<doc id="56551" wikidata="Q6869278" url="?curid=56551" title="Vocational education">
<text>Vocational education is education that prepares people for a skilled craft. Vocational education can also be seen as that type of education given to an individual to prepare that individual to be gainfully employed or self employed with requisite skill. Vocational education is known by a variety of names, depending on the country concerned, including career and technical education, or acronyms such as TVET (technical and vocational education and training; used by UNESCO) and TAFE (technical and further education). TVE refers to all forms and levels of education which provide knowledge and skills related to occupations in various sectors of economic and social life through formal, non-formal and informal learning methods in both school-based and work-based learning contexts. To achieve its aims and purposes, TVE focuses on the learning and mastery of specialized techniques and the scientific principles underlying those techniques, as well as general knowledge, skills and values.

A vocational school is a type of educational institution specifically designed to provide vocational education.

Vocational education can take place at the post-secondary, further education, or higher education level and can interact with the apprenticeship system. At the post-secondary level, vocational education is often provided by highly specialized trade schools, technical schools, community colleges, colleges of further education (UK), vocational universities, and institutes of technology (formerly called polytechnic institutes).

==Overview==
Historically, almost all vocational education took place in the classroom or on the job site, with students learning trade skills and trade theory from accredited instructors or established professionals. However, in recent years, online vocational education has grown in popularity, making learning various trade skills and soft skills from established professionals easier than ever for students, even those who may live far away from a traditional vocational school.

Trends have emerged in the implementation of TVET and skills development worldwide. From the late 1980s onwards a number of governments began to emphasize on the role of education in preparing learners effectively for the world of work. This school of thought, termed &quot;new vocationalism&quot;, placed the skills needs of industry at the centre of discussions on the purpose of public education. TVET and skills development were viewed as an important component in promoting economic growth in general and addressing youth unemployment in particular.

General education systems had not been effective in developing the skills that many adolescents and adults needed to secure employment in industry. The late 1980s and early 1990s saw the introduction and expansion of new vocational curricula and courses, often developed in collaboration with industry, and an increase in the variety of work-based learning routes on offer to young people.

==Purpose==
TVET serves multiple purposes. One purpose is to prepare the youth for work. This is done through the learning and development of work related skills and the mastery of underlying knowledge and scientific principles. Work is broadly defined and therefore refers to both formal employment and self-employment. To support self-employment, TVET curricula often include entrepreneurship training. Related to this is the social reproduction and transformation of occupational and vocational practices.

A related role is continuing professional development. The rapid technological changes demand that workers continuously update their knowledge and skills. Unlike the past where a job could be held for life, it is common place to change vocations several times. TVET enables that flexibility in two ways. One is providing broad based technical knowledge and transversal skills on which different occupations can be based on. The second is providing continuing vocational training to workers.
In contrast with the industrial paradigm of the old economy, today&#x27;s global economy lays the onus on the worker to continually reinvent himself or herself. In the past, workers were assured of a job for life, with full-time employment, clear occupational roles and well established career paths. This is no longer the case. The knowledge dependent global economy is characterized by rapid changes in technology and related modes of work. Often, workers find themselves declared redundant and out of work. TVET today has the responsibility of re-skilling such workers to enable them find and get back to work
Apart from providing work related education, TVET is also a site for personal development and emancipation. These concerns the development of those personal capacities that relate to realizing one&#x27;s full potential with regard to paid or self employment, occupational interests, and life goals outside of work. At the same time TVET seeks to enable individual overcome disadvantages due to circumstances of birth or prior educational experiences.

From a development point of view, TVET facilitates provide economic growth by increasing the productivity of workers. The returns from increased output far exceed the costs of training, direct and indirect, leading to economic growth. TVET like any other form of education also facilitates socio-economic development by enhancing the capacity of individuals to adopt practices that are socially worthwhile.
As a form of education similar to all others, TVET aims to developing the broad range of personal capabilities that characterize an educated person. Thus, the provision of broad based knowledge seeks to ensure critic-creative thinking. TVET also aims at developing capacities for effective communication and effective interpersonal relations.

==Opinions and models==
Wilhelm von Humboldt&#x27;s educational model goes beyond vocational training. In a letter to the Prussian king, he wrote: &quot;There are undeniably certain kinds of knowledge that must be of a general nature and, more importantly, a certain cultivation of the mind and character that nobody can afford to be without. People obviously cannot be good craftworkers, merchants, soldiers or businessmen unless, regardless of their occupation, they are good, upstanding and – according to their condition – well-informed human beings and citizens. If this basis is laid through schooling, vocational skills are easily acquired later on, and a person is always free to move from one occupation to another, as so often happens in life.&quot; The philosopher Julian Nida-Rümelin criticized discrepancies between Humboldt&#x27;s ideals and the contemporary European education policy, which narrowly understands education as a preparation for the labor market, and argued that we need to decide between &quot;McKinsey&quot;, to describe vocational training, and Humboldt.

=== Hybridisation ===
Because of TVET&#x27;s isolation with other education streams it was not widely adopted, in particularly in secondary education. Steps were taken to reduce segmentation of education and training and to address institutional barriers that restricted TVET learners′ options including choices to move vertically to higher levels of learning, or horizontally to other streams.

Policy-makers have introduced forms of hybridization with other education systems, additionally some of the distinctions between TVET and ′academic′ education streams have been blurred. This hybridisation has been termed the ′vocationalization of secondary education′, a similar process has happened to a lesser extent in tertiary education.

== Private sector ==
Private TVET providers include for-profit and non-profit institutions. Several factors triggered actions to support the expansion of private TVET including the limited capacities of public TVET providers and their low responsiveness to enterprises and trainees. Private TVET providers were expected to be more responsive because they were subject to fewer bureaucratic restrictions than public institutions (particularly in centralized systems). Their presence was expected to help raise quality system-wide, in many developing countries, government budgets constituted a vulnerable and unreliable source of financing for TVET, an important objective was to finance TVET systems by increasing the contribution of beneficiaries, including employers and trainees.

Private TVET provision over since 2005 has become a significant and growing part of TVET in sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East and North Africa. In some countries, e.g. Lebanon, enrolments in private TVET institutions have exceeded enrolments in public institutions. In Jordan, private provision at the community college level has been promoted by the government. However, not all experiences has been positive with private proprietary institutions or NGOs, their courses have often been concentrated in professional areas that typically do not require large capital investment, permitting easy entry and exit by private providers from the sector. Quality issues have also emerged, where market information about quality has been unavailable.

==Technological advancement and its impact==
TVET has an important role to play in technology diffusion through transfer of knowledge and skills. Rapid technological progress has had and continues to have significant implications for TVET. Understanding and anticipating changes has become crucial for designing responsive TVET systems and, more broadly, effective skills policies. The flexibility to adapt the supply of skills to the rapidly, and in some cases radically, changing needs in sectors such as information technology and the green economy has become a central feature of TVET systems. Globally, the skills requirements and qualifications demanded for job entry are rising. This reflects a need for not just a more knowledgeable and skilled workforce, but one that can adapt quickly to new emerging technologies in a cycle of continuous learning.

TVET courses have been created to respond to the diverse ICT needs of learners, whether these are related to work, education or citizenship. New courses have been introduced to address occupational changes in the ICT job market, while many TVET providers have shifted provision towards a blended approach, with significantly more self-directed and/or distance learning. In developed countries, new ICT approaches have been introduced to modernize TVET organizations and to manage administration and finance, including learner records.

== Education for all ==
The Education for All (EFA) movement encourages free education.

== Continuing TVET ==

Continuing TVE involves ongoing training to upgrade existing skills and to develop new ones and has a much higher profile in ageing societies and knowledge-based economies. Increased recognition of the importance of human capital for economic growth and social development made it necessary to increase learning opportunities for adults in workplaces within the wider context of policies and strategies for lifelong learning.

In many countries policy-makers have considered ways to expand workplace learning opportunities for workers and to assess and give credit for knowledge and skills acquired in workplaces. Efforts were geared towards training for workers in companies, encouraged by legislation, financial incentives and contractual agreements.

== Challenges ==
=== Labour market demands and trends ===
Following the global financial crisis in 2008, labour markets across the world experienced structural changes that influenced the demand for skills and TVET. Unemployment worsened and the quality of jobs decreased, especially for youth. Gender differentials in labour force participation placed men ahead of women, and skill mismatches deepened. The crisis impacted labour markets adversely and led to deepening uncertainty, vulnerability of employment, and inequality. Furthermore, measures to improve efficiency and profitability in the economic recovery have often led to jobless growth, as happened in Algeria, India and post-apartheid South Africa.

In seeking to address the level of vulnerable employment, TVET systems have focused on increasing the employability of graduates and enhancing their capacity to function effectively within existing vulnerable labour markets and to adjust to other labour market constraints. This has meant enhanced coordination among government departments responsible for TVET and employment policies. It has also created the need for TVET systems to develop mechanisms that identify skills needs early on and make better use of labour market information for matching skills demands and supply. TVET systems have focused more on developing immediate job skills and wider competencies. This has been accomplished by adopting competency-based approaches to instruction and workplace learning that enable learners to handle vulnerable employment, adjust to changing jobs and career contexts, and build their capacity to learn and agility to adapt.

=== Migration flows ===
Increasing migration are significant challenges to the national character of TVET systems and qualifications. TVET qualifications are progressively expected not only to serve as proxies for an individual&#x27;s competencies but to also act as a form of a currency that signals national and international value. TVET systems have been developing mechanisms to enable credible and fair cross-border recognition of skills. In 2007, the ILO identified three types of recognition that TVET system may use: unilateral (independent assessment by the receiving country), mutual (agreements between sending and receiving countries), and multilateral (mostly between a regional grouping of countries). The most prevalent of these is unilateral recognition, which is mostly under the control of national credential evaluation agencies. Countries have been slow to move from input-based skill evaluations to outcome-based methodologies that focus on competencies attained.

TVET systems are responding to migration by providing qualifications that can stand the rigour of these recognition systems and by creating frameworks for mutual recognition of qualifications. Regional Qualifications Frameworks such as those in Southern Africa, Europe, Asia and the Caribbean aim to significantly support the recognition of qualifications across borders. These efforts are further supported through the introduction of outcome-based learning methodologies within the broader context of multilateral recognition agreements.

===Providing broader competencies alongside specialist skills===
Skills for economic development include a mix of technical and soft skills. Empirical evidence and TVET policy reviews conducted by UNESCO suggest that TVET systems may not as yet sufficiently support the development of the so-called soft competencies. Many countries have, however, adopted competency-based approaches as measures for reforming TVET curricula.

The HEART Trust National Training Agency of Jamaica adopted this approach, with a particular emphasis on competency standards and balanced job-specific and generic skills. Competency standards aimed to ensure that the training was linked to industry and was up to date, and that competences were integrated into training programmes, along with the needed knowledge, skills and attitudes. The balancing of skill types was to ensure adequate attention was given to job-specific skills as well as the conceptual and experiential knowledge necessary to enable individuals to grow and develop in the workplace, and more generally in society.

=== Promoting social equity and inclusive workplaces ===
Preparing marginalized groups of youths and adults in 
with the right skills and helping them make the transition from school to work is part of the problem faced by TVET in promoting social equity. Ensuring that the workplace is inclusive poses numerous policy challenges, depending on the contextual dynamics of inclusion and exclusion, and the capabilities of individuals. For example, the experiences of exclusion by people with disabilities and disadvantaged women may be similar in some ways and different in others. Many individuals experience multiple forms of disadvantage in the workplace, to different degrees of severity, depending on social attitudes and traditions in a specific context or organization. Approaches to inclusiveness in the workplace will therefore vary according to population needs, social diversity and context. To give one example, the Netherlands set about the task of making workplaces more inclusive for low-skilled adults by offering programmes that combine language instruction with work, and in certain cases on-the-job training.

A review of employer surveys in Australia, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom and the United States of America, reported that employers valued people with disabilities for their high levels of motivation and their diverse perspectives, and found their attendance records to be the same or better than those of other employees. Many employers mentioned that being seen as pro-inclusion was positive for the company or organization&#x27;s image, an advantage that goes well beyond providing employment opportunities to disadvantaged groups. In many cases, however, social and cultural perceptions are an obstacle to making workplaces more inclusive, and this will require sensitive and concerted attention. Some low- and middle-income countries have sought to address this through legislation. In Tanzania the Disabled Persons (Employment) Act of 1982 established a quota system that stipulates that 2 per cent of the workforce in companies with over fifty employees must be persons with disabilities.

The 2012 Education for All Global Monitoring Report concluded that &#x27;all countries, regardless of income level, need to pay greater attention to the needs of young people who face disadvantage in education and skills development by virtue of their poverty, gender or other characteristics&#x27;. The report found that several barriers and constraints reduced the success of TVET in meeting social equity demands. First, national TVET policies in most cases failed to address the skills needs of young people living in urban poverty and in deprived rural areas. Second, additional funds were needed to support TVET learning opportunities on a much larger scale. Third, the training needs of disadvantaged young women were particularly neglected. The 2012 EFA Global Monitoring Report also noted that skills training alone was not sufficient for the most disadvantaged of the rural and urban poor. Coherent policies that link social protection, micro-finance and TVET are considered critical for ensuring better outcomes for marginalized groups.

=== Gender disparities ===
Recent years have seen rising numbers of young women enrolling in TVET programmes, especially in service sector subjects. At times the challenge is to bring more males into female-dominated streams. However, beyond number games, the real gender parity test that TVET systems are yet to pass is balancing the gender participation in programmes that lead to employability, as well as to decent and high-paying jobs. Gender disparities in learning opportunities, and earnings, are a cause for concern. The persistent gender-typing of TVET requires concerted attention if TVET is to really serve a key facilitative role in shared growth, social equity and inclusive development.

The absence of work, poor quality of work, lack of voice at work, continued gender discrimination and unacceptably high youth unemployment are all major drivers of TVET system reforms from the perspective of social equity. This is an area where TVET systems continue to be challenged to contribute proactively to the shaping of more equitable societies.

Gender equality has received significant international attention in recent years, and this has been reflected in a reduction in gender participation gaps in both primary and secondary schooling. Efforts to analyse and address gender equality in TVET are relevant to other aspects of equity and dimensions of inclusion/exclusion. In almost all parts of the world, the proportion of girls to total enrolment in secondary education defined as TVET is less than for &#x27;general&#x27; secondary education.

==== The Shanghai Consensus of the Third International Congress on TVET ====
The Shanghai Consensus of the Third International Congress on TVET made the following recommendations on expanding access and improving quality and equity, including to: 

&quot;Improve gender equality by promoting equal access of females and males to TVET programmes, particularly in fields where there is strong labour market demand, and by ensuring that TVET curricula and materials avoid stereotyping by gender.&quot;

==By country==

===Argentina===
Argentina was one of the first countries in Latin America to run apprenticeship and vocational programs. From 1903 to 1909 basic programs were delivered at main cities. The entity charged with delivering these programs was the General Workers&#x27; Union (Spanish: Unión General de Trabajadores; abbreviated UGT), an Argentine national labor confederation.

The massive development of vocational education in Argentina took place during the period between World War I and World War II, with the large influx of immigrants from Europe. During the presidency of Juan Perón, the first formal apprenticeship and vocational training programs were offered free of charge across the country, eventually becoming the National Workers&#x27; University (Universidad Obrera Nacional) under the National Vocational Programs Law 13229, implemented on August 19, 1948. These programs were created and supported by the federal government and delivered by provincial governments at various technical colleges and regional universities as well as industrial centers; they were meant to deal with the lack of technical specialists in Argentina at a time of rapid industrialization expansion across the country. The degrees granted were that of technician and factory engineer in many specialties.

Currently, vocational education programs are delivered by public and private learning organizations, supported by the Argentine Ministry of Labour and Ministry of Education. The leading providers of technical and vocational education in the country are the National Technological University (UTN) (Universidad Tecnológica Nacional, UTN) and the National University of the Arts (UNA) (Universidad Nacional de las Artes, UNA).

===Australia===

In Australia vocational education and training is mostly post-secondary and provided through the vocational education and training (VET) system by registered training organisations. However some secondary schools do offer school-based apprenticeships and traineeships for students in years 10, 11 and 12. There were 24 Technical Colleges in Australia but now only 5 independent Trade Colleges remain with three in Queensland; one in Townsville (Tec-NQ), one in Brisbane (Australian Trade College) and one on the Gold Coast (Australian Industry Trade College) and one in Adelaide and Perth. This system encompasses both public, TAFE, and private providers in a national training framework consisting of the Australian Quality Training Framework, Australian Qualifications Framework and Industry Training Packages which define the competency standards for the different vocational qualifications.

Australia&#x27;s apprenticeship system includes both apprenticeships in &quot;traditional&quot; trades and &quot;traineeships&quot; in other more service-oriented occupations. Both involve a legal contract between the employer and the apprentice or trainee and provide a combination of school-based and workplace training. Apprenticeships typically last three to four years, traineeships only one to two years. Apprentices and trainees receive a wage which increases as they progress through the training scheme.

The states and territories are responsible for providing funding for government subsidised delivery in their jurisdiction and the Commonwealth Government, through the Australian Quality Skills Authority, provides regulation of registered training organisations except in Victoria and Western Australia. A central concept of the VET system is &quot;national recognition&quot;, whereby the assessments and awards of any one registered training organisation must be recognised by all others, and the decisions of any VET regulatory authority must be recognised by the all states and territories. This allows national portability of qualifications and units of competency.

A crucial feature of the training package (which accounts for about 60% of publicly funded training and almost all apprenticeship training) is that the content of the vocational qualifications is theoretically defined by industry and not by government or training providers. A Training Package is endorsed by the Australian Industry and Skills Committee before it can be used by RTOs to deliver Nationally Accredited Training.

The National Centre for Vocational Education Research or NCVER is a not-for-profit company owned by the federal, state and territory ministries responsible for training. It is responsible for collecting, managing, analysing, evaluating and communicating research and statistics about vocational education and training (VET).

The boundaries between vocational education and tertiary education are becoming more blurred. A number of vocational training providers such as Melbourne Polytechnic, BHI and WAI are now offering specialised bachelor&#x27;s degrees in specific areas not being adequately provided by universities. Such applied courses include equine studies, winemaking and viticulture, aquaculture, information technology, music, illustration, culinary management and many more.

=== Bangladesh ===
Integrating women or men into areas of specialization in which they were previously under-represented is important to diversifying opportunities for TVET. The National Strategy for Promotion of Gender Equality in TVET in Bangladesh set clear priorities and targets for breaking gender stereotypes. The Strategy developed by a Gender Working Group comprising fifteen representatives from government ministries and departments, employers, workers and civil society organizations. It provided an overview of the current status and nature of gender inequalities in TVET, highlighted the priority areas for action, explored a number of steps to promote equal participation of women in TVET, and outlined the way forward.

=== Cambodia ===
In Cambodia, TVET programmes set out to empower young women in traditional trades by upgrading their skills and technology in silk weaving. This led to the revitalization and reappraisal of a traditional craft by learners and society.

===Commonwealth of Independent States===
The largest and the most unified system of vocational education was created in the Soviet Union with the professional`no-tehnicheskoye uchilische and Tehnikum. But it became less effective with the transition of the economies of post-Soviet countries to a market economy.

===European Union===
Education and training is the responsibility of member states, but the single European labour market makes some cooperation on education imperative, including on vocational education and training. The &#x27;Copenhagen process&#x27;, based on the open method of cooperation between Member States, was launched in 2002 in order to help make vocational education and training better and more attractive to learners throughout Europe. The process is based on mutually agreed priorities that are reviewed periodically. Much of the activity is monitored by Cedefop, the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training.

There is strong support, particularly in northern Europe, for a shift of resources from university education to vocational training. This is due to the perception that an oversupply of university graduates in many fields of study has aggravated graduate unemployment and underemployment. At the same time, employers are experiencing a shortage of skilled tradespeople.

===Finland===
In Finland, vocational education belongs to secondary education. After the nine-year comprehensive school, almost all students choose to go to either a &quot;lukio&quot; (high school), which is an institution preparing students for tertiary education, or to a vocational school. Both forms of secondary education last three years, and give a formal qualification to enter university or &quot;ammattikorkeakoulu&quot;, i.e., Finnish polytechnics. In certain fields (e.g., the police school, air traffic control personnel training), the entrance requirements of vocational schools include completion of the &quot;lukio&quot;, thus causing the students to complete their secondary education twice.

The education in vocational school is free, and students from low-income families are eligible for a state student grant. The curriculum is primarily vocational, and the academic part of the curriculum is adapted to the needs of a given course. The vocational schools are mostly maintained by municipalities.

After completing secondary education, one can enter higher vocational schools (&quot;ammattikorkeakoulu&quot;, or &quot;AMK&quot;) or universities.

It is also possible for a student to choose both lukio and vocational schooling. The education in such cases lasts usually from three to four years.

=== France and the Netherlands ===
The baccalauréat professionnel in France, and the middelbaar beroepsonderwijs (MBO) count work experience in the area they are specializing in.

===Germany===

Vocational education in Germany is based on the German model. A law (the &quot;Berufsausbildungsgesetz&quot;) was passed in 1969 which regulated and unified the vocational training system and codified the shared responsibility of the state, the unions, associations and &quot;Industrie- und Handelskammer&quot; (chambers of trade and industry). The system is very popular in modern Germany: in 2001, two-thirds of young people aged under 22 began an apprenticeship, and 78% of them completed it, meaning that approximately 51% of all young people under 22 have completed an apprenticeship. One in three companies offered apprenticeships in 2003; in 2004 the government signed a pledge with industrial unions that all companies except very small ones must take on apprentices.
From 2010 to 2023, the number of young people starting dual vocational training, has fallen. In recent years, Germany has invested a great deal of money to keep young people in the school system as long as possible. Apprenticeships enhanced content within occupational training courses and considerable emphasis has been placed on personal skills.

=== Ghana ===
In Ghana, Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) programs aim to equip individuals with the technical and professional skills they need to drive the country&#x27;s socioeconomic and industrial development. Notably, these programs place a strong emphasis on preparing Ghanaians for self-employment, empowering them to become not just employees but also job creators. In Ghana, TVET programs are designed specifically to address the needs of young Ghanaians who have completed Junior High School eager to acquire practical skills for immediate employment. There are new TVET schools under the Free education Policy under the auspices of the Government of Ghana set up to increase access and to purposely train students in pure technical skills. This is geared towards immediate job placement, this focus on hands-on learning and skill development sets Technical Vocational Institutes and Polytechnics apart from traditional universities, preparing graduates to hit the ground running in the workforce.

Ghana&#x27;s Technical Universities, an upgrade of Polytechnics, have received a major boost with the introduction of state-of-the-art laboratories. These labs are equipped with industry-standard training systems, prioritizing a hands-on approach to education. This focus fosters a dynamic teaching and learning environment while simultaneously preparing graduates with the practical skills they need to hit the ground running in the industrial market. By providing technical knowledge and vocational skills in areas like agriculture, industry, commerce, science, and technology, vocational and technical programs at the tertiary level act as a catalyst for national development in these crucial sectors.

The Ministry of Education (Ghana) alongside the National Vocational Training Institute (NVTI), Commission for Technical and Vocational Education and Training (COTVET), and National Accreditation Board (NABTEX), has made significant strides in modernizing vocational education. With the support of the private sector and industry. The introduction of STEM programs in specialized secondary schools alongside the expanded access to senior high schools, demonstrates a clear commitment to improving education equity.

Furthermore, initiatives like the retooling of technical schools with advanced equipment are equipping graduates with the practical skills needed for success in various industries. The upgrade of technical universities is also strategic move to strengthen TVET by offering advanced training opportunities in high-level technical skills. This, in turn, will provide a structured progression path for students coming from technical and vocational programs at the secondary level, contributing to a more skilled workforce. These efforts address the national skills gap and contribute to Ghana&#x27;s industrialization goals.

===Greece===
In Greece, vocational education and training (VET) is usually for lyceum (senior high school) graduates and is provided by public or private Schools of Higher Vocational Training [formerly known as Institute of Vocational Training (IEK) (IEK, the Greek abbreviation for the Ινστιτούτο Επαγγελματικής Κατάρτισης)]. The IEK course offerings are adult education only, except at times when it is rarely offered a course for non-adult students. The duration of study is two-and-a-half academic years full-time, 2 ½ years. 4 semesters in-school education and 1 semester being known as curricular practicum or on-the-job placement or internship, both involve a legal contract between the employer and the student-trainee on the job placement and provide a combination of school-based training and workplace practicum. Public IEKs are government-funded with free education, and it can be attended without tuition fee.

===Hong Kong===
In Hong Kong, vocational education is usually for post-secondary 6 students. The Hong Kong Institute of Vocational Education (IVE) provides training in nine different vocational fields, namely: applied science, business administration, child education and community services, construction, design, printing, textiles and clothing, hotel service and tourism studies, information technology, electrical and electronic engineering, and mechanical, manufacturing and industrial engineering.

===Hungary===
Normally at the end of elementary school (at age 14) students are directed to one of three types of upper secondary education: one academic track (gymnasium) and two vocational tracks. Vocational secondary schools (szakgimnázium) provide four years of general education and also prepare students for the &quot;maturata&quot; (school leaving certificate). These schools combine general education with some specific subjects, referred to as pre-vocational education and career orientation. At that point many students enrol in a post-secondary VET programme often at the same institution a vocational qualification, although they may also seek entry to tertiary education.

Vocational training schools (szakiskola) initially provide two years of general education, combined with some pre-vocational education and career orientation, they then choose an occupation, and then receive two or three years of vocational education and training focusing on that occupation—such as bricklayer. Students do not obtain the &quot;maturata&quot; but a vocational qualification at the end of a successfully completed programme. Demand for vocational training, both from the labour market and among students, has declined while it has increased for upper secondary schools delivering the &quot;maturata&quot;.

===India===
Vocational training in India historically has been a subject handled by the Ministry of Labour, other central ministries and various state-level organizations. To harmonize the variations and multiplicity in terms of standards and costs, the National Skills Qualification Framework was launched in December 2013.

Work education has been included in the primary standards (grades 1–8) to make the students aware of work. At the lower secondary level (grades 9–10) pre-vocational education has been included with the aim to increase students’ familiarity with the world of work.

The National Skills Qualifications Framework (NSQF) is a competency-based framework that organizes all qualifications according to a series of levels of knowledge, skills and aptitude. These levels, graded from one to ten, are defined in terms of learning outcomes which the learner must possess regardless of whether they are obtained through formal, non-formal or informal learning. NSQF in India was notified on 27 December 2013. All other frameworks, including the NVEQF (National Vocational Educational Qualification Framework) released by the Ministry of HRD, stand superseded by the NSQF.

In November 2014 the new Government in India formed the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship. Articulating the need for such a Ministry, the Prime Minister said, &quot;A separate Ministry, which will look after promoting entrepreneurship and skill development, would be created. Even developed countries have accorded priority to promoting skilled manpower&quot;.

As a continuation of its efforts to harmonize and consolidate skill development activities across the country, the Government launched the 1st Skill India Development Mission (NSDM) on 15 July 2015. Also launched on the day was the National Policy for Skill Development &amp; Entrepreneurship.

Today all skill development efforts through the Government (Directorate General of Training) and through the Public Private Partnership arm (National Skill Development Corporation) are carried out under the Ministry, through the Skill India Mission.

The Ministry works with various central ministries and departments and the State government in implementing the NSQF across all Government funded projects, based on a five-year implementation schedule for complete convergence.

The involvement of the private sector in various aspects of skill development has enhanced access, quality, and innovative financing models leading to sustainable skill development organizations on the ground. The short-term skill development programs (largely offered by private organizations) combined with the long-term programs offered by the Indian technical institutes (ITIs) complement each other under the larger framework. Credit equivalency, transnational standards, quality assurance and standards are being managed by the Ministry through the National Skill Development Agency (an autonomous body under the Ministry) in close partnership with industry-led sector-specific bodies (Sector Skill Councils) and various line ministries.

India has bilateral collaboration with governments including those of the UK, Australia, Germany, Canada, and the UAE, with the intention of implementing globally acceptable standards and providing the Indian workforce with overseas job mobility.

===Iran===
The Iran Technical and Vocational Training Organization or in brief I.R.T.V.T.O is one of the organizations affiliated to the Ministry of Cooperatives, Labour, and Social Welfare, which was formed from the merger of three educational institutions in 1980 in order to provide technical and vocational education. In addition to the central headquarters, this organization has 31 general administrations in provinces of Iran, an instructor training center, 552 Learning Center and over 11700 free technical and vocational schools. In order to achieve the latest science and technology news and to comply with international standards, the organization always tried to expand international relations, including with the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the International Organization for Vocational Training in other countries. In this regard, the organization, regardless of the interpretation of the overall organizational structure, carries out its activities only in the field of education, with the support of the research field.
TVET is mostly presented by TVTO which is the most pervasive skill training body in Iran, which attempts to meet the skill needs of the labor market and also updates the skills of employees with the latest technologies.
It functions as the provider and executor of informal technical and vocational training in agriculture, industry, services, culture, and art. TVTO has headquarters in the capital city of Tehran, an instructor training center(ITC) in Karaj city, 31 provincial head offices, 641 public training centers, 4710 public workshops, and over 12000 private institutions across the country.

The Technical and Vocational University (TVU) (, &quot;Danushgah-e Feni-ye Herfehai&quot;) includes higher education that runs all technical/vocational colleges across the country. The main objective of this University, training technicians in the majors technical. 4/5 of majors are belongs to Associate degree and 1/5 belongs to Bachelor&#x27;s degree.
The university has more than 176 schools and colleges across the country, and with more than 180 thousand students, it is one of the largest universities in Iran. there are all of the technical and vocational Majors.
To achieve the goals, TVTO holds 3-18-month training courses for job seekers and employees in different sectors. Along with training programs, there are activities of research, construction, equipment and development of human resources, most importantly including: codifying training standards based on international codes, research, updating training standards, research in training programs, training aids, audiovisuals, setting up and equipping workshops of training centers, setting up new workshops, guilds’ skill testing ,determining the technical competence of applicants of private institutions, holding specialized conferences, issuing skill certificates for construction workers.

===Iraq===
It is a new experiment in Iraq about TVET, there are three ministries related to TVET in Iraq, the Ministry of Higher Education and scientific research which is represented by the technical universities, the Ministry of Education which is represented by the vocational education foundation, and the Ministry of Labor and Social Guaranty which is represented by vocational training centers. These associations are trained by UNESCO for the last three years on the main topics and fields of TVET, so they are now waiting for the Iraqi Perelman to put a suitable law for the TVET Council in Iraq to start its system and control these associations with the required outputs of TVET.

=== Israel ===
Israel offers a post-high school college education system for technical occupations and engineering, aimed at high-school graduates of technological tracks. Students demonstrating technological potential in schools supervised by the Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs, and Services (MOLSA) may avail themselves of the MENTA Program, which provides scholastic, emotional, and social support throughout their high school and college studies. This support helps students meet the scholastic challenges and demands of the vocational track and, via the program, strives to expand both the number of youth continuing through college Grades 13-14 and the percentage eligible for a diploma at the end of their studies. The program was formulated by JDC-Ashalim in cooperation with the HEZNEK organization, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Economy (and subsequently, MOLSA), and by education networks operating schools. A 2016-17 formative evaluation of MENTA found that the program was successful in helping students complete their matriculation, strengthen their sense of self-efficacy, and create for themselves a picture of the future.  At the same time, the findings suggested that program better clarify the target population, improve the supports for transition to college, and more clearly define the scope of the coordinators&#x27; role.

===Japan===
Japanese vocational schools are known as . They are part of Japan&#x27;s higher education system. They are two-year schools that many students study at after finishing high school (although it is not always required that students graduate from high school). Some have a wide range of majors, others only a few majors. Some examples are computer technology, fashion, and English.

===South Korea===
Vocational high schools offer programmes in five fields: agriculture, technology/engineering, commerce/business, maritime/fishery, and home economics. In principle, all students in the first year of high school (10th grade) follow a common national curriculum, In the second and third years (11th and 12th grades) students are offered courses relevant to their specialisation. In some programmes, students may participate in workplace training through co-operation between schools and local employers. The government is now piloting Vocational Meister Schools in which workplace training is an important part of the programme. Around 40% of secondary students are currently enrolled in TVET education, in some schools, academic and vocational students share almost 75% of the curriculum. Around half of all vocational high schools are private. Private and public schools operate according to similar rules; for example, they charge the same fees for high school education, with an exemption for poorer families.

The number of students in vocational high schools has decreased, from about half of students in 1995 down to about one-quarter today. To make vocational high schools more attractive, in April 2007 the Korean government changed the name of vocational high schools into professional high schools. With the change of the name the government also facilitated the entry of vocational high school graduates to colleges and universities.

Most vocational high school students continue into tertiary education; in 2007 43% transferred to junior colleges and 25% to university. At tertiary level, vocational education and training is provided in junior colleges (two- and three-year programmes) and at polytechnic colleges. Education at junior colleges and in two-year programmes in polytechnic colleges leads to an Industrial associate degree. Polytechnics also provide one-year programmes for craftsmen and master craftsmen and short programmes for employed workers. The requirements for admission to these institutions are in principle the same as those in the rest of tertiary sector (on the basis of the College Scholastic Aptitude Test) but candidates with vocational qualifications are given priority in the admission process. Junior colleges have expanded rapidly in response to demand and in 2006 enrolled around 27% of all tertiary students.

95% of junior college students are in private institutions. Fees charged by private colleges are approximately twice those of public institutions. Polytechnic colleges are state-run institutions under the responsibility of the Ministry of Labour; government funding keeps student fees much lower than those charged by other tertiary institutions. Around 5% of students are enrolled in polytechnic colleges.

===Malaysia===
Skills training are no longer depicted as second-class education in Malaysia. There are numerous vocational education centres here including vocational schools (high schools to train skilled students), technic schools (high schools to train future engineers) and vocational colleges all of them under the Ministry of Education. Then there are 33 polytechnics and 86 community colleges under the Ministry of Higher Education; 10 MARA Advanced Skills Colleges, 13 MARA Skills Institutes, 286 GIATMARAs under Majlis Amanah Rakyat (MARA) and 15 National Youth Skills Institutes under Ministry of Youth and Sports. The first vocational institute in Malaysia is the Industrial Training Institute of Kuala Lumpur established in 1964 under the Manpower Department. Other institutes under the same department including 8 Advanced Technology Training Centres, one Centre for Instructor and Advanced Skill Training, one Japan-Malaysia Technical Institute and the other 21 ITIs.

===Mexico===
In Mexico, both federal and state governments are responsible for the administration of vocational education. Federal schools are funded by the federal budget, in addition to their own funding sources. The state governments are responsible for the management of decentralised institutions, such as the State Centres for Scientific and Technological Studies (CECyTE) and Institutes of Training for Work (ICAT). These institutions are funded 50% from the federal budget and 50% from the state budget. The state governments also manage and fund &quot;decentralised institutions of the federation&quot;, such as CONALEP schools.

Compulsory education (including primary and lower secondary education) finishes at the age of 15 and about half of those aged 15-to-19 are enrolled full-time or part-time in education. All programmes at upper secondary level require the payment of a tuition fee.

The upper secondary vocational education system in Mexico includes over a dozen subsystems (administrative units within the Upper Secondary Education Undersecretariat of the Ministry of Public Education, responsible for vocational programmes) which differ from each other to varying degrees in content, administration, and target group. The large number of school types and corresponding administrative units within the Ministry of Public Education makes the institutional landscape of vocational education and training complex by international standards.

Vocational education and training provided under the Upper Secondary Education Undersecretariat includes three main types of programme:

* &quot;Training for work&quot; (formación para el trabajo) courses at ISCED 2 level are short training programmes, taking typically three to six months to complete. The curriculum includes 50% theory and 50% practice. After completing the programme, students may enter the labour market. This programme does not provide direct access to tertiary education. Those who complete lower secondary education may choose between two broad options of vocational upper secondary education at ISCED 3 level. Both programmes normally take three years to complete and offer a vocational degree as well as the baccalaureate, which is required for entry into tertiary education.
* The title &quot;technical professional – baccalaureate&quot; (profesional técnico — bachiller) is offered by various subsystems though one subsystem (CONALEP) includes two thirds of the students. The programme involves 35% general subjects and 65% vocational subjects. Students are required to complete 360 hours of practical training.
* The programme awarding the &quot;technological baccalaureate&quot; (bachillerato tecnológico) and the title &quot;professional technician&quot; (técnico professional) is offered by various subsystems. It includes more general and less vocational education: 60% general subjects and 40% vocational subjects.

===Netherlands===
Nearly all of those leaving lower secondary school enter upper secondary (vocational) education (Middelbaar BeroepsOnderwijs, MBO), and around 50% of them follow one of four vocational programmes; technology, economics, agricultural, personal/social services &amp; health care. These programmes vary from 1 to 4 years (by level; only level 2, 3 and 4 diplomas are considered formal &quot;start qualifications&quot; for successfully entering the labour market). The programmes can be attended in either of two pathways. One either involving a minimum of 20% of school time (apprenticeship pathway; BBL-BeroepsBegeleidende Leerweg) or the other, involving a maximum of 80% schooltime (BOL -BeroepsOpleidende Leerweg). The remaining time in both cases is apprenticeship/work in a company. So in effect, students have a choice out of 32 trajectories, leading to over 600 professional qualifications.
BBL-Apprentices usually receive a wage negotiated in collective agreements. Employers taking on these apprentices receive a subsidy in the form of a tax reduction on the wages of the apprentice. (WVA-Wet vermindering afdracht).
Level 4 graduates of senior secondary VET may go directly to institutes for Higher Profession Education and Training (HBO-Hoger beroepsonderwijs), after which entering university is a possibility. This co-existence of upper secondary (MBO) and higher professional (HBO) education creates opportunities for further education and development, as well as a tension in the labour market because many vocations can be studied at various levels, and employers may prefer higher educated employees.
The social partners participate actively in the development of policy. As of January 1, 2012 they formed a foundation for Co operation Vocational Education and Entrepreneurship (St. SBB – stichting Samenwerking Beroepsonderwijs Bedrijfsleven; www.s-bb.nl). Its responsibility is to advise the Minister on the development of the national vocational education and training system, based on the full consensus of the constituent members (the representative organisations of schools and of entrepreneurship and their centres of expertise). Special topics are Qualification &amp; Examination, Apprenticeships (BPV-Beroepspraktijkvorming) and (labourmarket) Efficiency of VET.
The Centres of Expertices are linked to the four vocational education programmes provided in senior secondary VET on the content of VET programmes and on trends and future skill needs.
The Local County Vocational Training (MBO Raad www.mboraad.nl) represents the VET schools in this foundation and advise on the quality, operations and provision of VET.

===New Zealand===
New Zealand is served by 11 Industry Training Organisations (ITO). The unique element is that ITOs purchase training as well as set standards and aggregate industry opinion about skills in the labour market. Industry Training, as organised by ITOs, has expanded from apprenticeships to a more true lifelong learning situation with, for example, over 10% of trainees aged 50 or over. Moreover, much of the training is generic. This challenges the prevailing idea of vocational education and the standard layperson view that it focuses on apprenticeships.

One source for information in New Zealand is the Industry Training Federation. Another is the Ministry of Education.

Polytechnics, Private Training Establishments, Wananga and others also deliver vocational training, amongst other areas.

=== Nigeria ===
The educational system or structure of Nigeria has been changing over time. In the 1970&#x27;s, the Nigerian educational system was 6-5-4. This changed as time passed, between 1980 and 2005, it was changed to 6-3-3-4. 2008 saw another educational system review to 9-3-4 system of education. All these reviews are shown in the National Policy on Education. Due to the type of education Nigeria inherited from her colonial masters, education in the 1960&#x27;s were more book oriented.

===Norway===

Nearly all those leaving lower secondary school enter upper secondary education, and around half follow one of nine vocational programmes. These programmes typically involve two years in school followed by two years of apprenticeship in a company. The first year provides general education alongside introductory knowledge of the vocational area. During the second year, courses become more trade-specific.

Apprentices receive a wage negotiated in collective agreements ranging between 30% and 80% of the wage of a qualified worker; the percentage increase over the apprenticeship period. Employers taking on apprentices receive a subsidy, equivalent to the cost of one year in school.
After the two years vocational school programme some students opt for a third year in the &quot;general&quot; programme as an alternative to an apprenticeship. Both apprenticeship and a third year of practical training in school lead to the same vocational qualifications. Upper secondary VET graduates may go directly to Vocational Technical Colleges, while those who wish to enter university need to take a supplementary year of education.

The social partners participate actively in the development of policy. The National Council for Vocational Education and Training advises the Minister on the development of the national vocational education and training system. The Advisory Councils for Vocational Education and Training are linked to the nine vocational education programmes provided in upper secondary education and advise on the content of VET programmes and on trends and future skill needs. The National Curriculum groups assist in deciding the contents of the vocational training within the specific occupations. The Local County Vocational Training Committees advise on the quality, provision of VET and career guidance.

===Paraguay===
In Paraguay, vocational education is known as &quot;Bachillerato Técnico&quot; and is part of the secondary education system. These schools combine general education with some specific subjects, referred to as pre-vocational education and career orientation. After nine years of &quot;Educación Escolar Básica&quot; (Primary School), the student can choose to go to either a &quot;Bachillerato Técnico&quot; (Vocational School) or a &quot;Bachillerato Científico&quot; (High School). Both forms of secondary education last three years, and are usually located in the same campus called &quot;Colegio&quot;.

After completing secondary education, one can enter to the universities. It is also possible for a student to choose both Técnico and Científico schooling.

=== Poland ===
In Poland vocational programmes for the technical occupations are the part of the public system of post-secondary academic education. Post-secondary vocational school (post-secondary technical school) in Poland is known as Szkoła Policealna. It is an equivalent to a technical college in English-speaking countries. Admission to Post-secondary School in Poland is contingent upon the completion of secondary education. Post-secondary vocational schools offer professional training programs lasting to 2.5 years, including mandatory completion of internships at enterprises. The completion of Post-secondary vocational school in Poland results in the awarding of a technical diploma.

Post-secondary educational programs focus on practical and technical skills required for the work in specific industries, such as information technology, electronics, mechatronics, construction.
In the field of information technology, such education includes training for programmers, database administrators and analysts, computer network specialists, and hardware specialists. In the field of electronics, it includes training for electronic circuit designers and microelectronics specialists.

According to the International Standard Classification of Education, the academic program of a post-secondary school in Poland is classified as ISCED 4.

===Russia===

A new approach to vocationalization of secondary schooling has been introduced within the framework of general educational reform. This has been guided by the Ministry of Education&#x27;s strategy of modernization. Vocationalization in the Russian Federation refers to the introduction of profile education at the upper-secondary level (the last two years of schooling, grades 10 and 11) and the process of preparation for profile selection. Profile education provided students with the opportunity to study a chosen area in depth, usually one that would be related to their further study (TVET or academic). Schools could design their own profiles, e.g. science, socio-economics, humanities, and technology, or keep a general orientation curriculum. In preparation for the upper-secondary specialization, a ′pre-profiling′ programme in grade 9 has been introduced to help students make their choices in grade 10.

===Spain===
In Spain, vocational education is divided into 3 stages as of 2014. They&#x27;re known as &quot;Formación profesional Básica&quot;, which can be started in 3º ESO; &quot;Formación profesional de Grado Medio&quot;, which can be started after 4º ESO or after graduating from &quot;Formación profesional Básica&quot;; and &quot;Formación profesional de Grado Superior&quot;, which can be started after 2º Bachillerato, or after graduating from &quot;Formación profesional de Grado Medio&quot;. University can then be accessed after graduating from &quot;Formación profesional de Grado Superior&quot;, without the need to pass through Bachillerato.

There are typically two courses imparted until graduation. Each titulation is called a Ciclo, heavily specialized depending on its related professional discipline.

Spanish vocational education also features a Dual education system named &quot;Formación Profesional Dual&quot;, although not all Vocational Schools may feature it.

===Sri Lanka===

Vocational training from Agricultural subjects to ICT related subjects are available in Sri Lanka. 
In 2005 the Ministry of Vocational and Technical Training (MVTT) introduced the National Vocational Qualifications (NVQ) framework which was an important milestone for the education, economic and social development of Sri Lanka. The NVQ framework consists of seven levels of instruction. NVQ levels 1 to 4 are for craftsmen designation and successful candidates are issued with National certificates. NVQ levels 5 and 6 are Diploma level, whereas Level 7 is for degree equivalent qualification.

Training courses are provided by many institutions island wide. All training providers (public and private) must obtain institutional registration and course accreditation from the Tertiary and Vocational Education Commission (TVEC).In order to obtain registration institutions must satisfy specific criteria: infrastructure, basic services, tools and equipment, quality of instruction and staff, based on curriculum and syllabus, and quality of management and monitoring systems.

Government Ministries and Agencies involved in Vocational Training are The Ministry of Vocational and Technical Training (MVTT), The Tertiary and Vocational Education Commission (TVEC), The National Apprentice and Industrial Training Authority (NAITA), The Department of Technical Education and Training (DTET), University of Vocational Technology(UoVT), The Vocational Training Authority (VTA) and the National Youth Services Council (NYSC).

===Sweden===
Nearly all of those leaving compulsory schooling immediately enter upper secondary schools, and most complete their upper secondary education in three years. Upper secondary education is divided into 13 vocationally oriented and 4 academic national programmes. Slightly more than half of all students follow vocational programmes. All programmes offer broad general education and basic eligibility to continue studies at the post-secondary level. In addition, there are local programmes specially designed to meet local needs and &quot;individual&quot; programmes.

A 1992 school reform extended vocational upper secondary programmes by one year, aligning them with three years of general upper secondary education, increasing their general education content, and making core subjects compulsory in all programmes. The core subjects (which occupy around one-third of total teaching time in both vocational and academic programmes) include English, artistic activities, physical education and health, mathematics, natural science, social studies, Swedish or Swedish as a second language, and religious studies. In addition to the core subjects, students pursue optional courses, subjects which are specific to each programme and a special project.

Vocational programmes include 15 weeks of workplace training (Arbetsplatsförlagt lärande – APL) over the three-year period. Schools are responsible for arranging workplace training and verifying its quality. Most municipalities have advisory bodies: programme councils (programmråd) and vocational councils (yrkesråd) composed of employers&#x27; and employees&#x27; representatives from the locality. The councils advise schools on matters such as provision of workplace training courses, equipment purchase and training of supervisors in APL.

===Switzerland===
The Swiss vocational education and training system (VET) is regarded by many international experts as the strongest in Europe. It is the mainstream upper secondary program serving 65-70% of Swiss young people. It results in one of the lowest youth unemployment rates in Europe. Managers and the staff take pride in their young apprentices. Several Swiss CEOs of big multinational companies and government members have started their own careers as VET-apprentices, for example Sergio Ermotti, CEO of UBS. At this level, vocational education and training is mainly provided through the &quot;dual system&quot;. Apprentices rotate between workplace, vocational school and industry training centers where they develop complementary practical skills relating to the occupation. They spend the biggest amount of time at the workplace emphasizing the importance of on-the-job training. Rotation can be organised in different ways – either by switching places during the week or by allocating entire weeks to one place and form of learning. The program can also start with most of the time devoted to in-school education and then gradually increase the share of in-company training.

Besides the three- or four-year VET programme with Federal VET Diploma, there is also the option of two-year vocational education and training VET programme with Federal VET Certificate for adolescents with lower learning performance. Switzerland draws a distinction between vocational education and training programmes at upper-secondary level, and professional education and training (PET) programmes, which take place at tertiary B level. In 2007, more than half of the population aged 25–64 had a VET or PET qualification as their highest level of education. In addition, universities of applied sciences (Fachhochschulen) offer vocational education at tertiary A level. Pathways enable people to shift from one part of the education system to another.

===Turkey===
Students in Turkey may choose vocational high schools after completing the 8-year-long compulsory primary and secondary education. Vocational high school graduates may pursue two year-long polytechnics or may continue with a related tertiary degree.

According to a survey by OECD, 38% of 15-year-old students attend vocational study programmes that are offered by &quot;Anatolian vocational&quot;, &quot;Anatolian technical&quot;, and &quot;technical high schools&quot;.

Municipalities in Turkey also offer vocational training. The metropolitan municipality of Istanbul, the most populous city in Turkey, offers year long free vocational programs in a wide range of topics through ISMEK, an umbrella organization formed under the municipality.

===United Kingdom===
The first &quot;Trades School&quot; in the UK was &quot;Stanley Technical Trades School&quot; (now Harris Academy South Norwood) which was designed, built and set up by William Stanley. The initial idea was thought of in 1901, and the school opened in 1907.

The system of vocational education in the UK initially developed independently of the state, with bodies such as the RSA and City &amp; Guilds setting examinations for technical subjects. The Education Act 1944 made provision for a Tripartite System of grammar schools, secondary technical schools and secondary modern schools, but by 1975 only 0.5% of British senior pupils were in technical schools, compared to two-thirds of the equivalent German age group.

Successive recent British Governments have made attempts to promote and expand vocational education. In the 1970s, the Business And Technology Education Council was founded to confer further and higher education awards, particularly to further education colleges in the United Kingdom. In the 1980s and 1990s, the Conservative Government promoted the Youth Training Scheme, National Vocational Qualifications and General National Vocational Qualifications. However, youth training was marginalised as the proportion of young people staying on in full-time education increased.

In 1994, publicly funded Modern Apprenticeships were introduced to provide &quot;quality training on a work-based (educational) route&quot;. Numbers of apprentices have grown in recent years and the Department for Children, Schools and Families has stated its intention to make apprenticeships a &quot;mainstream&quot; part of England&#x27;s education system.

In the UK some higher engineering-technician positions that require 4–5 years&#x27; apprenticeship require academic study to HNC / HND or higher City &amp; Guilds level. Apprenticeships are increasingly recognised as the gold standard for work-based training. There are four levels of apprenticeship available for those aged 16 and over:

&quot;There is also a perception, deriving from centuries of social stratification and selectivity in the status and provision of different kinds of education in England, that vocational education is inevitably more narrowly utilitarian, less influential and less important than its more academic cousin: advanced (&#x27;A&#x27;) levels. This divide between the sectors of &#x27;vocational&#x27; and &#x27;higher&#x27; education, in many ways peculiarly English, is also reflected in higher education institutions and occupations (regarding academic credentials and some related provisions). These academic-vocational divisions in the &#x27;English model&#x27;, together with negative social and political perceptions, have to some extent stymied the debate regarding the significance and relevance of vocational education provision to learning, work and the economy&quot; (Loo and Jameson, 2017, p. 1). The authors suggest that the divisions between further and higher education sectors in England be reconsidered. They (Loo and Jameson, 2017) call for an opening up of new pathways of &quot;occupation-related&quot; provisions that offer greater parity, progression and enhanced social mobility in vocational education across the academic levels of England&#x27;s educational provision.

Loo (2018) uses the term, technical and vocational education and training (TVET) by UNESCO (2012) as in the section below, to offer a more rational term than &quot;vocational&quot; in England, and to reach out to like-minded users in the global educational community. He offers insights into the study of the pedagogy of teachers of work-related programmes. Especially, he investigates the complex issue of how teachers use their know-how in their delivery of work-related programmes. This complexity surrounds the need for these deliverers to have the disciplinary and wider elements relating to knowledge of the relevant work practices, which involves the learning of the type of know-how and its application in their work practices. The combination of these work know-how (e.g. knowledge, experiences, dispositions and values) are then used to enable them to deliver to the learners. These pedagogic activities rely on different types of knowledge and experiences – pedagogic and work-related.

The theoretical framework uses, initially, a dual professionalism concept to review the literature sources of knowledge concerning the occupational pedagogy of teachers. From a pedagogic delineation of knowledge, teaching knowledge may include knowledge of the relevant disciplines (Becher 1994; Bernstein 1996; Smeby 1996) such as psychology and sociology (e.g. learning theories) for the education field. Teaching knowledge may be explicit or tacit (Shulman 1987; Polanyi 1966; Nonaka and Takeuchi 1995; Verloop et al. 2001; Loughran et al. 2003; Collins 2010), and may include a teacher&#x27;s wider life experiences (Clandinin 1985) and occupational or work-related practices (Loo 2012).

Knowledge concerning occupational practices (i.e. non-teaching) also requires a base of disciplinary or theoretical know-how that may be explicit and a process of application to specific work contexts and the environment it operates in (Bernstein 1996; Loo 2012). This occupational knowledge base also includes knowledge of procedures, skills (e.g. interpersonal and intrapersonal ones which are usually tacit), techniques, transversal abilities, project management abilities, personal capabilities and occupational capacity/awareness (Eraut 2004; Winch 2014). This knowledge base is a wider spectrum than a pedagogic one.

These two forms of knowledge – pedagogic and occupational – may be applied through the processes of recontextualization (Bernstein 1996; van Oers 1998; Barnett 2006, Evans et al. 2010, Loo 2012, 2014). The knowledge forms can be changed through selecting, relocating and refocusing aspects when used in another setting. In particular, the recontextualization processes regarding content (relating to specifications of a programme), pedagogic (relating to teaching activities), occupational (relating to working activities), and work (relating to the systems and processes that are specific to a workplace or organisation). From the initial teaching and occupational dimensions, the final modified know-how of Occupational Pedagogic Knowledge or Occupational Teachers&#x27; Capacities is formed via content recontextualization, pedagogic recontextualization, occupational recontextualization, and integrated applied recontextualization (IAR). There are also relevant concepts that offer insights to the application of teaching and occupational know-how. These include knowledgeable practice (Evans 2016), practice architecture (Kemmis and Green 2013), and Systems 1 and 2 (Kahneman 2012). For a detailed description of the theoretical framework, please refer to Chapter 4 in Teachers and Teaching in Vocational and Professional Education (Loo, 2018). The conceptual framework of the occupational pedagogy of teachers is illustrated on page 50 (Loo 2018).

The analysed empirical data is discussed in the separate sections of TVET, higher and professional education courses, five case studies of fashion and textiles, airline industry, dental hygiene, clinical training in emergency medicine and doctors, and a comparison chapter. These chapters offer critical understandings of how pedagogic and occupational know-how are acquired and applied in highly contextualized pedagogic and occupational contexts culminating in the use of teaching strategies/approaches in teaching sessions.

The observations from this investigation include (Loo 2018):
1. there are programme pathways to occupational work
2. occupational pathways are more direct for work-related provisions at higher academic levels than those at the TVET level
3. two strands of practices exist at the outset: teaching and occupational where &quot;basic&quot; disciplinary or theoretical knowledge is used to provide occupational relevance to pedagogic and work-related areas
4. IAR process provides a critical understanding of how the modified teaching, occupational and work capacities are combined to inform the application of appropriate teaching strategies to specific pedagogic settings
5. users acquire the occupational capacities over the course duration, and they include abilities, capabilities, dispositions, experiences, judgement, knowledge, protocols, skill sets and techniques
6. deliverers require the relevant occupational experiences to teach on work-related programmes, and continuous professional development is needed for deliverers to maintain their ongoing professionalism in the two practice strands of teaching and work

Finally, this investigation has implications for teachers, managers and policymakers of occupational courses. For teachers, these include insights of the sources and types of knowledge that are acquired, recontextualized and applied for teaching and working in the related occupational areas. Managers need to empathise with the deliverers and support their professional needs, and policymakers need to acknowledge the complexities of teaching in occupational programmes and that the curriculum, professional staff and institution are adequately supported (Loo 2018).

===United States===
Tech-prep programmes in the United States of America are examples of how the ′blending′ approach was used to help students make the connections between school and work. In year nine, programmes in broad occupational fields such as the health professions, automotive technology, computer systems networking are offered within general technology studies. The programmes continue for at least two years after the end of secondary school, through a tertiary education or an apprenticeship programme, with students achieving an associate degree or certificate by the end of the programme.

==See also==
*
*
*
*
*Policy development for skills and TVET
*School-to-work transition
* (Australia)
* Technology education or tech ed.
*
* (UK)
*Vocational IT (India)
*Commonwealth Register of Institutions and Courses for Overseas Students (Australia)

== References ==
== Sources ==

==Further reading==
*Achilles, C. M.; Lintz, M.N.; and Wayson, W.W. &quot;Observations on Building Public Confidence in Education.&quot; EDUCATIONAL EVALUATION AND POLICY ANALYSIS 11 no. 3 (1989): 275–284.
*Banach, Banach, and Cassidy. THE ABC COMPLETE BOOK OF SCHOOL MARKETING. Ray Township, MI: Author, 1996.
*Brodhead, C. W. &quot;Image 2000: A Vision for Vocational Education.&quot; VOCATIONAL EDUCATION JOURNAL 66, no. 1 (January 1991): 22–25.
*Buzzell, C.H. &quot;Let Our Image Reflect Our Pride.&quot; VOCATIONAL EDUCATION JOURNAL 62, no. 8 (November–December 1987): 10.
*Kincheloe, Joe L. Toil and Trouble: Good Work, Smart Workers, and the Integration of Academic and Vocational Education. New York: Peter Lang Publishing. (1995)
*Kincheloe, Joe L. How Do We Tell the Workers? The Socio-Economic Foundations of Work and Vocational Education. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. (1999)
*Lauglo, Jon; Maclean, Rupert (Eds.) &quot;Vocationalisation of Secondary Education Revisited&quot;. Series: Technical and Vocational Education and Training: Issues, Concerns and Prospects , Vol. 1. Springer. (2005)
*O&#x27;Connor, P.J., and Trussell, S.T. &quot;The Marketing of Vocational Education.&quot; VOCATIONAL EDUCATION JOURNAL 62, no. 8 (November–December 1987): 31–32.
*Ries, E. &quot;To &#x27;V&#x27; or Not to &#x27;V&#x27;: for Many the Word &#x27;Vocational&#x27; Doesn&#x27;t Work.&quot; TECHNIQUES 72, no. 8 (November–December 1997): 32–36.
*Ries, A., and Trout, J. THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING. New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1993.
*Sharpe, D. &quot;Image Control: Teachers and Staff Have the Power to Shape Positive Thinking.&quot; VOCATIONAL EDUCATION JOURNAL 68, no. 1 (January 1993): 26–27.
*Shields, C.J. &quot;How to Market Vocational Education.&quot; CURRICULUM REVIEW (November 1989): 3-5
*Silberman, H.F. &quot;Improving the Status of High School Vocational Education.&quot; EDUCATIONAL HORIZONS 65, no. 1 (Fall 1986): 5–9.
*Tuttle, F.T. &quot;Let&#x27;s Get Serious about Image-Building.&quot; VOCATIONAL EDUCATION JOURNAL 62, no. 8 (November–December 1987): 11.
*&quot;What Do People Think of Us?&quot; TECHNIQUES 72, no. 6 (September 1997): 14–15.
*Asian Academy of Film and Television
*Reeves, Diane Lindsey CAREER ACADEMY TOOLKIT. Raleigh, North Carolina: Bright Futures Press, 2006.

==External links==
*Profiles of national vocational education systems compiled from a variety of national and international sources - UNESCO-UNEVOC International Centre for Technical and Vocational Education and Training 
*Choosing a Career or Vocational School - U.S. Federal Trade Commission
*
*Mind and Hand: Manual Training the Chief Factor in Education. By Charles H. Ham, published in 1900 by American Book Company.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="0" end="20" title="Vocational education" label="Vocational education"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="24" end="33" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391083" start="61" end="74" title="Skilled worker" label="skilled craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="353" end="383" title="Vocational education" label="career and technical education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="405" end="409" title="Vocational education" label="TVET"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274997" start="480" end="484" title="technical and further education" label="TAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="681" end="687" title="Formal learning" label="formal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346484" start="689" end="699" title="Nonformal learning" label="non-formal"/>
<link wikidata="Q361428" start="704" end="721" title="informal learning" label="informal learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q322563" start="996" end="1013" title="vocational school" label="vocational school"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="1150" end="1164" title="tertiary education" label="post-secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q765192" start="1166" end="1183" title="further education" label="further education"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="1188" end="1204" title="higher education" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q20773771" start="1237" end="1251" title="apprenticeship" label="apprenticeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q322563" start="1350" end="1363" title="vocational school" label="trade schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q322563" start="1365" end="1381" title="technical school" label="technical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="1384" end="1401" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q17028020" start="1440" end="1463" title="vocational university" label="vocational universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371037" start="1469" end="1493" title="institute of technology" label="institutes of technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="2066" end="2070" title="TVET (technical and vocational education and training)" label="TVET"/>
<link wikidata="Q205961" start="2075" end="2080" title="skill" label="skill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="2145" end="2155" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="2403" end="2419" title="Public Education" label="public education"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="2500" end="2515" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="2548" end="2560" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q131774" start="2661" end="2672" title="adolescence" label="adolescents"/>
<link wikidata="Q207137" start="2809" end="2818" title="curriculum" label="curricula"/>
<link wikidata="Q77888" start="5809" end="5829" title="Wilhelm von Humboldt" label="Wilhelm von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q918385" start="5878" end="5886" title="training" label="training"/>
<link wikidata="Q91865" start="6561" end="6580" title="Julian Nida-Rümelin" label="Julian Nida-Rümelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="6747" end="6759" title="Labour economics" label="labor market"/>
<link wikidata="Q310207" start="6809" end="6817" title="McKinsey &amp;amp; Company" label="McKinsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="7664" end="7674" title="for-profit" label="for-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="7679" end="7689" title="Nonprofit organization" label="non-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="8488" end="8506" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="8512" end="8523" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="8528" end="8540" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="8566" end="8573" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="8667" end="8673" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="8849" end="8853" title="Non-governmental organization" label="NGOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="9648" end="9670" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q598188" start="9679" end="9692" title="green economy" label="green economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="10058" end="10061" title="Information and communications technology" label="ICT"/>
<link wikidata="Q159595" start="10352" end="10369" title="Distance education" label="distance learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570840" start="11475" end="11506" title="Global financial crisis in 2009" label="global financial crisis in 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="11619" end="11631" title="Unemployment" label="Unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q190007" start="11691" end="11696" title="youth" label="youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039656" start="12036" end="12050" title="jobless recovery" label="jobless growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="12067" end="12074" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="12076" end="12081" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136857" start="12086" end="12113" title="post-apartheid South Africa" label="post-apartheid South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="13503" end="13506" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="14277" end="14292" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="14294" end="14300" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="14302" end="14306" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="14315" end="14324" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q15910354" start="14701" end="14712" title="soft skills" label="soft skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="14770" end="14776" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="15044" end="15051" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="16128" end="16140" title="Disability" label="disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="16797" end="16806" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="16812" end="16823" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="16829" end="16843" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="16852" end="16876" title="United States" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="17561" end="17569" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17574" end="17615" title="Disabled Persons (Employment) Act of 1982" label="Disabled Persons (Employment) Act of 1982"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17776" end="17818" title="Education for All Global Monitoring Report" label="Education for All Global Monitoring Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551100" start="19477" end="19490" title="social equity" label="social equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853064" start="19495" end="19516" title="inclusive development" label="inclusive development"/>
<link wikidata="Q975085" start="20036" end="20043" title="Primary education" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q13006147" start="20048" end="20067" title="Secondary education" label="secondary schooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="20641" end="20656" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="20910" end="20919" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532307" start="21137" end="21164" title="General Workers&amp;#x27; Union (Argentina)" label="General Workers&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="21366" end="21377" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="21382" end="21394" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="21470" end="21480" title="Juan Perón" label="Juan Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232206" start="22447" end="22486" title="National Technological University" label="National Technological University (UTN)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315126" start="22535" end="22572" title="Universidad Nacional de las Artes" label="National University of the Arts (UNA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="22636" end="22645" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309420" start="22780" end="22814" title="Registered Training Organisations" label="registered training organisations."/>
<link wikidata="Q16826315" start="23157" end="23190" title="Australian Industry Trade College" label="Australian Industry Trade College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274997" start="23260" end="23264" title="TAFE" label="TAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824589" start="23378" end="23413" title="Australian Qualifications Framework" label="Australian Qualifications Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058747" start="25611" end="25632" title="Northern Melbourne Institute of TAFE" label="Melbourne Polytechnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951533" start="25634" end="25637" title="Box Hill Institute of TAFE" label="BHI"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004456" start="25642" end="25645" title="William Angliss Institute of TAFE" label="WAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="26171" end="26181" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="26687" end="26695" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="26810" end="26822" title="silk weaving" label="silk weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="27044" end="27056" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q13438887" start="27066" end="27106" title="Professional technical school" label="professional`no-tehnicheskoye uchilische"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897316" start="27111" end="27119" title="Tehnikum" label="Tehnikum"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="27217" end="27231" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214" start="27819" end="27877" title="European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training" label="European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592070" start="28125" end="28146" title="graduate unemployment" label="graduate unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931244" start="28151" end="28166" title="underemployment" label="underemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="28267" end="28274" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q861585" start="28422" end="28427" title="Education in Finland" label="lukio"/>
<link wikidata="Q19152599" start="28656" end="28674" title="ammattikorkeakoulu" label="ammattikorkeakoulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="28754" end="28773" title="air traffic control" label="air traffic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q856076" start="29253" end="29267" title="municipalities of Finland" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q798022" start="29608" end="29634" title="Baccalauréat" label="baccalauréat professionnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="29638" end="29644" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q861623" start="29654" end="29681" title="Education in the Netherlands" label="middelbaar beroepsonderwijs"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="29788" end="29795" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29812" end="29824" title="German model#Vocational training" label="German model"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="30906" end="30911" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500224" start="31510" end="31524" title="Free education" label="Free education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866842" start="32630" end="32659" title="Ministry of Education (Ghana)" label="Ministry of Education (Ghana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="33780" end="33786" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33843" end="33849" title="Lyceum#Greece" label="lyceum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319035" start="34120" end="34135" title="adult education" label="adult education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620772" start="34367" end="34376" title="practicum" label="practicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500754" start="34404" end="34414" title="internship" label="internship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500224" start="34627" end="34641" title="free education" label="free education"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="34707" end="34716" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q17130618" start="36513" end="36541" title="Vocational education in India" label="Vocational training in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294756" start="36589" end="36607" title="Ministry of Labour and Employment (India)" label="Ministry of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="36615" end="36633" title="Government of India" label="central ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603691" start="36638" end="36671" title="State governments of India" label="various state-level organizations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36755" end="36794" title="National qualifications framework#India" label="National Skills Qualification Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294642" start="37641" end="37656" title="Ministry of Human Resource Development" label="Ministry of HRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673518" start="37745" end="37795" title="Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship" label="Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship"/>
<link wikidata="Q22222755" start="38211" end="38222" title="Skill India" label="Skill India"/>
<link wikidata="Q48724095" start="38504" end="38542" title="National Skill Development Corporation" label="National Skill Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="39850" end="39854" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866700" start="39972" end="40024" title="Ministry of Cooperatives, Labour, and Social Welfare" label="Ministry of Cooperatives, Labour, and Social Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="40263" end="40267" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="40561" end="40600" title="International Labour Organization" label="International Labour Organization (ILO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="40887" end="40891" title="TVET (technical and vocational education and training)" label="TVET"/>
<link wikidata="Q17028020" start="41620" end="41649" title="Vocational university" label="technical/vocational colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="41784" end="41800" title="Associate degree" label="Associate degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="41820" end="41842" title="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="42001" end="42005" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="43458" end="43464" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778059" start="43691" end="43738" title="Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs and Social Services" label="Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs, and Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590151" start="44259" end="44280" title="Ministry of Education (Israel)" label="Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091487" start="44286" end="44305" title="Ministry of Economy (Israel)" label="Ministry of Economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153659" start="44532" end="44545" title="self-efficacy" label="self-efficacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="44818" end="44823" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="44891" end="44907" title="higher education" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="45154" end="45173" title="computer technology" label="computer technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12684" start="45175" end="45182" title="fashion" label="fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="45188" end="45195" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="48064" end="48072" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48342" end="48354" title="Institute of technology#Malaysia" label="polytechnics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351659" start="48656" end="48701" title="Industrial Training Institute of Kuala Lumpur" label="Industrial Training Institute of Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="48980" end="48986" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="54552" end="54563" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="55402" end="55409" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="57706" end="57714" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q13006147" start="57801" end="57820" title="secondary education" label="secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q209465" start="58275" end="58281" title="campus" label="campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="58486" end="58492" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="" start="58706" end="58723" title=":pl:Szko%C5%82a policealna" label="Szkoła Policealna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500754" start="59029" end="59039" title="internship" label="internship"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="59297" end="59319" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q180165" start="59334" end="59346" title="mechatronics" label="mechatronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482740" start="59439" end="59449" title="programmer" label="programmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078262" start="59452" end="59474" title="database administrator" label="database administrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q175403" start="59633" end="59649" title="microelectronics" label="microelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390351" start="59681" end="59731" title="International Standard Classification of Education" label="International Standard Classification of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="60762" end="60767" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758042" start="61390" end="61402" title="Bachillerato" label="Bachillerato"/>
<link wikidata="Q697304" start="61615" end="61636" title="Dual education system" label="Dual education system"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="65103" end="65108" title="Switzerland" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q117289" start="65575" end="65589" title="Sergio Ermotti" label="Sergio Ermotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q193199" start="65598" end="65601" title="UBS" label="UBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="67058" end="67064" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="67322" end="67326" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="67609" end="67617" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q15223088" start="67913" end="67941" title="Harris Academy South Norwood" label="Harris Academy South Norwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568968" start="67983" end="67998" title="William Stanley (inventor)" label="William Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="68190" end="68193" title="Royal Society for the encouragement of Arts, Manufactures &amp;amp; Commerce" label="RSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036240" start="68198" end="68215" title="City &amp;amp; Guilds" label="City &amp;amp; Guilds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340874" start="68265" end="68283" title="Education Act 1944" label="Education Act 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843247" start="68305" end="68322" title="Tripartite System" label="Tripartite System"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="68326" end="68340" title="grammar school" label="grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443799" start="68343" end="68369" title="secondary technical school" label="secondary technical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443856" start="68375" end="68398" title="secondary modern school" label="secondary modern school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="68553" end="68572" title="HM Government" label="British Governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001836" start="68654" end="68695" title="Business And Technology Education Council (BTEC)" label="Business And Technology Education Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q765192" start="68718" end="68725" title="further education" label="further"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="68730" end="68746" title="higher education" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q765192" start="68771" end="68788" title="further education" label="further education"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="68849" end="68861" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059275" start="68886" end="68907" title="Youth Training Scheme" label="Youth Training Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873201" start="68909" end="68942" title="National Vocational Qualification" label="National Vocational Qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532070" start="68948" end="68989" title="General National Vocational Qualification" label="General National Vocational Qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154307" start="69081" end="69100" title="Education in the United Kingdom" label="full-time education"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69138" end="69160" title="Apprenticeships#United Kingdom" label="Modern Apprenticeships"/>
<link wikidata="Q15623227" start="69312" end="69357" title="Department for Children, Schools and Families" label="Department for Children, Schools and Families"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="69440" end="69447" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036240" start="69619" end="69636" title="City &amp;amp; Guilds" label="City &amp;amp; Guilds"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="77141" end="77165" title="United States" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q124192" start="77368" end="77389" title="automotive technology" label="automotive technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="77720" end="77758" title="Policy development for skills and TVET" label="Policy development for skills and TVET"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432131" start="77760" end="77785" title="School-to-work transition" label="School-to-work transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q750986" start="77802" end="77822" title="Technology education" label="Technology education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153847" start="77868" end="77939" title="Commonwealth Register of Institutions and Courses for Overseas Students" label="Commonwealth Register of Institutions and Courses for Overseas Students"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047594" start="80162" end="80198" title="Noida Film City" label="Asian Academy of Film and Television"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56552" wikidata="Q192579" url="?curid=56552" title="Jet lag">
<text>Jet lag is a temporary physiological condition that occurs when a person&#x27;s circadian rhythm is out of sync with the time zone they are in, and is a typical result from travelling rapidly across multiple time zones (east–west or west–east). For example, someone travelling from New York to London, i.e. from west to east, feels as if the time were five hours &quot;earlier&quot; than local time, and someone travelling from London to New York, i.e. from east to west, feels as if the time were five hours &quot;later&quot; than local time. The phase shift when travelling from east to west is referred to as &quot;phase-delay&quot; of the circadian cycle, whereas going west to east is &quot;phase-advance&quot; of the cycle. Most travellers find that it is harder to adjust time zones when travelling east. Jet lag was previously classified as a circadian rhythm sleep disorder.

The condition may last several days before a traveller becomes fully adjusted to a new time zone; it takes on average one day per time zone crossed to reach circadian reentrainment. Jet lag is especially an issue for airline pilots, aircraft crew, and frequent travellers. Airlines have regulations aimed at combating pilot fatigue caused by jet lag.

The term &quot;jet lag&quot; was created after the arrival of jet aircraft, because prior that it was uncommon to travel far and fast enough to cause the condition.

==Discovery==
According to a 1969 study by the Federal Aviation Administration, aviator Wiley Post was the first to write about the effects of flying across time zones in his 1931 co-authored book, &quot;Around the World in Eight Days&quot;.

==Signs and symptoms==
The symptoms of jet lag can be quite varied, depending on the amount of time zone alteration, time of day, and individual differences. Sleep disturbance occurs, with poor sleep upon arrival or sleep disruptions such as trouble falling asleep (when flying east), early awakening (when flying west), and trouble remaining asleep. Cognitive effects include poorer performance on mental tasks and concentration; dizziness, nausea, insomnia, confusion, anxiety, increased fatigue, headaches, and irritability; and problems with digestion, including indigestion, changes in the frequency and consistency of bowel movements, and reduced appetite. The symptoms are caused by a circadian rhythm that is out of sync with the day–night cycle of the destination, as well as the possibility of internal desynchronisation. Jet lag has been measured with simple analogue scales, but a study has shown that these are relatively blunt for assessing all the problems associated with jet lag. The Liverpool Jet Lag Questionnaire was developed to measure all the symptoms of jet lag at several times of day, and has been used to assess jet lag in athletes.

Jet lag may require a change of three time zones or more to occur, though some individuals can be affected by as little as a single time zone or the single-hour shift to or from daylight saving time. Symptoms and consequences of jet lag can be a significant concern for athletes travelling east or west to competitions, as performance is often dependent on a combination of physical and mental characteristics that are affected by jet lag. This is often a common concern at international sporting events like the Olympics and FIFA World Cup. However many athletes arrive at least 2–4 weeks ahead of these events, to help adjust from any jet lag issues.

===Travel fatigue===
Travel fatigue is general fatigue, disorientation, and headache caused by a disruption in routine, time spent in a cramped space with little chance to move around, a low-oxygen environment, and dehydration caused by dry air and limited food and drink. It does not necessarily involve the shift in circadian rhythms that cause jet lag. Travel fatigue can occur without crossing time zones, and it often disappears after one day accompanied by a night of good quality sleep.

==Cause==
Jet lag is a chronobiological problem, similar to issues often induced by shift work and circadian rhythm sleep disorders. When travelling across a number of time zones, a person&#x27;s body clock (circadian rhythm) will be out of synchronisation with the destination time, as it experiences daylight and darkness contrary to the rhythms to which it was accustomed. The body&#x27;s natural pattern is disturbed, as the rhythms that dictate times for eating, sleeping, hormone regulation, body temperature variation, and other functions no longer correspond to the environment, nor to each other in some cases. To the degree that the body cannot immediately realign these rhythms, it is jet lagged. 

The speed at which the body adjusts to a new rhythm depends on the individual as well as the direction of travel; some people may require several days to adjust to a new time zone, while others experience little disruption.

Crossing the International Date Line does not in itself contribute to jet lag, as the guide for calculating jet lag is the number of time zones crossed, with a maximum possible time difference of plus or minus 12 hours. If the absolute time difference between two locations is greater than 12 hours, one must subtract 24 from or add 24 to that number. For example, the time zone UTC+14 will be at the same time of day as UTC−10, though the former is one day &quot;ahead&quot; of the latter.

Jet lag is linked only to the distance travelled along the east–west axis. A ten-hour flight between Europe and southern Africa does not cause jet lag, as the direction of travel is primarily north–south. A four-hour flight between Miami, Florida, and Phoenix, Arizona, in the United States may result in jet lag, as the direction of travel is primarily east–west.

===Double desynchronisation===
There are two separate processes related to biological timing: circadian oscillators and homeostasis. The circadian system is located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) in the hypothalamus of the brain. The other process is homeostatic sleep propensity, which is a function of the amount of time elapsed since the last adequate sleep episode.

The human body has a master clock in the SCN and peripheral oscillators in tissues. The SCN&#x27;s role is to send signals to the peripheral oscillators, which synchronise them for physiological functions. The SCN responds to light information sent from the retina. It is hypothesised that peripheral oscillators respond to internal signals such as hormones, food intake, and &quot;nervous stimuli&quot;.

The implication of independent internal clocks may explain some of the symptoms of jet lag. People who travel across several time zones can, within a few days, adapt their sleep–wake cycles with light from the environment. However, their skeletal muscles, liver, lungs, and other organs will adapt at different rates. This internal biological de-synchronisation is exacerbated as the body is not in sync with the environmenta &quot;double desynchronisation&quot;, which has implications for health and mood.

===Delayed sleep phase disorder===
Delayed sleep phase disorder is a medical disorder characterised by delayed sleeping time and a proportionately delayed waking time due to a phase delay in the internal biological master clock. Specific genotypes underlie this disorder. If allowed to sleep as dictated by their endogenous clock these individuals will not have any ill effects as a result of their phase-shifted sleeping time.

==Management==
===Light exposure===
Light is the strongest stimulus, or zeitgeber, for realigning a person&#x27;s circadian cycle, and the key to quick adaptation is therefore timed light exposure based on the traveller&#x27;s sleep pattern, chronotype, and plans.

Timed light exposure can be effective to help people match their circadian rhythms with the expected cycle at their destination; it requires strict adherence to timing. Light therapy is a popular method used by professional athletes to reduce jet lag. Timed correctly, the light may contribute to an advance or delay of the circadian phase to match the destination.

The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends mobile apps for the correct timing of light exposure and avoidance, when to use caffeine, and when to sleep.

===Melatonin administration===
In addition to timed light exposure, the right type and dose of melatonin, at the right time, can help travellers shift faster and sleep better as they are transitioning between time zones. There are issues regarding the appropriate timing of melatonin use, in addition to the legality of the substance in certain countries. For athletes, anti-doping agencies may prohibit or limit its use.

Melatonin can be considered to be a darkness signal, with effects on circadian timing that are the opposite of the effects of exposure to light. Melatonin receptors are situated on the suprachiasmatic nucleus, which is the anatomical site of the circadian clock. The results of a few field studies of melatonin administration, monitoring circadian phase, have provided evidence for a correlation between the reduction of jet lag symptoms and the accelerated realignment of the circadian clock.

===Short duration trips===
In the case of short duration trips, jet lag may be minimised by maintaining a sleep-wake schedule based on the originating time zone after arriving at the destination, but this strategy is often impractical in regard to desired social activities or work obligations. Shifting one&#x27;s sleep schedule before departure by 1–2 hours to match the destination time zone may also shorten the duration of jet lag. Symptoms can be further reduced through a combination of artificial exposure to light and rescheduling, as these have been shown to augment phase-shifting.

===Pharmacotherapy===
The short-term use of hypnotic medication has shown efficacy in reducing insomnia related to jet lag. In a study, zolpidem improved sleep quality and reduced awakenings for people travelling across five to nine time zones. The potential adverse effects of hypnotic agents, like amnesia and confusion, have led some doctors to advise patients to test such medications prior to using them for treating jet lag. Several cases using triazolam to promote sleep during a flight reported dramatic global amnesia.

==Mental health implications==
Jet lag may affect the mental health of vulnerable individuals. When travelling across time zones, there is a &quot;phase-shift of body temperature, rapid-eye-movement sleep, melatonin production, and other circadian rhythms&quot;. A 2002 study found that relapse of bipolar and psychotic disorders occurred more frequently when seven or more time zones had been crossed in the past week than when three or fewer had been crossed. Although significant circadian rhythm disruption has been documented as affecting individuals with bipolar disorder, an Australian team studied suicide statistics from 1971 to 2001 to determine whether the one-hour shifts involved in daylight saving time had an effect. They found increased incidence of male suicide after the commencement of daylight saving time but not after returning to standard time.

==See also==

* Sleep deprivation

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192579" start="0" end="7" title="Jet lag" label="Jet lag"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="23" end="36" title="physiological" label="physiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="80" end="96" title="circadian rhythm" label="circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12143" start="121" end="130" title="time zone" label="time zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="282" end="290" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="294" end="300" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="548" end="559" title="phase shift" label="phase shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712607" start="851" end="882" title="circadian rhythm sleep disorder" label="circadian rhythm sleep disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345068" start="1052" end="1065" title="Entrainment (chronobiology)" label="reentrainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095549" start="1102" end="1115" title="airline pilot" label="airline pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245384" start="1203" end="1216" title="pilot fatigue" label="pilot fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="1299" end="1311" title="jet aircraft" label="jet aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="1450" end="1481" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q264389" start="1491" end="1501" title="Wiley Post" label="Wiley Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q177190" start="1804" end="1821" title="Sleep disturbance" label="Sleep disturbance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="1997" end="2006" title="Cognitive" label="Cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818236" start="2062" end="2075" title="attentional control" label="concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="2088" end="2094" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="2096" end="2104" title="insomnia" label="insomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="2117" end="2124" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="2136" end="2143" title="fatigue" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="2145" end="2153" title="headache" label="headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q29299" start="2160" end="2172" title="irritability" label="irritability"/>
<link wikidata="Q653971" start="2213" end="2224" title="indigestion" label="indigestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q204015" start="2270" end="2285" title="bowel movements" label="bowel movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q28578" start="2299" end="2307" title="appetite" label="appetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469559" start="2384" end="2399" title="day–night cycle" label="day–night cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36669" start="2985" end="3005" title="daylight saving time" label="daylight saving time"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="3077" end="3085" title="Athletics (sport)" label="athletes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="3320" end="3328" title="Olympics" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="3333" end="3347" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q194290" start="3676" end="3687" title="dehydration" label="dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q506874" start="3979" end="3995" title="chronobiological" label="chronobiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068683" start="4040" end="4050" title="shift work" label="shift work"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712607" start="4055" end="4086" title="circadian rhythm sleep disorder" label="circadian rhythm sleep disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="4152" end="4162" title="body clock" label="body clock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4434" end="4452" title="Hormone#Regulation" label="hormone regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="4454" end="4480" title="Thermoregulation" label="body temperature variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131389" start="4904" end="4927" title="International Date Line" label="International Date Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130" start="5270" end="5276" title="UTC+14" label="UTC+14"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163" start="5312" end="5318" title="UTC−10" label="UTC−10"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="5615" end="5629" title="Miami, Florida" label="Miami, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="5635" end="5651" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121352" start="5843" end="5863" title="circadian oscillator" label="circadian oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q103191" start="5869" end="5880" title="homeostasis" label="homeostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156516" start="5921" end="5944" title="suprachiasmatic nucleus" label="suprachiasmatic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="5958" end="5970" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="6384" end="6390" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048687" start="6770" end="6785" title="skeletal muscle" label="skeletal muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="6788" end="6793" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="6795" end="6799" title="lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470530" start="7076" end="7104" title="Delayed sleep phase disorder" label="Delayed sleep phase disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q106016" start="7279" end="7287" title="genotype" label="genotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q185962" start="7542" end="7551" title="zeitgeber" label="zeitgeber"/>
<link wikidata="Q184869" start="7712" end="7722" title="chronotype" label="chronotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q243570" start="7905" end="7918" title="Light therapy" label="Light therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="8107" end="8152" title="US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="8170" end="8180" title="mobile app" label="mobile app"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="8250" end="8258" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180912" start="8375" end="8384" title="melatonin" label="melatonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q166376" start="8650" end="8661" title="anti-doping" label="anti-doping"/>
<link wikidata="Q62962" start="9836" end="9844" title="hypnotic" label="hypnotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q218842" start="9928" end="9936" title="zolpidem" label="zolpidem"/>
<link wikidata="Q412143" start="10243" end="10252" title="triazolam" label="triazolam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18740" start="10304" end="10318" title="global amnesia" label="global amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="10619" end="10626" title="Bipolar disorder" label="bipolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="10631" end="10650" title="psychotic disorders" label="psychotic disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364801" start="11206" end="11223" title="Sleep deprivation" label="Sleep deprivation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56556" wikidata="Q746183" url="?curid=56556" title="Ketone bodies">
<text>Ketone bodies are water-soluble molecules or compounds that contain the ketone groups produced from fatty acids by the liver (ketogenesis). Ketone bodies are readily transported into tissues outside the liver, where they are converted into acetyl-CoA (acetyl-Coenzyme A)which then enters the citric acid cycle (Krebs cycle) and is oxidized for energy. These liver-derived ketone groups include acetoacetic acid (acetoacetate), beta-hydroxybutyrate, and acetone, a spontaneous breakdown product of acetoacetate (see graphic).

Ketone bodies are produced by the liver during periods of caloric restriction of various scenarios: low food intake (fasting), carbohydrate restrictive diets, starvation, prolonged intense exercise, alcoholism, or during untreated (or inadequately treated) type 1 diabetes mellitus. Ketone bodies are produced in liver cells by the breakdown of fatty acids. They are released into the blood &quot;after&quot; glycogen stores in the liver have been depleted. (Glycogen stores typically are depleted within the first 24 hours of fasting.) Ketone bodies are also produced in glial cells under periods of food restriction to sustain memory formation.

When two acetyl-CoA molecules lose their -CoAs (or coenzyme A groups), they can form a (covalent) dimer called acetoacetate. β-hydroxybutyrate is a reduced form of acetoacetate, in which the ketone group is converted into an alcohol (or hydroxyl) group (see illustration on the right). Both are 4-carbon molecules that can readily be converted back into acetyl-CoA by most tissues of the body, with the notable exception of the liver. Acetone is the decarboxylated form of acetoacetate which cannot be converted back into acetyl-CoA except via detoxification in the liver where it is converted into lactic acid, which can, in turn, be oxidized into pyruvic acid, and only then into acetyl-CoA.

Ketone bodies have a characteristic smell, which can easily be detected in the breath of persons in ketosis and ketoacidosis. It is often described as fruity or like nail polish remover (which usually contains acetone or ethyl acetate).

Apart from the three endogenous ketone bodies, other ketone bodies like β-ketopentanoate and β-hydroxypentanoate may be created as a result of the metabolism of synthetic triglycerides, such as triheptanoin.

==Production==

Fats stored in adipose tissue are released from the fat cells into the blood as free fatty acids and glycerol when insulin levels are low and glucagon and epinephrine levels in the blood are high. This occurs between meals, during fasting, starvation and strenuous exercise, when blood glucose levels are likely to fall. Fatty acids are very high energy fuels and are taken up by all metabolizing cells that have mitochondria. This is because fatty acids can only be metabolized in the mitochondria. Red blood cells do not contain mitochondria and are therefore entirely dependent on anaerobic glycolysis for their energy requirements. In all other tissues, the fatty acids that enter the metabolizing cells are combined with coenzyme A to form acyl-CoA chains. These are transferred into the mitochondria of the cells, where they are broken down into acetyl-CoA units by a sequence of reactions known as β-oxidation.

The acetyl-CoA produced by β-oxidation enters the citric acid cycle in the mitochondrion by combining with oxaloacetate to form citrate. This results in the complete combustion of the acetyl group of acetyl-CoA (see diagram above, on the right) to CO2 and water. The energy released in this process is captured in the form of 1 GTP and 9 ATP molecules per acetyl group (or acetic acid molecule) oxidized. This is the fate of acetyl-CoA wherever β-oxidation of fatty acids occurs, except under certain circumstances in the liver. In the liver oxaloacetate is wholly or partially diverted into the gluconeogenic pathway during fasting, starvation, a low carbohydrate diet, prolonged strenuous exercise, and in uncontrolled type 1 diabetes mellitus. Under these circumstances oxaloacetate is hydrogenated to malate which is then removed from the mitochondrion to be converted into glucose in the cytoplasm of the liver cells, from where the glucose is released into the blood. In the liver, therefore, oxaloacetate is unavailable for condensation with acetyl-CoA when significant gluconeogenesis has been stimulated by low (or absent) insulin and high glucagon concentrations in the blood. Under these circumstances, acetyl-CoA is diverted to the formation of acetoacetate and beta-hydroxybutyrate. Acetoacetate, beta-hydroxybutyrate, and their spontaneous breakdown product, acetone, are known as ketone bodies. The ketone bodies are released by the liver into the blood. All cells with mitochondria can take ketone bodies up from the blood and reconvert them into acetyl-CoA, which can then be used as fuel in their citric acid cycles, as no other tissue can divert its oxaloacetate into the gluconeogenic pathway in the way that the liver does this. Unlike free fatty acids, ketone bodies can cross the blood–brain barrier and are therefore available as fuel for the cells of the central nervous system, acting as a substitute for glucose, on which these cells normally survive. The occurrence of high levels of ketone bodies in the blood during starvation, a low carbohydrate diet and prolonged heavy exercise can lead to ketosis, and in its extreme form in out-of-control type 1 diabetes mellitus, as ketoacidosis.

Acetoacetate has a highly characteristic smell, for the people who can detect this smell, which occurs in the breath and urine during ketosis. On the other hand, most people can smell acetone, whose &quot;sweet &amp; fruity&quot; odor also characterizes the breath of persons in ketosis or, especially, ketoacidosis.

==Fuel utilization across different organs==
Ketone bodies can be used as fuel in the heart, brain and muscle, but not the liver. They yield 2 guanosine triphosphate (GTP) and 22 adenosine triphosphate (ATP) molecules per acetoacetate molecule when oxidized in the mitochondria. Ketone bodies are transported from the liver to other tissues, where acetoacetate and β-hydroxybutyrate can be reconverted to acetyl-CoA to produce reducing equivalents (NADH and FADH2), via the citric acid cycle. Though it is the source of ketone bodies, the liver cannot use them for energy because it lacks the enzyme thiophorase (β-ketoacyl-CoA transferase). Acetone is taken up by the liver in low concentrations and undergoes detoxification through the methylglyoxal pathway which ends with lactate. Acetone in high concentrations, as can occur with prolonged fasting or a ketogenic diet, is absorbed by cells outside the liver and metabolized through a different pathway via propylene glycol. Though the pathway follows a different series of steps requiring ATP, propylene glycol can eventually be turned into pyruvate.

=== Heart ===
The heart preferentially uses fatty acids as fuel under normal physiologic conditions. However, under ketotic conditions, the heart can effectively use ketone bodies for this purpose.

=== Brain ===
For several decades the liver has been considered as the main supplier of ketone bodies to fuel brain energy metabolism. However, recent evidence has demonstrated that glial cells can fuel neurons with locally synthesized ketone bodies to sustain memory formation upon food restriction.

The brain gets a portion of its fuel requirements from ketone bodies when glucose is less available than normal. In the event of low glucose concentration in the blood, most other tissues have alternative fuel sources besides ketone bodies and glucose (such as fatty acids), but studies have indicated that the brain has an obligatory requirement for some glucose. After strict fasting for 3 days, the brain gets 25% of its energy from ketone bodies. After about 24 days, ketone bodies become the major fuel of the brain, making up to two-thirds of brain fuel consumption. Many studies suggest that human brain cells can survive with little or no glucose, but proving the point is ethically questionable. During the initial stages of ketosis, the brain does not burn ketones, since they are an important substrate for lipid synthesis in the brain. Furthermore, ketones produced from omega-3 fatty acids may reduce cognitive deterioration in old age.

Ketogenesis helped fuel the enlargement of the human brain during its evolution. It was previously proposed that ketogenesis is key to the evolution and viability of bigger brains in general. However, the loss of HMGCS2 (and consequently this ability) in three large-brained mammalian lineages (cetaceans, elephants–mastodons, Old World fruit bats) shows otherwise. Out of the three lineages, only fruit bats have the expected sensitivity to starvation; the other two have found alternative ways to fuel the body during starvation.

==Ketosis and ketoacidosis==
In normal individuals, there is a constant production of ketone bodies by the liver and their utilization by extrahepatic tissues. The concentration of ketone bodies in blood is maintained around . Their excretion in urine is very low and undetectable by routine urine tests (Rothera&#x27;s test).

When the rate of synthesis of ketone bodies exceeds the rate of utilization, their concentration in blood increases; this is known as &quot;ketonemia&quot;. This is followed by &quot;ketonuria&quot; – excretion of ketone bodies in urine. The overall picture of ketonemia and ketonuria is commonly referred to as ketosis. The smell of acetoacetate and/or acetone in breath is a common feature in ketosis.

When a type 1 diabetic suffers acute biological stress (infection, heart attack, or physical trauma) or fails to administer enough insulin, they may enter the pathological state of diabetic ketoacidosis. Under these circumstances, the low or absent insulin levels in the blood, combined with the inappropriately high glucagon concentrations, induce the liver to produce glucose at an inappropriately increased rate, causing acetyl-CoA resulting from the beta-oxidation of fatty acids, to be converted into ketone bodies. The resulting very high levels of ketone bodies lower the pH of the blood plasma, which reflexively triggers the kidneys to excrete urine with very high acid levels. The high levels of glucose and ketones in the blood also spill passively into the urine (due to the inability of the renal tubules to reabsorb glucose and ketones from the tubular fluid, being overwhelmed by the high volumes of these substances being filtered into the tubular fluid). The resulting osmotic diuresis of glucose causes the removal of water and electrolytes from the blood resulting in potentially fatal dehydration.

Individuals who follow a low-carbohydrate diet will also develop ketosis. This induced ketosis is sometimes called nutritional ketosis, but the level of ketone body concentrations are on the order of whereas the pathological ketoacidosis is .

The process of ketosis has been studied for its effects in improving the cognitive symptoms of neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer&#x27;s disease. Clinical trials have also looked to ketosis in children for Angelman syndrome.

== See also ==
* Fatty acid metabolism

== References ==
==External links==
* – Diabetic Ketoacidosis
* Fat metabolism at unisanet.unisa.edu.au
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q746183" start="0" end="13" title="Ketone bodies" label="Ketone bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="18" end="31" title="water-soluble" label="water-soluble"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="32" end="40" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q170744" start="72" end="85" title="ketone" label="ketone groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="100" end="111" title="fatty acids" label="fatty acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q14913195" start="126" end="137" title="ketogenesis" label="ketogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q715317" start="240" end="250" title="acetyl-CoA" label="acetyl-CoA"/>
<link wikidata="Q133895" start="292" end="323" title="citric acid cycle" label="citric acid cycle (Krebs cycle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q409692" start="394" end="410" title="acetoacetic acid" label="acetoacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q223092" start="427" end="447" title="beta-Hydroxybutyric acid" label="beta-hydroxybutyrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="453" end="460" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q44602" start="643" end="650" title="fasting" label="fasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570280" start="653" end="683" title="Low-carbohydrate diet" label="carbohydrate restrictive diets"/>
<link wikidata="Q853930" start="685" end="695" title="starvation" label="starvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q219067" start="715" end="723" title="exercise" label="exercise"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="783" end="807" title="Diabetes mellitus#Type 1" label="type 1 diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174936" start="935" end="943" title="glycogen" label="glycogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q177105" start="1098" end="1109" title="glial cells" label="glial cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q407635" start="1225" end="1242" title="Coenzyme A" label="coenzyme A groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q762043" start="1272" end="1277" title="dimer (chemistry)" label="dimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q223092" start="1299" end="1316" title="Beta-Hydroxybutyric acid" label="β-hydroxybutyrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161141" start="1322" end="1329" title="organic redox reaction" label="reduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q156" start="1399" end="1406" title="Alcohol (chemistry)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="1411" end="1419" title="hydroxyl" label="hydroxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q161249" start="1773" end="1784" title="lactic acid" label="lactic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q213580" start="1823" end="1835" title="pyruvic acid" label="pyruvic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123139" start="1969" end="1976" title="ketosis" label="ketosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130148" start="1981" end="1993" title="ketoacidosis" label="ketoacidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="2020" end="2025" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q223807" start="2035" end="2054" title="nail polish remover" label="nail polish remover"/>
<link wikidata="Q407153" start="2090" end="2103" title="ethyl acetate" label="ethyl acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823218" start="2179" end="2195" title="3-Oxopentanoic acid" label="β-ketopentanoate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823214" start="2200" end="2219" title="3-Hydroxypentanoic acid" label="β-hydroxypentanoate"/>
<link wikidata="Q186319" start="2278" end="2291" title="triglycerides" label="triglycerides"/>
<link wikidata="Q414576" start="2301" end="2313" title="triheptanoin" label="triheptanoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="2347" end="2361" title="adipose tissue" label="adipose tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q357519" start="2384" end="2393" title="Adipocytes" label="fat cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="2412" end="2428" title="free fatty acids" label="free fatty acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q132501" start="2433" end="2441" title="glycerol" label="glycerol"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="2447" end="2454" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170617" start="2474" end="2482" title="glucagon" label="glucagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="2487" end="2498" title="epinephrine" label="epinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q275157" start="2612" end="2632" title="blood sugar level" label="blood glucose levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="2745" end="2757" title="mitochondria" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="2832" end="2847" title="Erythrocytes" label="Red blood cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750801" start="2916" end="2936" title="anaerobic glycolysis" label="anaerobic glycolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q407635" start="3058" end="3068" title="coenzyme A" label="coenzyme A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699537" start="3077" end="3085" title="acyl-CoA" label="acyl-CoA"/>
<link wikidata="Q97261657" start="3237" end="3248" title="Beta-oxidation" label="β-oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q408658" start="3358" end="3370" title="Oxaloacetic acid" label="oxaloacetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="3379" end="3386" title="citric acid" label="citrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q392227" start="3579" end="3582" title="Guanosine triphosphate" label="GTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="3589" end="3592" title="Adenosine triphosphate" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="3624" end="3635" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="3773" end="3778" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q191835" start="3847" end="3868" title="gluconeogenesis" label="gluconeogenic pathway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3972" end="3996" title="Diabetes mellitus#Type 1" label="type 1 diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190143" start="4056" end="4062" title="Malic acid" label="malate"/>
<link wikidata="Q79899" start="4144" end="4153" title="cytoplasm" label="cytoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q170617" start="4400" end="4408" title="glucagon" label="glucagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="5054" end="5073" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="5131" end="5153" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130148" start="5454" end="5466" title="ketoacidosis" label="ketoacidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="5873" end="5878" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="5880" end="5885" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="5890" end="5896" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="5910" end="5915" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q392227" start="5930" end="5952" title="guanosine triphosphate" label="guanosine triphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="5966" end="5988" title="adenosine triphosphate" label="adenosine triphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12499775" start="6236" end="6240" title="NADH" label="NADH"/>
<link wikidata="Q28746" start="6245" end="6250" title="FADH2" label="FADH2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824008" start="6525" end="6546" title="methylglyoxal pathway" label="methylglyoxal pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q161495" start="6748" end="6764" title="propylene glycol" label="propylene glycol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123139" start="7010" end="7017" title="Ketosis" label="ketotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q177105" start="7275" end="7286" title="Glia" label="glial cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q44602" start="7773" end="7780" title="fasting" label="fasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331083" start="8076" end="8098" title="Human subject research" label="ethically questionable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2792936" start="8213" end="8228" title="Lipid metabolism" label="lipid synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191756" start="8278" end="8296" title="omega-3 fatty acid" label="omega-3 fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q438962" start="8309" end="8332" title="Aging-associated diseases" label="cognitive deterioration"/>
<link wikidata="Q191089" start="8336" end="8343" title="old age" label="old age"/>
<link wikidata="Q21118284" start="8559" end="8565" title="HMGCS2" label="HMGCS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="8641" end="8649" title="cetacean" label="cetacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="8652" end="8660" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q192272" start="8662" end="8670" title="mastodon" label="mastodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q185230" start="8673" end="8693" title="Megachiroptera" label="Old World fruit bats"/>
<link wikidata="Q877827" start="9793" end="9814" title="diabetic ketoacidosis" label="diabetic ketoacidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q584691" start="10598" end="10614" title="osmotic diuresis" label="osmotic diuresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="10658" end="10669" title="electrolyte" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q194290" start="10717" end="10728" title="dehydration" label="dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123139" start="10846" end="10865" title="nutritional ketosis" label="nutritional ketosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755122" start="11070" end="11095" title="neurodegenerative disease" label="neurodegenerative disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="11107" end="11131" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q535364" start="11193" end="11210" title="Angelman syndrome" label="Angelman syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q14860867" start="11230" end="11251" title="Fatty acid metabolism" label="Fatty acid metabolism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56557" wikidata="Q4927806" url="?curid=56557" title="Blood glucose monitoring">
<text>Blood glucose monitoring is the use of a glucose meter for testing the concentration of glucose in the blood (glycemia). Particularly important in diabetes management, a blood glucose test is typically performed by piercing the skin (typically, via fingerstick) to draw blood, then applying the blood to a chemically active disposable &#x27;test-strip&#x27;. The other main option is continuous glucose monitoring (CGM). Different manufacturers use different technology, but most systems measure an electrical characteristic and use this to determine the glucose level in the blood. Skin-prick methods measure capillary blood glucose (i.e., the level found in capillary blood), whereas CGM correlates interstitial fluid glucose level to blood glucose level. Measurements may occur after fasting or at random nonfasting intervals (random glucose tests), each of which informs diagnosis or monitoring in different ways.

Healthcare professionals advise patients with diabetes mellitus on the appropriate monitoring regimen for their condition. Most people with type 2 diabetes test at least once per day. The Mayo Clinic generally recommends that diabetics who use insulin (all type 1 diabetics and many type 2 diabetics) test their blood sugar more often (4–8 times per day for type 1 diabetics, 2 or more times per day for type 2 diabetics), both to assess the effectiveness of their prior insulin dose and to help determine their next insulin dose.

==Purpose==
Blood glucose monitoring reveals individual patterns of blood glucose changes, and helps in the planning of meals, activities, and at what time of day to take medications.

Also, testing allows for a quick response to high blood sugar (hyperglycemia) or low blood sugar (hypoglycemia). This might include diet adjustments, exercise, and insulin (as instructed by the health care provider).

==Blood glucose meters==
A blood glucose meter is an electronic device for measuring the blood glucose level. A relatively small drop of blood is placed on a disposable test strip which interfaces with a digital meter. Within several seconds, the level of blood glucose will be shown on the digital display. Needing only a small drop of blood for the meter means that the time and effort required for testing are reduced and the compliance of diabetic people to their testing regimens is improved significantly. Blood glucose meters provide results in various units such as eAG (mg/dL) and eAG (mmol/L), and may also estimate A1C levels. These measurements can aid in classifying blood glucose levels as normal, prediabetic, or diabetic, facilitating effective diabetes management for users. While some models offer interpretative features that indicate the health status based on these results, not all meters provide this functionality, focusing instead on providing raw glucose measurements. Users of blood glucose meters without interpretative features can utilize online calculators to determine their blood glucose status based on measured values. The cost of using blood glucose meters is believed to be a cost-benefit relative to the avoided medical costs of the complications of diabetes.

Recent advances include:
* alternative site testing, the use of blood drops from places other than the fingertips, usually the palm or forearm. This alternative site testing uses the same test strips and meter, is practically pain-free, and gives the fingertips a needed break if they become sore. The disadvantage of this technique is that there is usually less blood flow to alternative sites, which prevents the reading from being accurate when the blood sugar level is changing.
* no coding systems. Older systems required &#x27;coding&#x27; of the strips to the meter. This carried a risk of &#x27;miscoding&#x27;, which can lead to inaccurate results. Two approaches have resulted in systems that no longer require coding. Some systems are &#x27;autocoded&#x27;, where technology is used to code each strip to the meter. And some are manufactured to a &#x27;single code&#x27;, thereby avoiding the risk of miscoding.
* multi-test systems. Some systems use a cartridge or a disc containing multiple test strips. This has the advantage that the user doesn&#x27;t have to load individual strips each time, which is convenient and can enable quicker testing.
* downloadable companion software. Most newer systems come with software that allows the user to download meter results to a computer. This information can then be used, together with health care professional guidance, to enhance and improve diabetes management. The meters usually require a connection cable, unless they are designed to work wirelessly with an insulin pump, are designed to plug directly into the computer, or use a radio (Bluetooth, for example) or infrared connection.

==Continuous glucose monitoring==

A continuous glucose monitor determines glucose levels on a continuous basis (every few minutes). A typical system consists of:
* a disposable glucose sensor placed just under the skin, which is worn for a few days until replacement
* a link from the sensor to a non-implanted transmitter which communicates to a radio receiver
* an electronic receiver is worn like a pager (or insulin pump) that displays glucose levels with nearly continuous updates, as well as monitors rising and falling trends.

Continuous glucose monitors measure the concentration of glucose in a sample of interstitial fluid. Shortcomings of CGM systems due to this fact are:
* continuous systems must be calibrated with a traditional blood glucose measurement (using current technology) and therefore require both the CGM system and occasional &quot;fingerstick&quot;
* glucose levels in interstitial fluid lag behind blood glucose values
Patients, therefore, require traditional fingerstick measurements for calibration (typically twice per day) and are often advised to use fingerstick measurements to confirm hypo- or hyperglycemia before taking corrective action.

The lag time discussed above has been reported to be about 5 minutes. Anecdotally, some users of the various systems report lag times of up to 10–15 minutes. This lag time is insignificant when blood sugar levels are relatively consistent. However, blood sugar levels, when changing rapidly, may read in the normal range on a CGM system while in reality the patient is already experiencing symptoms of an out-of-range blood glucose value and may require treatment. Patients using CGM are therefore advised to consider both the absolute value of the blood glucose level given by the system as well as any trend in the blood glucose levels. For example, a patient using CGM with a blood glucose of 100 mg/dl on their CGM system might take no action if their blood glucose has been consistent for several readings, while a patient with the same blood glucose level but whose blood glucose has been dropping steeply in a short period of time might be advised to perform a fingerstick test to check for hypoglycemia.

Continuous monitoring allows examination of how the blood glucose level reacts to insulin, exercise, food, and other factors. The additional data can be useful for setting correct insulin dosing ratios for food intake and correction of hyperglycemia. Monitoring during periods when blood glucose levels are not typically checked (e.g. overnight) can help to identify problems in insulin dosing (such as basal levels for insulin pump users or long-acting insulin levels for patients taking injections). Monitors may also be equipped with alarms to alert patients of hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia so that a patient can take corrective action(s) (after fingerstick testing, if necessary) even in cases where they do not feel symptoms of either condition. While the technology has its limitations, studies have demonstrated that patients with continuous sensors experience a smaller number of hyperglycemic and hypoglycemic events, a reduction in their glycated hemoglobin levels and a decrease in glycemic variability. Compared to intermittent testing, it is likely to help reduce hypertensive complications during pregnancy. In a recent systematic review with meta-analysis about glycaemia monitoring in critical patients who are haemodynamically unstable and require intensive monitoring of glycaemia it concluded that should be undertaken using arterial blood samples and POC blood gas analysers, as this is more reliable and is not affected by the variability of different confusion factors. Determining glycaemia in capillary blood using glucometry may be suitable in stable patients or when close monitoring of glycaemia is not required.

Continuous blood glucose monitoring is not automatically covered by health insurance in the United States in the same way that most other diabetic supplies are covered (e.g. standard glucose testing supplies, insulin, and insulin pumps). However, an increasing number of insurance companies do cover continuous glucose monitoring supplies (both the receiver and disposable sensors) on a case-by-case basis if the patient and doctor show a specific need. The lack of insurance coverage is exacerbated by the fact that disposable sensors must be frequently replaced. Some sensors have been U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved for 7- and 3-day use, (although some patients wear sensors for longer than the recommended period) and the receiving meters likewise have finite lifetimes (less than 2 years and as little as 6 months). This is one factor in the slow uptake in the use of sensors that have been marketed in the United States.

The principles, history and recent developments of operation of electrochemical glucose biosensors are discussed in a chemical review by Joseph Wang.

==Glucose sensing bio-implants==
Investigations on the use of test strips have shown that the required self-injury acts as a psychological barrier restraining the patients from sufficient glucose control. As a result, secondary diseases are caused by excessive glucose levels. A significant improvement of diabetes therapy might be achieved with an implantable sensor that would continuously monitor blood sugar levels within the body and transmit the measured data outside. The burden of regular blood testing would be taken from the patient, who would instead follow the course of their glucose levels on an intelligent device like a laptop or a smartphone.

Glucose concentrations do not necessarily have to be measured in blood vessels, but may also be determined in the interstitial fluid, where the same levels prevail – with a time lag of a few minutes – due to its connection with the capillary system. However, the enzymatic glucose detection scheme used in single-use test strips is not directly suitable for implants. One main problem is caused by the varying supply of oxygen, by which glucose is converted to glucono lactone and HO by glucose oxidase. Since the implantation of a sensor into the body is accompanied by growth of encapsulation tissue, the diffusion of oxygen to the reaction zone is continuously diminished. This decreasing oxygen availability causes the sensor reading to drift, requiring frequent re-calibration using finger-sticks and test strips.

One approach to achieving long-term glucose sensing is to measure and compensate for the changing local oxygen concentration. Other approaches replace the troublesome glucose oxidase reaction with a reversible sensing reaction, known as an affinity assay. This scheme was originally put forward by Schultz &amp; Sims in 1978. A number of different affinity assays have been investigated, with fluorescent assays proving most common. MEMS technology has recently allowed for smaller and more convenient alternatives to fluorescent detection, via measurement of viscosity. Investigation of affinity-based sensors has shown that encapsulation by body tissue does not cause a drift of the sensor signal, but only a time lag of the signal compared to the direct measurement in blood. A new implantable continuous glucose monitor based on affinity principles and fluorescence detection is the Eversense device manufactured by Senseonics Inc. This device has been approved by the FDA for 90 day implantation.

==Non-invasive technologies==
Some new technologies to monitor blood glucose levels will not require access to blood to read the glucose level. Non-invasive technologies include microwave/RF sensing, near IR detection, ultrasound&lt;ref name=&quot;Diabetes U/S SMBG&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and dielectric spectroscopy. These may free the person with diabetes from finger sticks to supply the drop of blood for blood glucose analysis.

Most of the non-invasive methods under development are continuous glucose monitoring methods and offer the advantage of providing additional information to the subject between the conventional finger stick, blood glucose measurements, and overtime periods where no finger stick measurements are available (i.e. while the subject is sleeping).

==Effectiveness==
For patients with diabetes mellitus type 2, the importance of monitoring and the optimal frequency of monitoring are not clear. A 2011 study found no evidence that blood glucose monitoring leads to better patient outcomes in actual practice. Randomized controlled trials found that self-monitoring of blood glucose did not improve glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) among &quot;reasonably well controlled non-insulin treated patients with type 2 diabetes&quot; or lead to significant changes in quality of life. However a recent meta-analysis of 47 randomized controlled trials encompassing 7677 patients showed that self-care management intervention improves glycemic control in diabetics, with an estimated 0.36% (95% CI, 0.21–0.51) reduction in their glycated hemoglobin values. Furthermore, a recent study showed that patients described as being &quot;Uncontrolled Diabetics&quot; (defined in this study by HbA1C levels &gt;8%) showed a statistically significant decrease in the HbA1C levels after a 90-day period of seven-point self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) with a relative risk reduction (RRR) of 0.18% (95% CI, 0.86–2.64%, p&lt;.001). Regardless of lab values or other numerical parameters, the purpose of the clinician is to improve quality of life and patient outcomes in diabetic patients. A recent study included 12 randomized controlled trials and evaluated outcomes in 3259 patients. The authors concluded through a qualitative analysis that SMBG on quality of life showed no effect on patient satisfaction or the patients&#x27; health-related quality of life. Furthermore, the same study identified that patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus diagnosed greater than one year prior to initiation of SMBG, who were not on insulin, experienced a statistically significant reduction in their HbA1C of 0.3% (95% CI, -0.4 – -0.1) at six months follow up, but a statistically insignificant reduction of 0.1% (95% CI, -0.3 – 0.04) at twelve months follow up. Conversely, newly diagnosed patients experienced a statistically significant reduction of 0.5% (95% CI, -0.9 – -0.1) at 12 months follow up. A recent study found that a treatment strategy of intensively lowering blood sugar levels (below 6%) in patients with additional cardiovascular disease risk factors poses more harm than benefit. For type 2 diabetics who are not on insulin, exercise and diet are the best tools. Blood glucose monitoring is, in that case, simply a tool to evaluate the success of diet and exercise. Insulin-dependent type 2 diabetics do not need to monitor their blood sugar as frequently as type 1 diabetics. In a recent systematic review with meta-analysis, about glycaemia monitoring in critical patients who are haemodynamically unstable and require intensive monitoring of glycaemia it concluded that should be undertaken using arterial blood samples and POC blood gas analysers, as this is more reliable and is not affected by the variability of different confusion factors. Determining glycaemia in capillary blood using glucometry may be suitable in stable patients or when close monitoring of glycaemia is not required.

==Recommendations==
The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE), UK released updated diabetes recommendations on 30 May 2008, which recommend that self-monitoring of plasma glucose levels for people with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes must be integrated into a structured self-management education process. The recommendations have been updated in August 2015 for children and young adults with type 1 diabetes.

The American Diabetes Association (ADA), which produces guidelines for diabetes care and clinical practice recommendations, recently updated its &quot;Standards of Medical Care&quot; in January 2019 to acknowledge that routine self-monitoring of blood glucose in people who are not using insulin is of limited additional clinical benefit. A randomized controlled trial evaluated once-daily self-monitoring that included tailored patient messaging and did not show that this strategy led to significant changes in A1C after a year.

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4927806" start="0" end="24" title="Blood glucose monitoring" label="Blood glucose monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q842840" start="41" end="54" title="glucose meter" label="glucose meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="88" end="95" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q275157" start="110" end="118" title="Blood sugar level" label="glycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100933" start="147" end="166" title="diabetes management" label="diabetes management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="228" end="232" title="skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450300" start="249" end="260" title="fingerstick" label="fingerstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638492" start="384" end="410" title="continuous glucose monitor" label="continuous glucose monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q44602" start="787" end="794" title="fasting" label="fasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291968" start="830" end="849" title="random glucose test" label="random glucose test"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="965" end="982" title="diabetes mellitus" label="diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="1059" end="1074" title="type 2 diabetes" label="type 2 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130172" start="1107" end="1118" title="Mayo Clinic" label="Mayo Clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124407" start="1176" end="1192" title="Type 1 diabetes" label="type 1 diabetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="1202" end="1218" title="Type 2 diabetes" label="type 2 diabetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q271993" start="1699" end="1712" title="hyperglycemia" label="hyperglycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202758" start="1734" end="1746" title="hypoglycemia" label="hypoglycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198677" start="3125" end="3150" title="complications of diabetes" label="complications of diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="4755" end="4764" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638492" start="4841" end="4867" title="continuous glucose monitor" label="continuous glucose monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914458" start="5420" end="5438" title="interstitial fluid" label="interstitial fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="7177" end="7184" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q311213" start="7946" end="7965" title="glycated hemoglobin" label="glycated hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="8707" end="8723" title="health insurance" label="health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="8848" end="8855" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q941674" start="8861" end="8873" title="insulin pump" label="insulin pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="9232" end="9260" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287769" start="9722" end="9733" title="Joseph Wang" label="Joseph Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198677" start="9954" end="9972" title="Complications of diabetes mellitus" label="secondary diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914458" start="10511" end="10529" title="interstitial fluid" label="interstitial fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q103142" start="10629" end="10645" title="capillary system" label="capillary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q486975" start="10755" end="10763" title="implant (medicine)" label="implants"/>
<link wikidata="Q114174" start="10858" end="10873" title="glucono delta-lactone" label="glucono lactone"/>
<link wikidata="Q419321" start="10884" end="10899" title="glucose oxidase" label="glucose oxidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545857" start="11457" end="11471" title="ligand binding assay" label="affinity assay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462822" start="11610" end="11628" title="fluorescent glucose biosensor" label="fluorescent assays"/>
<link wikidata="Q175561" start="11650" end="11654" title="MEMS" label="MEMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="11777" end="11786" title="viscosity" label="viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11385749" start="12364" end="12376" title="Non-invasive" label="Non-invasive"/>
<link wikidata="Q30920485" start="12420" end="12427" title="near infrared spectroscopy" label="near IR"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="12439" end="12449" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q899580" start="12512" end="12535" title="dielectric spectroscopy" label="dielectric spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="13033" end="13057" title="diabetes mellitus type 2" label="diabetes mellitus type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q311213" start="13346" end="13365" title="glycated hemoglobin" label="glycated hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="15253" end="15275" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425168" start="16160" end="16213" title="National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence" label="National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q878041" start="16660" end="16693" title="Clinical practice guidelines" label="clinical practice recommendations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56558" wikidata="Q82642" url="?curid=56558" title="Blood pressure">
<text>Blood pressure (BP) is the pressure of circulating blood against the walls of blood vessels. Most of this pressure results from the heart pumping blood through the circulatory system. When used without qualification, the term &quot;blood pressure&quot; refers to the pressure in a brachial artery, where it is most commonly measured. Blood pressure is usually expressed in terms of the systolic pressure (maximum pressure during one heartbeat) over diastolic pressure (minimum pressure between two heartbeats) in the cardiac cycle. It is measured in millimeters of mercury (mmHg) above the surrounding atmospheric pressure, or in kilopascals (kPa). The difference between the systolic and diastolic pressures is known as pulse pressure, while the average pressure during a cardiac cycle is known as mean arterial pressure.

Blood pressure is one of the vital signs—together with respiratory rate, heart rate, oxygen saturation, and body temperature—that healthcare professionals use in evaluating a patient&#x27;s health. Normal resting blood pressure in an adult is approximately systolic over diastolic, denoted as &quot;120/80 mmHg&quot;. Globally, the average blood pressure, age standardized, has remained about the same since 1975 to the present, at approximately 127/79 mmHg in men and 122/77 mmHg in women, although these average data mask significantly diverging regional trends.

Traditionally, a health-care worker measured blood pressure non-invasively by auscultation (listening) through a stethoscope for sounds in one arm&#x27;s artery as the artery is squeezed, closer to the heart, by an aneroid gauge or a mercury-tube sphygmomanometer. Auscultation is still generally considered to be the gold standard of accuracy for non-invasive blood pressure readings in clinic. However, semi-automated methods have become common, largely due to concerns about potential mercury toxicity, although cost, ease of use and applicability to ambulatory blood pressure or home blood pressure measurements have also influenced this trend. Early automated alternatives to mercury-tube sphygmomanometers were often seriously inaccurate, but modern devices validated to international standards achieve an average difference between two standardized reading methods of 5 mm Hg or less, and a standard deviation of less than 8 mm Hg. Most of these semi-automated methods measure blood pressure using oscillometry (measurement by a pressure transducer in the cuff of the device of small oscillations of intra-cuff pressure accompanying heartbeat-induced changes in the volume of each pulse).

Blood pressure is influenced by cardiac output, systemic vascular resistance, blood volume and arterial stiffness, and varies depending on person&#x27;s situation, emotional state, activity and relative health or disease state. In the short term, blood pressure is regulated by baroreceptors, which act via the brain to influence the nervous and the endocrine systems.

Blood pressure that is too low is called hypotension, pressure that is consistently too high is called hypertension, and normal pressure is called normotension. Both hypertension and hypotension have many causes and may be of sudden onset or of long duration. Long-term hypertension is a risk factor for many diseases, including stroke, heart disease, and kidney failure. Long-term hypertension is more common than long-term hypotension.
==Classification, normal and abnormal values==
===Systemic arterial pressure===
Blood pressure measurements can be influenced by circumstances of measurement. Guidelines use different thresholds for office (also known as clinic), home (when the person measures their own blood pressure at home), and ambulatory blood pressure (using an automated device over a 24-hour period).
The risk of cardiovascular disease increases progressively above 90 mmHg, especially among women.

Observational studies demonstrate that people who maintain arterial pressures at the low end of these pressure ranges have much better long-term cardiovascular health. There is an ongoing medical debate over what is the optimal level of blood pressure to target when using drugs to lower blood pressure with hypertension, particularly in older people.

Blood pressure fluctuates from minute to minute and normally shows a circadian rhythm over a 24-hour period, with highest readings in the early morning and evenings and lowest readings at night. Loss of the normal fall in blood pressure at night is associated with a greater future risk of cardiovascular disease and there is evidence that night-time blood pressure is a stronger predictor of cardiovascular events than day-time blood pressure. Blood pressure varies over longer time periods (months to years) and this variability predicts adverse outcomes. Blood pressure also changes in response to temperature, noise, emotional stress, consumption of food or liquid, dietary factors, physical activity, changes in posture (such as standing-up), drugs, and disease. The variability in blood pressure and the better predictive value of ambulatory blood pressure measurements has led some authorities, such as the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) in the UK, to advocate for the use of ambulatory blood pressure as the preferred method for diagnosis of hypertension.

Various other factors, such as age and sex, also influence a person&#x27;s blood pressure. Differences between left-arm and right-arm blood pressure measurements tend to be small. However, occasionally there is a consistent difference greater than 10 mmHg which may need further investigation, e.g. for peripheral arterial disease, obstructive arterial disease or aortic dissection.

There is no accepted diagnostic standard for hypotension, although pressures less than 90/60 are commonly regarded as hypotensive. In practice blood pressure is considered too low only if symptoms are present.

===Systemic arterial pressure and age===
====Fetal blood pressure====

In pregnancy, it is the fetal heart and not the mother&#x27;s heart that builds up the fetal blood pressure to drive blood through the fetal circulation. The blood pressure in the fetal aorta is approximately 30 mmHg at 20 weeks of gestation, and increases to approximately 45 mmHg at 40 weeks of gestation.

The average blood pressure for full-term infants:
* Systolic 65–95 mmHg
* Diastolic 30–60 mmHg

====Childhood====

In children the normal ranges for blood pressure are lower than for adults and depend on height. Reference blood pressure values have been developed for children in different countries, based on the distribution of blood pressure in children of these countries.

====Aging adults====
In adults in most societies, systolic blood pressure tends to rise from early adulthood onward, up to at least age 70; diastolic pressure tends to begin to rise at the same time but start to fall earlier in mid-life, approximately age 55. Mean blood pressure rises from early adulthood, plateauing in mid-life, while pulse pressure rises quite markedly after the age of 40. Consequently, in many older people, systolic blood pressure often exceeds the normal adult range, if the diastolic pressure is in the normal range this is termed isolated systolic hypertension. The rise in pulse pressure with age is attributed to increased stiffness of the arteries. An age-related rise in blood pressure is not considered healthy and is not observed in some isolated unacculturated communities.

==Systemic venous pressure==

Blood pressure generally refers to the arterial pressure in the systemic circulation. However, measurement of pressures in the venous system and the pulmonary vessels plays an important role in intensive care medicine but requires invasive measurement of pressure using a catheter.

Venous pressure is the vascular pressure in a vein or in the atria of the heart. It is much lower than arterial pressure, with common values of 5 mmHg in the right atrium and 8 mmHg in the left atrium.

Variants of venous pressure include:
* Central venous pressure, which is a good approximation of right atrial pressure, which is a major determinant of right ventricular end diastolic volume. (However, there can be exceptions in some cases.)
* The jugular venous pressure (JVP) is the indirectly observed pressure over the venous system. It can be useful in the differentiation of different forms of heart and lung disease.
* The portal venous pressure is the blood pressure in the portal vein. It is normally 5–10 mmHg

==Pulmonary pressure==

Normally, the pressure in the pulmonary artery is about 15 mmHg at rest.

Increased blood pressure in the capillaries of the lung causes pulmonary hypertension, leading to interstitial edema if the pressure increases to above 20 mmHg, and to pulmonary edema at pressures above 25 mmHg.

==Aortic pressure==

Aortic pressure, also called central aortic blood pressure, or central blood pressure, is the blood pressure at the root of the aorta. Elevated aortic pressure has been found to be a more accurate predictor of both cardiovascular events and mortality, as well as structural changes in the heart, than has peripheral blood pressure (such as measured through the brachial artery). Traditionally it involved an invasive procedure to measure aortic pressure, but now there are non-invasive methods of measuring it indirectly without a significant margin of error.

Certain researchers have argued for physicians to begin using aortic pressure, as opposed to peripheral blood pressure, as a guide for clinical decisions. The way antihypertensive drugs impact peripheral blood pressure can often be very different from the way they impact central aortic pressure.

==Mean systemic pressure==

If the heart is stopped, blood pressure falls, but it does not fall to zero. The remaining pressure measured after cessation of the heart beat and redistribution of blood throughout the circulation is termed the mean systemic pressure or mean circulatory filling pressure; typically this is proximally ~7 mmHg.

==Disorders of blood pressure==
Disorders of blood pressure control include high blood pressure, low blood pressure, and blood pressure that shows excessive or maladaptive fluctuation.

===High blood pressure===

Arterial hypertension can be an indicator of other problems and may have long-term adverse effects. Sometimes it can be an acute problem, such as in a hypertensive emergency when blood pressure is more than 180/120 mmHg.

Levels of arterial pressure put mechanical stress on the arterial walls. Higher pressures increase heart workload and progression of unhealthy tissue growth (atheroma) that develops within the walls of arteries. The higher the pressure, the more stress that is present and the more atheroma tend to progress and the heart muscle tends to thicken, enlarge and become weaker over time.

Persistent hypertension is one of the risk factors for strokes, heart attacks, heart failure, and arterial aneurysms, and is the leading cause of chronic kidney failure. Even moderate elevation of arterial pressure leads to shortened life expectancy. At severely high pressures, mean arterial pressures 50% or more above average, a person can expect to live no more than a few years unless appropriately treated. For people with high blood pressure, higher heart rate variability (HRV) is a risk factor for atrial fibrillation.

Both high systolic pressure and high pulse pressure (the numerical difference between systolic and diastolic pressures) are risk factors. Elevated pulse pressure has been found to be a stronger independent predictor of cardiovascular events, especially in older populations, than has systolic, diastolic, or mean arterial pressure. In some cases, it appears that a decrease in excessive diastolic pressure can actually increase risk, probably due to the increased difference between systolic and diastolic pressures (ie. widened pulse pressure). If systolic blood pressure is elevated (&gt;140 mmHg) with a normal diastolic blood pressure (&lt;90 mmHg), it is called isolated systolic hypertension and may present a health concern. According to the 2017 American Heart Association blood pressure guidelines state that a systolic blood pressure of 130–139 mmHg with a diastolic pressure of 80–89 mmHg is &quot;stage one hypertension&quot;.

For those with heart valve regurgitation, a change in its severity may be associated with a change in diastolic pressure. In a study of people with heart valve regurgitation that compared measurements two weeks apart for each person, there was an increased severity of aortic and mitral regurgitation when diastolic blood pressure increased, whereas when diastolic blood pressure decreased, there was a decreased severity.

===Low blood pressure===

Blood pressure that is too low is known as hypotension. This is a medical concern if it causes signs or symptoms, such as dizziness, fainting, or in extreme cases in medical emergencies, circulatory shock. Causes of low arterial pressure include sepsis, hypovolemia, bleeding, cardiogenic shock, reflex syncope, hormonal abnormalities such as Addison&#x27;s disease, eating disorders – particularly anorexia nervosa and bulimia.

====Orthostatic hypotension====

A large fall in blood pressure upon standing (typically a systolic/diastolic blood pressure decrease of &gt;20/10 mmHg) is termed orthostatic hypotension (postural hypotension) and represents a failure of the body to compensate for the effect of gravity on the circulation. Standing results in an increased hydrostatic pressure in the blood vessels of the lower limbs. The consequent distension of the veins below the diaphragm (venous pooling) causes ~500 ml of blood to be relocated from the chest and upper body. This results in a rapid decrease in central blood volume and a reduction of ventricular preload which in turn reduces stroke volume, and mean arterial pressure. Normally this is compensated for by multiple mechanisms, including activation of the autonomic nervous system which increases heart rate, myocardial contractility and systemic arterial vasoconstriction to preserve blood pressure and elicits venous vasoconstriction to decrease venous compliance. Decreased venous compliance also results from an intrinsic myogenic increase in venous smooth muscle tone in response to the elevated pressure in the veins of the lower body. 

Other compensatory mechanisms include the veno-arteriolar axon reflex, the &#x27;skeletal muscle pump&#x27; and &#x27;respiratory pump&#x27;. Together these mechanisms normally stabilize blood pressure within a minute or less. If these compensatory mechanisms fail and arterial pressure and blood flow decrease beyond a certain point, the perfusion of the brain becomes critically compromised (i.e., the blood supply is not sufficient), causing lightheadedness, dizziness, weakness or fainting. Usually this failure of compensation is due to disease, or drugs that affect the sympathetic nervous system. A similar effect is observed following the experience of excessive gravitational forces (G-loading), such as routinely experienced by aerobatic or combat pilots &#x27;pulling Gs&#x27; where the extreme hydrostatic pressures exceed the ability of the body&#x27;s compensatory mechanisms.

===Variable or fluctuating blood pressure===

Some fluctuation or variation in blood pressure is normal. Variation in blood pressure that is significantly greater than the norm is known as labile hypertension and is associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease brain small vessel disease, and dementia independent of the average blood pressure level. Recent evidence from clinical trials has also linked variation in blood pressure to mortality, stroke, heart failure, and cardiac changes that may give rise to heart failure. These data have prompted discussion of whether excessive variation in blood pressure should be treated, even among normotensive older adults. 

Older individuals and those who had received blood pressure medications are more likely to exhibit larger fluctuations in pressure, and there is some evidence that different antihypertensive agents have different effects on blood pressure variability; whether these differences translate to benefits in outcome is uncertain.

==Physiology==

During each heartbeat, blood pressure varies between a maximum (systolic) and a minimum (diastolic) pressure. The blood pressure in the circulation is principally due to the pumping action of the heart. However, blood pressure is also regulated by neural regulation from the brain (see Hypertension and the brain), as well as osmotic regulation from the kidney. Differences in mean blood pressure drive the flow of blood around the circulation. The rate of mean blood flow depends on both blood pressure and the resistance to flow presented by the blood vessels. In the absence of hydrostatic effects (e.g. standing), mean blood pressure decreases as the circulating blood moves away from the heart through arteries and capillaries due to viscous losses of energy. Mean blood pressure drops over the whole circulation, although most of the fall occurs along the small arteries and arterioles. Pulsatility also diminishes in the smaller elements of the arterial circulation, although some transmitted pulsatility is observed in capillaries. Gravity affects blood pressure via hydrostatic forces (e.g., during standing), and valves in veins, breathing, and pumping from contraction of skeletal muscles also influence blood pressure, particularly in veins.

===Hemodynamics===

A simple view of the hemodynamics of systemic arterial pressure is based around mean arterial pressure (MAP) and pulse pressure. Most influences on blood pressure can be understood in terms of their effect on cardiac output, systemic vascular resistance, or arterial stiffness (the inverse of arterial compliance). Cardiac output is the product of stroke volume and heart rate. Stroke volume is influenced by 1) the end-diastolic volume or filling pressure of the ventricle acting via the Frank–Starling mechanism—this is influenced by blood volume; 2) cardiac contractility; and 3) afterload, the impedance to blood flow presented by the circulation. In the short-term, the greater the blood volume, the higher the cardiac output. This has been proposed as an explanation of the relationship between high dietary salt intake and increased blood pressure; however, responses to increased dietary sodium intake vary between individuals and are highly dependent on autonomic nervous system responses and the renin–angiotensin system, changes in plasma osmolarity may also be important. In the longer-term the relationship between volume and blood pressure is more complex. In simple terms, systemic vascular resistance is mainly determined by the caliber of small arteries and arterioles. The resistance attributable to a blood vessel depends on its radius as described by the Hagen-Poiseuille&#x27;s equation (resistance∝1/radius4). Hence, the smaller the radius, the higher the resistance. Other physical factors that affect resistance include: vessel length (the longer the vessel, the higher the resistance), blood viscosity (the higher the viscosity, the higher the resistance) and the number of vessels, particularly the smaller numerous, arterioles and capillaries. The presence of a severe arterial stenosis increases resistance to flow, however this increase in resistance rarely increases systemic blood pressure because its contribution to total systemic resistance is small, although it may profoundly decrease downstream flow. Substances called vasoconstrictors reduce the caliber of blood vessels, thereby increasing blood pressure. Vasodilators (such as nitroglycerin) increase the caliber of blood vessels, thereby decreasing arterial pressure. In the longer term a process termed remodeling also contributes to changing the caliber of small blood vessels and influencing resistance and reactivity to vasoactive agents. Reductions in capillary density, termed capillary rarefaction, may also contribute to increased resistance in some circumstances.

In practice, each individual&#x27;s autonomic nervous system and other systems regulating blood pressure, notably the kidney, respond to and regulate all these factors so that, although the above issues are important, they rarely act in isolation and the actual arterial pressure response of a given individual can vary widely in the short and long term.

===Pulse pressure===
The pulse pressure is the difference between the measured systolic and diastolic pressures,

:::::::::::formula_1

The pulse pressure is a consequence of the pulsatile nature of the cardiac output, i.e. the heartbeat. The magnitude of the pulse pressure is usually attributed to the interaction of the stroke volume of the heart, the compliance (ability to expand) of the arterial system—largely attributable to the aorta and large elastic arteries—and the resistance to flow in the arterial tree.

====Clinical significance of pulse pressure====
A healthy pulse pressure is around 40 mmHg. A pulse pressure that is consistently 60 mmHg or greater is likely to be associated with disease, and a pulse pressure of 50 mmHg or more increases the risk of cardiovascular disease as well as other complications such as eye and kidney disease. Pulse pressure is considered low if it is less than 25% of the systolic. (For example, if the systolic pressure is 120 mmHg, then the pulse pressure would be considered low if it is less than 30 mmHg, since 30 is 25% of 120.) A very low pulse pressure can be a symptom of disorders such as congestive heart failure.

Elevated pulse pressure has been found to be a stronger independent predictor of cardiovascular events, especially in older populations, than has systolic, diastolic, or mean arterial pressure. This increased risk exists for both men and women and even when no other cardiovascular risk factors are present. The increased risk also exists even in cases in which diastolic pressure decreases over time while systolic remains steady.

A meta-analysis in 2000 showed that a 10 mmHg increase in pulse pressure was associated with a 20% increased risk of cardiovascular mortality, and a 13% increase in risk for all coronary end points. The study authors also noted that, while risks of cardiovascular end points do increase with higher systolic pressures, at any given systolic blood pressure the risk of major cardiovascular end points increases, rather than decreases, with lower diastolic levels. This suggests that interventions that lower diastolic pressure without also lowering systolic pressure (and thus lowering pulse pressure) could actually be counterproductive. There are no drugs currently approved to lower pulse pressure, although some antihypertensive drugs may modestly lower pulse pressure, while in some cases a drug that lowers overall blood pressure may actually have the counterproductive side effect of raising pulse pressure.

Pulse pressure can both widen or narrow in people with sepsis depending on the degree of hemodynamic compromise. A pulse pressure of over 70 mmHg in sepsis is correlated with an increased chance of survival and a more positive response to IV fluids.

===Mean arterial pressure===

Mean arterial pressure (MAP) is the average of blood pressure over a cardiac cycle and is determined by the cardiac output (CO), systemic vascular resistance (SVR), and central venous pressure (CVP):

:::::::::::formula_2

In practice, the contribution of CVP (which is small) is generally ignored and so

:::::::::::formula_3

MAP is often estimated from measurements of the systolic pressure, formula_4 and the diastolic pressure, formula_5  using the equation:

formula_6

where &quot;k&quot; = 0.333 although other values for &quot;k&quot; have been advocated.

===Regulation of blood pressure===

The endogenous, homeostatic regulation of arterial pressure is not completely understood, but the following mechanisms of regulating arterial pressure have been well-characterized:
* Baroreceptor reflex: Baroreceptors in the high pressure receptor zones detect changes in arterial pressure. These baroreceptors send signals ultimately to the medulla of the brain stem, specifically to the rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM). The medulla, by way of the autonomic nervous system, adjusts the mean arterial pressure by altering both the force and speed of the heart&#x27;s contractions, as well as the systemic vascular resistance. The most important arterial baroreceptors are located in the left and right carotid sinuses and in the aortic arch.
* Renin–angiotensin system (RAS): This system is generally known for its long-term adjustment of arterial pressure. This system allows the kidney to compensate for loss in blood volume or drops in arterial pressure by activating an endogenous vasoconstrictor known as angiotensin II.
* Aldosterone release: This steroid hormone is released from the adrenal cortex in response to activation of the renin-angiotensin system, high serum potassium levels, or elevated adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). Renin converts angiotensinogen to angiotensin I, which is converted by angiotensin converting enzyme to angiotensin II. Angiotensin II then signals to the adrenal cortex to release aldosterone. Aldosterone stimulates sodium retention and potassium excretion by the kidneys and the consequent salt and water retention increases plasma volume, and indirectly, arterial pressure. Aldosterone may also exert direct pressor effects on vascular smooth muscle and central effects on sympathetic nervous system activity.
* Baroreceptors in low pressure receptor zones (mainly in the venae cavae and the pulmonary veins, and in the atria) result in feedback by regulating the secretion of antidiuretic hormone (ADH/vasopressin), renin and aldosterone. The resultant increase in blood volume results in an increased cardiac output by the Frank–Starling law of the heart, in turn increasing arterial blood pressure.

These different mechanisms are not necessarily independent of each other, as indicated by the link between the RAS and aldosterone release. When blood pressure falls many physiological cascades commence in order to return the blood pressure to a more appropriate level.

# The blood pressure fall is detected by a decrease in blood flow and thus a decrease in glomerular filtration rate (GFR).
# Decrease in GFR is sensed as a decrease in Na+ levels by the macula densa.
# The macula densa causes an increase in Na+ reabsorption, which causes water to follow in via osmosis and leads to an ultimate increase in plasma volume. Further, the macula densa releases adenosine which causes constriction of the afferent arterioles.
# At the same time, the juxtaglomerular cells sense the decrease in blood pressure and release renin.
# Renin converts angiotensinogen (inactive form) to angiotensin I (active form).
# Angiotensin I flows in the bloodstream until it reaches the capillaries of the lungs where angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) acts on it to convert it into angiotensin II.
# Angiotensin II is a vasoconstrictor that will increase blood flow to the heart and subsequently the preload, ultimately increasing the cardiac output.
# Angiotensin II also causes an increase in the release of aldosterone from the adrenal glands.
# Aldosterone further increases the Na+ and H2O reabsorption in the distal convoluted tubule of the nephron.

The RAS is targeted pharmacologically by ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor antagonists (also known as angiotensin receptor blockers; ARB). The aldosterone system is directly targeted by aldosterone antagonists. The fluid retention may be targeted by diuretics; the antihypertensive effect of diuretics is due to its effect on blood volume. Generally, the baroreceptor reflex is not targeted in hypertension because if blocked, individuals may experience orthostatic hypotension and fainting.

==Measurement==

Arterial pressure is most commonly measured via a sphygmomanometer, which uses the height of a column of mercury, or an aneroid gauge, to reflect the blood pressure by auscultation. The most common automated blood pressure measurement technique is based on the oscillometric method. Fully automated oscillometric measurement has been available since 1981. This principle has recently been used to measure blood pressure with a smartphone. Measuring pressure invasively, by penetrating the arterial wall to take the measurement, is much less common and usually restricted to a hospital setting. Novel methods to measure blood pressure without penetrating the arterial wall, and without applying any pressure on patient&#x27;s body are being explored, for example, cuffless measurements that uses only optical sensors.

In office blood pressure measurement, terminal digit preference is common. According to one study, approximately 40% of recorded measurements ended with the digit zero, whereas &quot;without bias, 10%–20% of measurements are expected to end in zero&quot;

==In animals==
Blood pressure levels in non-human mammals may vary depending on the species. Heart rate differs markedly, largely depending on the size of the animal (larger animals have slower heart rates). The giraffe has a distinctly high arterial pressure of about 190 mm Hg, enabling blood perfusion through the -long neck to the head. In other species subjected to orthostatic blood pressure, such as arboreal snakes, blood pressure is higher than in non-arboreal snakes. A heart near to the head (short heart-to-head distance) and a long tail with tight integument favor blood perfusion to the head.

As in humans, blood pressure in animals differs by age, sex, time of day, and environmental circumstances: measurements made in laboratories or under anesthesia may not be representative of values under free-living conditions. Rats, mice, dogs and rabbits have been used extensively to study the regulation of blood pressure.
===Hypertension in cats and dogs===
Hypertension in cats and dogs is generally diagnosed if the blood pressure is greater than 150 mm Hg (systolic), although sight hounds have higher blood pressures than most other dog breeds; a systolic pressure greater than 180 mmHg is considered abnormal in these dogs.

==See also==
* History of hypertension

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="0" end="14" title="Blood pressure" label="Blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="16" end="18" title="Blood pressure" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="27" end="35" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="39" end="56" title="Circulatory system" label="circulating blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="78" end="90" title="blood vessel" label="blood vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="132" end="137" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="164" end="182" title="circulatory system" label="circulatory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q503643" start="281" end="296" title="brachial artery" label="brachial artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="386" end="403" title="Blood pressure" label="systolic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q257319" start="433" end="442" title="Cardiac cycle" label="heartbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="449" end="467" title="Blood pressure" label="diastolic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q257319" start="517" end="530" title="cardiac cycle" label="cardiac cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859652" start="550" end="579" title="Millimetre of mercury" label="millimeters of mercury (mmHg)"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="602" end="622" title="atmospheric pressure" label="atmospheric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q44395" start="630" end="641" title="Pascal (unit)" label="kilopascals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759415" start="721" end="735" title="pulse pressure" label="pulse pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940733" start="799" end="821" title="mean arterial pressure" label="mean arterial pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067560" start="853" end="864" title="vital signs" label="vital signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q754250" start="879" end="895" title="respiratory rate" label="respiratory rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073121" start="897" end="907" title="heart rate" label="heart rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045040" start="909" end="926" title="Oxygen saturation (medicine)" label="oxygen saturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="932" end="948" title="body temperature" label="body temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q779054" start="1468" end="1480" title="auscultation" label="auscultation"/>
<link wikidata="Q162339" start="1503" end="1514" title="stethoscope" label="stethoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q9655" start="1544" end="1550" title="artery" label="artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424019" start="1605" end="1618" title="aneroid gauge" label="aneroid gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="1624" end="1636" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury-tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q503968" start="1637" end="1653" title="sphygmomanometer" label="sphygmomanometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090739" start="1944" end="1969" title="ambulatory blood pressure" label="ambulatory blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q159375" start="2288" end="2306" title="standard deviation" label="standard deviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q596579" start="2619" end="2633" title="cardiac output" label="cardiac output"/>
<link wikidata="Q456026" start="2635" end="2663" title="systemic vascular resistance" label="systemic vascular resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797538" start="2682" end="2700" title="arterial stiffness" label="arterial stiffness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2852" end="2861" title="Homeostasis#Arterial blood pressure" label="regulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q808732" start="2865" end="2877" title="baroreceptor" label="baroreceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="2921" end="2928" title="nervous system" label="nervous"/>
<link wikidata="Q11078" start="2937" end="2946" title="endocrine system" label="endocrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q275419" start="2998" end="3009" title="hypotension" label="hypotension"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="3060" end="3072" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="3286" end="3292" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="3294" end="3307" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="3313" end="3327" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090739" start="3695" end="3720" title="ambulatory blood pressure" label="ambulatory blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="4855" end="4861" title="stress (medicine)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104966" start="4958" end="4969" title="orthostatic hypotension" label="standing-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="4972" end="4977" title="medication" label="drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q290" start="5354" end="5357" title="sex" label="sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q378681" start="5618" end="5645" title="Peripheral artery disease" label="peripheral arterial disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="5647" end="5675" title="Cardiovascular disease" label="obstructive arterial disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q594660" start="5679" end="5696" title="aortic dissection" label="aortic dissection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5887" end="5895" title="Hypotension#Signs and symptoms" label="symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="5984" end="5993" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663896" start="7225" end="7255" title="isolated systolic hypertension" label="isolated systolic hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797538" start="7320" end="7345" title="Arterial stiffness" label="stiffness of the arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="7571" end="7591" title="systemic circulation" label="systemic circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q494603" start="7656" end="7673" title="Pulmonary circulation" label="pulmonary vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q679690" start="7701" end="7724" title="intensive care medicine" label="intensive care medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="7779" end="7787" title="catheter" label="catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9609" start="7836" end="7840" title="vein" label="vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074839" start="7851" end="7869" title="atrium (anatomy)" label="atria of the heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074839" start="7948" end="7960" title="right atrium" label="right atrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q190402" start="8032" end="8055" title="Central venous pressure" label="Central venous pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q649122" start="8241" end="8264" title="jugular venous pressure" label="jugular venous pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="8393" end="8398" title="heart disease" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286546" start="8403" end="8415" title="lung disease" label="lung disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231497" start="8423" end="8445" title="portal venous pressure" label="portal venous pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q464543" start="8475" end="8486" title="portal vein" label="portal vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q206280" start="8568" end="8584" title="pulmonary artery" label="pulmonary artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q103142" start="8644" end="8655" title="capillaries" label="capillaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128595" start="8675" end="8697" title="pulmonary hypertension" label="pulmonary hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="8723" end="8728" title="edema" label="edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q857667" start="8780" end="8795" title="pulmonary edema" label="pulmonary edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778759" start="8846" end="8861" title="Aortic pressure" label="Aortic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q101004" start="8974" end="8979" title="aorta" label="aorta"/>
<link wikidata="Q503643" start="9207" end="9222" title="brachial artery" label="brachial artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="10121" end="10140" title="Hypertension" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q275419" start="10142" end="10160" title="Hypotension" label="low blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="10258" end="10279" title="Arterial hypertension" label="Arterial hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275739" start="10409" end="10431" title="hypertensive emergency" label="hypertensive emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058276" start="10638" end="10646" title="atheroma" label="atheroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q84133" start="10796" end="10808" title="Myocardium" label="heart muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="10876" end="10888" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="10920" end="10926" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="10929" end="10942" title="myocardial infarction" label="heart attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="10944" end="10957" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q189389" start="10963" end="10980" title="arterial aneurysm" label="arterial aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q736715" start="11011" end="11033" title="chronic kidney failure" label="chronic kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="11099" end="11114" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q933954" start="11322" end="11344" title="heart rate variability" label="heart rate variability"/>
<link wikidata="Q815819" start="11372" end="11391" title="atrial fibrillation" label="atrial fibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q496359" start="11404" end="11412" title="Systole (medicine)" label="systolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759415" start="11431" end="11445" title="pulse pressure" label="pulse pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663896" start="12061" end="12091" title="isolated systolic hypertension" label="isolated systolic hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q215620" start="12349" end="12360" title="heart valve" label="heart valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q616087" start="12603" end="12609" title="aortic insufficiency" label="aortic"/>
<link wikidata="Q268292" start="12614" end="12634" title="mitral regurgitation" label="mitral regurgitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q275419" start="12827" end="12838" title="hypotension" label="hypotension"/>
<link wikidata="Q178061" start="12971" end="12988" title="shock (circulatory)" label="circulatory shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="13030" end="13036" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320276" start="13038" end="13049" title="hypovolemia" label="hypovolemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166019" start="13051" end="13059" title="bleeding" label="bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477062" start="13061" end="13078" title="cardiogenic shock" label="cardiogenic shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667159" start="13080" end="13094" title="reflex syncope" label="reflex syncope"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="13096" end="13104" title="hormone" label="hormonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8282" start="13127" end="13149" title="Addison&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Addison&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q373822" start="13151" end="13166" title="eating disorder" label="eating disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131749" start="13183" end="13199" title="anorexia nervosa" label="anorexia nervosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q64513386" start="13204" end="13211" title="bulimia" label="bulimia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104966" start="13377" end="13400" title="orthostatic hypotension" label="orthostatic hypotension"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="13493" end="13500" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q177807" start="13554" end="13565" title="Hydrostatics" label="hydrostatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9654" start="13665" end="13674" title="Thoracic diaphragm" label="diaphragm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406926" start="13851" end="13858" title="Preload (cardiology)" label="preload"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="14009" end="14033" title="autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073121" start="14050" end="14060" title="heart rate" label="heart rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165683" start="14062" end="14086" title="myocardial contractility" label="myocardial contractility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067506" start="14109" end="14125" title="vasoconstriction" label="vasoconstriction"/>
<link wikidata="Q9609" start="14165" end="14171" title="Vein" label="venous"/>
<link wikidata="Q633140" start="14208" end="14218" title="Compliance (physiology)" label="compliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6947924" start="14279" end="14287" title="Myogenic mechanism" label="myogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208453" start="14307" end="14320" title="smooth muscle" label="smooth muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018262" start="14455" end="14466" title="axon reflex" label="axon reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900588" start="14478" end="14498" title="Skeletal-muscle pump" label="skeletal muscle pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q121433319" start="14515" end="14531" title="respiratory pump" label="respiratory pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134348" start="14694" end="14698" title="rate of fluid flow" label="flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266915" start="14736" end="14745" title="perfusion" label="perfusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q57823162" start="14842" end="14857" title="lightheadedness" label="lightheadedness"/>
<link wikidata="Q10916362" start="14859" end="14868" title="dizziness" label="dizziness"/>
<link wikidata="Q180007" start="14882" end="14890" title="Syncope (medicine)" label="fainting"/>
<link wikidata="Q187215" start="14973" end="14999" title="sympathetic nervous system" label="sympathetic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q284602" start="15168" end="15178" title="G-force" label="pulling Gs"/>
<link wikidata="Q85775462" start="15478" end="15497" title="labile hypertension" label="labile hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="15673" end="15687" title="clinical trial" label="clinical trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q104855970" start="16599" end="16625" title="Hypertension and the brain" label="Hypertension and the brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q177807" start="16894" end="16905" title="Fluid statics" label="hydrostatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="16968" end="16985" title="Circulatory system" label="circulating blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q103142" start="17033" end="17044" title="capillaries" label="capillaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="17052" end="17059" title="Viscosity" label="viscous"/>
<link wikidata="Q501908" start="17194" end="17204" title="arterioles" label="arterioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9530" start="17453" end="17462" title="breathing" label="breathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642137" start="17609" end="17621" title="hemodynamics" label="hemodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940733" start="17668" end="17690" title="mean arterial pressure" label="mean arterial pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q596579" start="17797" end="17811" title="cardiac output" label="cardiac output"/>
<link wikidata="Q456026" start="17813" end="17841" title="Vascular resistance" label="systemic vascular resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797538" start="17846" end="17864" title="arterial stiffness" label="arterial stiffness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366819" start="18004" end="18024" title="end-diastolic volume" label="end-diastolic volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q45163" start="18077" end="18101" title="Frank–Starling law" label="Frank–Starling mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896673" start="18124" end="18136" title="blood volume" label="blood volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165683" start="18141" end="18162" title="Myocardial contractility" label="cardiac contractility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299082" start="18171" end="18180" title="afterload" label="afterload"/>
<link wikidata="Q898218" start="18594" end="18618" title="renin–angiotensin system" label="renin–angiotensin system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201783" start="18631" end="18648" title="Plasma osmolality" label="plasma osmolarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q869854" start="18963" end="18995" title="Hagen–Poiseuille equation" label="Hagen-Poiseuille&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343082" start="19393" end="19401" title="stenosis" label="stenosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067506" start="19644" end="19659" title="vasoconstrictor" label="vasoconstrictor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859627" start="19733" end="19744" title="Vasodilator" label="Vasodilator"/>
<link wikidata="Q162867" start="19755" end="19768" title="nitroglycerin" label="nitroglycerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q596579" start="20712" end="20726" title="cardiac output" label="cardiac output"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698533" start="20832" end="20845" title="stroke volume" label="stroke volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q101004" start="20946" end="20951" title="aorta" label="aorta"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="20987" end="20997" title="Drag (physics)" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623006" start="21013" end="21026" title="arterial tree" label="arterial tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="21281" end="21303" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="21657" end="21681" title="congestive heart failure" label="congestive heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="22119" end="22132" title="meta-analysis" label="meta-analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="23087" end="23093" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642137" start="23121" end="23132" title="hemodynamic" label="hemodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23271" end="23280" title="Fluid replacement#Intravenous" label="IV fluids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940733" start="23313" end="23335" title="Mean arterial pressure" label="Mean arterial pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q257319" start="23382" end="23395" title="cardiac cycle" label="cardiac cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q596579" start="23421" end="23435" title="cardiac output" label="cardiac output"/>
<link wikidata="Q456026" start="23442" end="23470" title="systemic vascular resistance" label="systemic vascular resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q190402" start="23482" end="23505" title="central venous pressure" label="central venous pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q285982" start="23919" end="23929" title="endogenous" label="endogenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q103191" start="23931" end="23942" title="Homeostasis" label="homeostatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q808725" start="24098" end="24117" title="Baroreceptor reflex" label="Baroreceptor reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q808732" start="24119" end="24131" title="Baroreceptor" label="Baroreceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757655" start="24140" end="24168" title="high pressure receptor zones" label="high pressure receptor zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q189033" start="24257" end="24282" title="medulla oblongata" label="medulla of the brain stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370060" start="24304" end="24333" title="rostral ventrolateral medulla" label="rostral ventrolateral medulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="24369" end="24393" title="autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q956224" start="24622" end="24635" title="carotid sinus" label="carotid sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q616032" start="24649" end="24660" title="aortic arch" label="aortic arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q898218" start="24664" end="24688" title="Renin–angiotensin system" label="Renin–angiotensin system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="24801" end="24807" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896673" start="24834" end="24846" title="blood volume" label="blood volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067506" start="24905" end="24920" title="vasoconstrictor" label="vasoconstrictor"/>
<link wikidata="Q65963433" start="24930" end="24944" title="angiotensin II" label="angiotensin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="24948" end="24959" title="Aldosterone" label="Aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q422137" start="24974" end="24989" title="steroid hormone" label="steroid hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="25011" end="25025" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="25096" end="25105" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="25126" end="25160" title="Adrenocorticotropic hormone" label="adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)"/>
<link wikidata="Q128861" start="25233" end="25262" title="Angiotensin-converting enzyme" label="angiotensin converting enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="25379" end="25385" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q808732" start="25677" end="25689" title="Baroreceptor" label="Baroreceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693042" start="25694" end="25721" title="low pressure receptor zones" label="low pressure receptor zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q372409" start="25737" end="25748" title="venae cavae" label="venae cavae"/>
<link wikidata="Q535352" start="25757" end="25772" title="pulmonary veins" label="pulmonary veins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074839" start="25785" end="25790" title="atrium (heart)" label="atria"/>
<link wikidata="Q21124841" start="25842" end="25862" title="antidiuretic hormone" label="antidiuretic hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q258915" start="25882" end="25887" title="renin" label="renin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="25892" end="25903" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896673" start="25931" end="25943" title="blood volume" label="blood volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q596579" start="25968" end="25982" title="cardiac output" label="cardiac output"/>
<link wikidata="Q45163" start="25990" end="26021" title="Frank–Starling law of the heart" label="Frank–Starling law of the heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542839" start="26428" end="26454" title="glomerular filtration rate" label="glomerular filtration rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883079" start="26525" end="26537" title="macula densa" label="macula densa"/>
<link wikidata="Q54237" start="26634" end="26641" title="osmosis" label="osmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79749" start="26679" end="26685" title="blood plasma" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596226" start="26817" end="26838" title="juxtaglomerular cells" label="juxtaglomerular cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q258915" start="26888" end="26893" title="renin" label="renin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65963433" start="26912" end="26927" title="angiotensinogen" label="angiotensinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q65963433" start="26947" end="26960" title="angiotensin I" label="angiotensin I"/>
<link wikidata="Q128861" start="27069" end="27098" title="angiotensin-converting enzyme" label="angiotensin-converting enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q65963433" start="27135" end="27149" title="angiotensin II" label="angiotensin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q596579" start="27288" end="27302" title="cardiac output" label="cardiac output"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="27363" end="27374" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q712294" start="27384" end="27397" title="adrenal gland" label="adrenal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914731" start="27468" end="27492" title="distal convoluted tubule" label="distal convoluted tubule"/>
<link wikidata="Q58184" start="27500" end="27507" title="nephron" label="nephron"/>
<link wikidata="Q288280" start="27551" end="27564" title="ACE inhibitor" label="ACE inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q285044" start="27570" end="27604" title="angiotensin II receptor antagonist" label="angiotensin II receptor antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290587" start="27705" end="27727" title="aldosterone antagonist" label="aldosterone antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q200656" start="27769" end="27777" title="diuretic" label="diuretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="27913" end="27925" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104966" start="27973" end="27996" title="orthostatic hypotension" label="orthostatic hypotension"/>
<link wikidata="Q180007" start="28001" end="28009" title="fainting" label="fainting"/>
<link wikidata="Q503968" start="28079" end="28095" title="sphygmomanometer" label="sphygmomanometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424019" start="28149" end="28162" title="aneroid gauge" label="aneroid gauge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28290" end="28303" title="Blood pressure measurement#Oscillometric" label="oscillometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="28487" end="28497" title="Invasive blood pressure" label="invasively"/>
<link wikidata="Q108913324" start="28885" end="28910" title="terminal digit preference" label="terminal digit preference"/>
<link wikidata="Q767024" start="29510" end="29518" title="Arboreal locomotion" label="arboreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214385" start="29664" end="29674" title="integument" label="integument"/>
<link wikidata="Q39344" start="30195" end="30207" title="Sighthound" label="sight hounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390943" start="30360" end="30383" title="History of hypertension" label="History of hypertension"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56561" wikidata="Q131130" url="?curid=56561" title="Anesthesia">
<text>Anesthesia (American English) or anaesthesia (British English) is a state of controlled, temporary loss of sensation or awareness that is induced for medical or veterinary purposes. It may include some or all of analgesia (relief from or prevention of pain), paralysis (muscle relaxation), amnesia (loss of memory), and unconsciousness. An individual under the effects of anesthetic drugs is referred to as being anesthetized.

Anesthesia enables the painless performance of procedures that would otherwise require physical restraint in a non-anesthetized individual, or would otherwise be technically unfeasible. Three broad categories of anesthesia exist:
* &quot;General anesthesia&quot; suppresses central nervous system activity and results in unconsciousness and total lack of sensation, using either injected or inhaled drugs.
* &quot;Sedation&quot; suppresses the central nervous system to a lesser degree, inhibiting both anxiety and creation of long-term memories without resulting in unconsciousness.
* &quot;Regional and local anesthesia&quot; block transmission of nerve impulses from a specific part of the body. Depending on the situation, this may be used either on its own (in which case the individual remains fully conscious), or in combination with general anesthesia or sedation.
**&quot;Local anesthesia&quot; is simple infiltration by the clinician directly onto the region of interest (e.g. numbing a tooth for dental work).
** &quot;Peripheral nerve blocks&quot; use drugs targeted at peripheral nerves to anesthetize an isolated part of the body, such as an entire limb.
** &quot;Neuraxial blockade&quot;, mainly epidural and spinal anesthesia, can be performed in the region of the central nervous system itself, suppressing all incoming sensation from nerves supplying the area of the block.

In preparing for a medical or veterinary procedure, the clinician chooses one or more drugs to achieve the types and degree of anesthesia characteristics appropriate for the type of procedure and the particular patient. The types of drugs used include general anesthetics, local anesthetics, hypnotics, dissociatives, sedatives, adjuncts, neuromuscular-blocking drugs, narcotics, and analgesics.

The risks of complications during or after anesthesia are often difficult to separate from those of the procedure for which anesthesia is being given, but in the main they are related to three factors: the health of the individual, the complexity and stress of the procedure itself, and the anaesthetic technique. Of these factors, the individual&#x27;s health has the greatest impact. Major perioperative risks can include death, heart attack, and pulmonary embolism whereas minor risks can include postoperative nausea and vomiting and hospital readmission. Some conditions, like local anesthetic toxicity, airway trauma or malignant hyperthermia, can be more directly attributed to specific anesthetic drugs and techniques.

== Medical uses ==

The purpose of anesthesia can be distilled down to three basic goals or endpoints:
* hypnosis (a temporary loss of consciousness and with it a loss of memory. In a pharmacological context, the word hypnosis usually has this technical meaning, in contrast to its more familiar lay or psychological meaning of an altered state of consciousness not necessarily caused by drugs—see hypnosis).
* analgesia (lack of sensation which also blunts autonomic reflexes)
* muscle relaxation

Different types of anesthesia affect the endpoints differently. Regional anesthesia, for instance, affects analgesia; benzodiazepine-type sedatives (used for sedation, or &quot;twilight anesthesia&quot;) favor amnesia; and general anesthetics can affect all of the endpoints. The goal of anesthesia is to achieve the endpoints required for the given surgical procedure with the least risk to the subject.

To achieve the goals of anesthesia, drugs act on different but interconnected parts of the nervous system. Hypnosis, for instance, is generated through actions on the nuclei in the brain and is similar to the activation of sleep. The effect is to make people less aware and less reactive to noxious stimuli.

Loss of memory (amnesia) is created by action of drugs on multiple (but specific) regions of the brain. Memories are created as either declarative or non-declarative memories in several stages (short-term, long-term, long-lasting) the strength of which is determined by the strength of connections between neurons termed synaptic plasticity. Each anesthetic produces amnesia through unique effects on memory formation at variable doses. Inhalational anesthetics will reliably produce amnesia through general suppression of the nuclei at doses below those required for loss of consciousness. Drugs like midazolam produce amnesia through different pathways by blocking the formation of long-term memories.

Nevertheless, a person can dream under anesthesia or are conscious of the procedure despite giving no indication of this during it. An estimated 22% of people do dream under general anesthesia, and one or two cases in a thousand have some consciousness, termed &quot;anesthesia awareness&quot;. It is not known whether animals dream while under general anesthesia.

== Techniques ==
Anesthesia is unique in that it is not a direct means of treatment; rather, it allows the clinician to do things that may treat, diagnose, or cure an ailment which would otherwise be painful or complicated. The best anesthetic, therefore, is the one with the lowest risk to the patient that still achieves the endpoints required to complete the procedure. The first stage in anesthesia is the pre-operative risk assessment consisting of the medical history, physical examination and lab tests. Diagnosing the patient&#x27;s pre-operative physical status allows the clinician to minimize anesthetic risks. A well completed medical history will arrive at the correct diagnosis 56% of the time which increases to 73% with a physical examination. Lab tests help in diagnosis but only in 3% of cases, underscoring the need for a full history and physical examination prior to anesthetics. Incorrect pre-operative assessments or preparations are the root cause of 11% of all adverse anesthetic events.

Safe anesthesia care depends greatly on well-functioning teams of highly trained healthcare workers. The medical specialty centred around anesthesia is called anesthesiology, and doctors specialised in the field are termed anesthesiologists. Additional healthcare professionals involved in anesthesia provision have varying titles and roles depending on the jurisdiction, and include anesthetic nurses, nurse anesthetists, anesthesiologist assistants, anaesthetic technicians, anaesthesia associates, operating department practitioners and anesthesia technologists. International standards for the safe practice of anesthesia, jointly endorsed by the World Health Organization and the World Federation of Societies of Anaesthesiologists, highly recommend that anesthesia should be provided, overseen or led by anesthesiologists, with the exception of minimal sedation or superficial procedures performed under local anesthesia.

A trained, vigilant anesthesia provider should continually care for the patient; where the provider is not an anesthesiologist, they should be locally directed and supervised by an anesthesiologist, and in countries or settings where this is not feasible, care should be led by the most qualified local individual within a regional or national anesthesiologist-led framework. The same minimum standards for patient safety apply regardless of the provider, including continuous clinical and biometric monitoring of tissue oxygenation, perfusion and blood pressure; confirmation of correct placement of airway management devices by auscultation and carbon dioxide detection; use of the WHO Surgical Safety Checklist; and safe onward transfer of the patient&#x27;s care following the procedure.
One part of the risk assessment is based on the patient&#x27;s health. The American Society of Anesthesiologists has developed a six-tier scale that stratifies the patient&#x27;s pre-operative physical state. It is called the ASA physical status classification. The scale assesses risk as the patient&#x27;s general health relates to an anesthetic.

The more detailed pre-operative medical history aims to discover genetic disorders (such as malignant hyperthermia or pseudocholinesterase deficiency), habits (tobacco, drug and alcohol use), physical attributes (such as obesity or a difficult airway) and any coexisting diseases (especially cardiac and respiratory diseases) that might impact the anesthetic. The physical examination helps quantify the impact of anything found in the medical history in addition to lab tests.

Aside from the generalities of the patient&#x27;s health assessment, an evaluation of specific factors as they relate to the surgery also need to be considered for anesthesia. For instance, anesthesia during childbirth must consider not only the mother but the baby. Cancers and tumors that occupy the lungs or throat create special challenges to general anesthesia. After determining the health of the patient undergoing anesthesia and the endpoints that are required to complete the procedure, the type of anesthetic can be selected. Choice of surgical method and anesthetic technique aims to reduce risk of complications, shorten time needed for recovery and minimize the surgical stress response.

=== General anesthesia ===

Anesthesia is a combination of the endpoints (discussed above) that are reached by drugs acting on different but overlapping sites in the central nervous system. General anesthesia (as opposed to sedation or regional anesthesia) has three main goals: lack of movement (paralysis), unconsciousness, and blunting of the stress response. In the early days of anesthesia, anesthetics could reliably achieve the first two, allowing surgeons to perform necessary procedures, but many patients died because the extremes of blood pressure and pulse caused by the surgical insult were ultimately harmful. Eventually, the need for blunting of the surgical stress response was identified by Harvey Cushing, who injected local anesthetic prior to hernia repairs. This led to the development of other drugs that could blunt the response, leading to lower surgical mortality rates.

The most common approach to reach the endpoints of general anesthesia is through the use of inhaled general anesthetics. Each anesthetic has its own potency, which is correlated to its solubility in oil. This relationship exists because the drugs bind directly to cavities in proteins of the central nervous system, although several theories of general anesthetic action have been described. Inhalational anesthetics are thought to exact their effects on different parts of the central nervous system. For instance, the immobilizing effect of inhaled anesthetics results from an effect on the spinal cord whereas sedation, hypnosis and amnesia involve sites in the brain. The potency of an inhalational anesthetic is quantified by its minimum alveolar concentration (MAC). The MAC is the percentage dose of anesthetic that will prevent a response to painful stimulus in 50% of subjects. The higher the MAC, generally, the less potent the anesthetic.
The ideal anesthetic drug would provide hypnosis, amnesia, analgesia, and muscle relaxation without undesirable changes in blood pressure, pulse or breathing. In the 1930s, physicians started to augment inhaled general anesthetics with intravenous general anesthetics. The drugs used in combination offered a better risk profile to the subject under anesthesia and a quicker recovery. A combination of drugs was later shown to result in lower odds of dying in the first seven days after anesthetic. For instance, propofol (injection) might be used to start the anesthetic, fentanyl (injection) used to blunt the stress response, midazolam (injection) given to ensure amnesia and sevoflurane (inhaled) during the procedure to maintain the effects. More recently, several intravenous drugs have been developed which, if desired, allow inhaled general anesthetics to be avoided completely.

==== Equipment ====
The core instrument in an inhalational anesthetic delivery system is an anesthetic machine. It has vaporizers, ventilators, an anesthetic breathing circuit, waste gas scavenging system and pressure gauges. The purpose of the anesthetic machine is to provide anesthetic gas at a constant pressure, oxygen for breathing and to remove carbon dioxide or other waste anesthetic gases. Since inhalational anesthetics are flammable, various checklists have been developed to confirm that the machine is ready for use, that the safety features are active and the electrical hazards are removed. Intravenous anesthetic is delivered either by bolus doses or an infusion pump. There are also many smaller instruments used in airway management and monitoring the patient. The common thread to modern machinery in this field is the use of fail-safe systems that decrease the odds of catastrophic misuse of the machine.

==== Monitoring ====

Patients under general anesthesia must undergo continuous physiological monitoring to ensure safety. In the US, the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) has established minimum monitoring guidelines for patients receiving general anesthesia, regional anesthesia, or sedation. These include electrocardiography (ECG), heart rate, blood pressure, inspired and expired gases, oxygen saturation of the blood (pulse oximetry), and temperature. In the UK the Association of Anaesthetists (AAGBI) have set minimum monitoring guidelines for general and regional anesthesia. For minor surgery, this generally includes monitoring of heart rate, oxygen saturation, blood pressure, and inspired and expired concentrations for oxygen, carbon dioxide, and inhalational anesthetic agents. For more invasive surgery, monitoring may also include temperature, urine output, blood pressure, central venous pressure, pulmonary artery pressure and pulmonary artery occlusion pressure, cardiac output, cerebral activity, and neuromuscular function. In addition, the operating room environment must be monitored for ambient temperature and humidity, as well as for accumulation of exhaled inhalational anesthetic agents, which might be deleterious to the health of operating room personnel.

=== Sedation ===

Sedation (also referred to as &quot;dissociative anesthesia&quot; or &quot;twilight anesthesia&quot;) creates hypnotic, sedative, anxiolytic, amnesic, anticonvulsant, and centrally produced muscle-relaxing properties. From the perspective of the person giving the sedation, the patient appears sleepy, relaxed and forgetful, allowing unpleasant procedures to be more easily completed. Sedatives such as benzodiazepines are usually given with pain relievers (such as narcotics, or local anesthetics or both) because they do not, by themselves, provide significant pain relief.

From the perspective of the subject receiving a sedative, the effect is a feeling of general relaxation, amnesia (loss of memory) and time passing quickly. Many drugs can produce a sedative effect including benzodiazepines, propofol, thiopental, ketamine and inhaled general anesthetics. The advantage of sedation over a general anesthetic is that it generally does not require support of the airway or breathing (no tracheal intubation or mechanical ventilation) and can have less of an effect on the cardiovascular system which may add to a greater margin of safety in some patients.

=== Regional anesthesia ===

When pain is blocked from a part of the body using local anesthetics, it is generally referred to as regional anesthesia. There are many types of regional anesthesia either by injecting into the tissue itself, a vein that feeds the area or around a nerve trunk that supplies sensation to the area. The latter are called nerve blocks and are divided into peripheral or central nerve blocks.

The following are the types of regional anesthesia:
* &quot;Infiltrative anesthesia&quot;: a small amount of local anesthetic is injected in a small area to stop any sensation (such as during the closure of a laceration, as a continuous infusion or &quot;freezing&quot; a tooth). The effect is almost immediate.
* &quot;Peripheral nerve block&quot;: local anesthetic is injected near a nerve that provides sensation to particular portion of the body. There is significant variation in the speed of onset and duration of anesthesia depending on the potency of the drug (e.g. Mandibular block, Fascia Iliaca Compartment Block).
* &quot;Intravenous regional anesthesia&quot; (also called a Bier block): dilute local anesthetic is infused to a limb through a vein with a tourniquet placed to prevent the drug from diffusing out of the limb.
* &quot;Central nerve block&quot;: Local anesthetic is injected or infused in or around a portion of the central nervous system (discussed in more detail below in spinal, epidural and caudal anesthesia).
* &quot;Topical anesthesia&quot;: local anesthetics that are specially formulated to diffuse through the mucous membranes or skin to give a thin layer of analgesia to an area (e.g. EMLA patches).
* &quot;Tumescent anesthesia&quot;: a large amount of very dilute local anesthetics are injected into the subcutaneous tissues during liposuction.
* &quot;Systemic local anesthetics&quot;: local anesthetics are given systemically (orally or intravenous) to relieve neuropathic pain. 
A 2018 Cochrane review found moderate quality evidence that regional anesthesia may reduce the frequency of persistent postoperative pain (PPP) from 3 to 18 months following thoracotomy and 3 to 12 months following caesarean. Low quality evidence was found 3 to 12 months following breast cancer surgery. This review acknowledges certain limitations that impact its applicability beyond the surgeries and regional anesthesia techniques reviewed.

==== Nerve blocks ====

When local anesthetic is injected around a larger diameter nerve that transmits sensation from an entire region it is referred to as a nerve block or regional nerve blockade. Nerve blocks are commonly used in dentistry, when the mandibular nerve is blocked for procedures on the lower teeth. With larger diameter nerves (such as the interscalene block for upper limbs or psoas compartment block for lower limbs) the nerve and position of the needle is localized with ultrasound or electrical stimulation. Evidence supports the use of ultrasound guidance alone, or in combination with peripheral nerve stimulation, as superior for improved sensory and motor block, a reduction in the need for supplementation and fewer complications. Because of the large amount of local anesthetic required to affect the nerve, the maximum dose of local anesthetic has to be considered. Nerve blocks are also used as a continuous infusion, following major surgery such as knee, hip and shoulder replacement surgery, and may be associated with lower complications. Nerve blocks are also associated with a lower risk of neurologic complications compared to the more central epidural or spinal neuraxial blocks.

==== Spinal, epidural and caudal anesthesia ====
Central neuraxial anesthesia is the injection of local anesthetic around the spinal cord to provide analgesia in the abdomen, pelvis or lower extremities. It is divided into either spinal (injection into the subarachnoid space), epidural (injection outside of the subarachnoid space into the epidural space) and caudal (injection into the cauda equina or tail end of the spinal cord). Spinal and epidural are the most commonly used forms of central neuraxial blockade.

Spinal anesthesia is a &quot;one-shot&quot; injection that provides rapid onset and profound sensory anesthesia with lower doses of anesthetic, and is usually associated with neuromuscular blockade (loss of muscle control). Epidural anesthesia uses larger doses of anesthetic infused through an indwelling catheter which allows the anesthetic to be augmented should the effects begin to dissipate. Epidural anesthesia does not typically affect muscle control.

Because central neuraxial blockade causes arterial and venous vasodilation, a drop in blood pressure is common. This drop is largely dictated by the venous side of the circulatory system which holds 75% of the circulating blood volume. The physiologic effects are much greater when the block is placed above the 5th thoracic vertebra. An ineffective block is most often due to inadequate anxiolysis or sedation rather than a failure of the block itself.

=== Acute pain management ===

Nociception (pain sensation) is not hard-wired into the body. Instead, it is a dynamic process wherein persistent painful stimuli can sensitize the system and either make pain management difficult or promote the development of chronic pain. For this reason, preemptive acute pain management may reduce both acute and chronic pain and is tailored to the surgery, the environment in which it is given (in-patient/out-patient) and the individual.

Pain management is classified into either pre-emptive or on-demand. On-demand pain medications typically include either opioid or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs but can also make use of novel approaches such as inhaled nitrous oxide or ketamine. On demand drugs can be administered by a clinician (&quot;as needed drug orders&quot;) or by the patient using patient-controlled analgesia (PCA). PCA has been shown to provide slightly better pain control and increased patient satisfaction when compared with conventional methods. Common preemptive approaches include epidural neuraxial blockade or nerve blocks. One review which looked at pain control after abdominal aortic surgery found that epidural blockade provides better pain relief (especially during movement) in the period up to three postoperative days. It reduces the duration of postoperative tracheal intubation by roughly half. The occurrence of prolonged postoperative mechanical ventilation and myocardial infarction is also reduced by epidural analgesia.

== Risks and complications ==

Risks and complications as they relate to anesthesia are classified as either morbidity (a disease or disorder that results from anesthesia) or mortality (death that results from anesthesia). Quantifying how anesthesia contributes to morbidity and mortality can be difficult because the patient&#x27;s health prior to surgery and the complexity of the surgical procedure can also contribute to the risks.

Prior to the introduction of anesthesia in the early 19th century, the physiologic stress from surgery caused significant complications and many deaths from shock. The faster the surgery was, the lower the rate of complications (leading to reports of very quick amputations). The advent of anesthesia allowed more complicated and life-saving surgery to be completed, decreased the physiologic stress of the surgery, but added an element of risk. It was two years after the introduction of ether anesthetics that the first death directly related to the use of anesthesia was reported.

Morbidity can be major (myocardial infarction, pneumonia, pulmonary embolism, kidney failure/chronic kidney disease, postoperative cognitive dysfunction and allergy) or minor (minor nausea, vomiting, readmission). There is usually overlap in the contributing factors that lead to morbidity and mortality between the health of the patients, the type of surgery being performed and the anesthetic. To understand the relative risk of each contributing factor, consider that the rate of deaths totally attributed to the patient&#x27;s health is 1:870. Compare that to the rate of deaths totally attributed to surgical factors (1:2860) or anesthesia alone (1:185,056) illustrating that the single greatest factor in anesthetic mortality is the health of the patient. These statistics can also be compared to the first such study on mortality in anesthesia from 1954, which reported a rate of death from all causes at 1:75 and a rate attributed to anesthesia alone at 1:2680. Direct comparisons between mortality statistics cannot reliably be made over time and across countries because of differences in the stratification of risk factors, however, there is evidence that anesthetics have made a significant improvement in safety but to what degree is uncertain.

Rather than stating a flat rate of morbidity or mortality, many factors are reported as contributing to the relative risk of the procedure and anesthetic combined. For instance, an operation on a person who is between the ages of 60–79 years old places the patient at 2.3 times greater risk than someone less than 60 years old. Having an ASA score of 3, 4 or 5 places the person at 10.7 times greater risk than someone with an ASA score of 1 or 2. Other variables include age greater than 80 (3.3 times risk compared to those under 60), gender (females have a lower risk of 0.8), urgency of the procedure (emergencies have a 4.4 times greater risk), experience of the person completing the procedure (less than 8 years experience and/or less than 600 cases have a 1.1 times greater risk) and the type of anesthetic (regional anesthetics are lower risk than general anesthetics). Obstetrical, the very young and the very old are all at greater risk of complication so extra precautions may need to be taken.

On 14 December 2016, the Food and Drug Administration issued a Public Safety Communication warning that &quot;repeated or lengthy use of general anesthetic and sedation drugs during surgeries or procedures in children younger than 3 years or in pregnant women during their third trimester may affect the development of children&#x27;s brains.&quot; The warning was criticized by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, which pointed out the absence of direct evidence regarding use in pregnant women and the possibility that &quot;this warning could inappropriately dissuade providers from providing medically indicated care during pregnancy.&quot; Patient advocates noted that a randomized clinical trial would be unethical, that the mechanism of injury is well-established in animals, and that studies had shown exposure to multiple uses of anesthetic significantly increased the risk of developing learning disabilities in young children, with a hazard ratio of 2.12 (95% confidence interval, 1.26–3.54).

== Recovery ==
The immediate time after anesthesia is called emergence. Emergence from general anesthesia or sedation requires careful monitoring because there is still a risk of complication. Nausea and vomiting are reported at 9.8% but will vary with the type of anesthetic and procedure. There is a need for airway support in 6.8%, there can be urinary retention (more common in those over 50 years of age) and hypotension in 2.7%. Hypothermia, shivering and confusion are also common in the immediate post-operative period because of the lack of muscle movement (and subsequent lack of heat production) during the procedure. Furthermore, the rare manifestation in the post-anesthetic period may be the occurrence of functional neurological symptom disorder (FNSD).

Postoperative cognitive dysfunction (also known as &quot;POCD&quot; and post-anesthetic confusion) is a disturbance in cognition after surgery. It may also be variably used to describe emergence delirium (immediate post-operative confusion) and early cognitive dysfunction (diminished cognitive function in the first post-operative week). Although the three entities (delirium, early POCD and long-term POCD) are separate, the presence of delirium post-operatively predicts the presence of early POCD. There does not appear to be an association between delirium or early POCD and long-term POCD. According to a recent study conducted at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, the brain navigates its way through a series of activity clusters, or &quot;hubs&quot; on its way back to consciousness. Andrew Hudson, an assistant professor in anesthesiology states, &quot;Recovery from anesthesia is not simply the result of the anesthetic &#x27;wearing off,&#x27; but also of the brain finding its way back through a maze of possible activity states to those that allow conscious experience. Put simply, the brain reboots itself.&quot;

Long-term POCD is a subtle deterioration in cognitive function, that can last for weeks, months, or longer. Most commonly, relatives of the person report a lack of attention, memory and loss of interest in activities previously dear to the person (such as crosswords). In a similar way, people in the workforce may report an inability to complete tasks at the same speed they could previously. There is good evidence that POCD occurs after cardiac surgery and the major reason for its occurrence is the formation of microemboli. POCD also appears to occur in non-cardiac surgery. Its causes in non-cardiac surgery are less clear but older age is a risk factor for its occurrence.

== History ==

The first attempts at general anesthesia were probably herbal remedies administered in prehistory. Alcohol is one of the oldest known sedatives and it was used in ancient Mesopotamia thousands of years ago. The Sumerians are said to have cultivated and harvested the opium poppy (&quot;Papaver somniferum&quot;) in lower Mesopotamia as early as 3400 BCE. The ancient Egyptians had some surgical instruments, as well as crude analgesics and sedatives, including possibly an extract prepared from the mandrake fruit.

In China, Bian Que (Chinese: 扁鹊, Wade–Giles: &quot;Pien Ch&#x27;iao&quot;, ) was a legendary Chinese internist and surgeon who reportedly used general anesthesia for surgical procedures. Despite this, it was the Chinese physician Hua Tuo whom historians considered the first verifiable historical figure to develop a type of mixture of anesthesia, though his recipe has yet to be fully discovered.

Throughout Europe, Asia, and the Americas, a variety of &quot;Solanum&quot; species containing potent tropane alkaloids was used for anesthesia. In 13th-century Italy, Theodoric Borgognoni used similar mixtures along with opiates to induce unconsciousness, and treatment with the combined alkaloids proved a mainstay of anesthesia until the 19th century. Local anesthetics were used in Inca civilization where shamans chewed coca leaves and performed operations on the skull while spitting into the wounds they had inflicted to anesthetize. Cocaine was later isolated and became the first effective local anesthetic. It was first used in eye surgery in 1884 by Karl Koller, at the suggestion of Sigmund Freud. German surgeon August Bier (1861–1949) was the first to use cocaine for intrathecal anesthesia in 1898. Romanian surgeon Nicolae Racoviceanu-Piteşti (1860–1942) was the first to use opioids for intrathecal analgesia; he presented his experience in Paris in 1901.

The &quot;soporific sponge&quot; (&quot;sleep sponge&quot;) used by Arabic physicians was introduced to Europe by the Salerno school of medicine in the late 12th century and by Ugo Borgognoni (1180–1258) in the 13th century. The sponge was promoted and described by Ugo&#x27;s son and fellow surgeon, Theodoric Borgognoni (1205–1298). In this anesthetic method, a sponge was soaked in a dissolved solution of opium, mandragora, hemlock juice, and other substances. The sponge was then dried and stored; just before surgery the sponge was moistened and then held under the patient&#x27;s nose. When all went well, the fumes rendered the individual unconscious.
The most famous anesthetic, ether, may have been synthesized as early as the 8th century, but it took many centuries for its anesthetic importance to be appreciated, even though the 16th century physician and polymath Paracelsus noted that chickens made to breathe it not only fell asleep but also felt no pain. By the early 19th century, ether was being used by humans, but only as a recreational drug.

Meanwhile, in 1772, English scientist Joseph Priestley discovered the gas nitrous oxide. Initially, people thought this gas to be lethal, even in small doses, like some other nitrogen oxides. However, in 1799, British chemist and inventor Humphry Davy decided to find out by experimenting on himself. To his astonishment he found that nitrous oxide made him laugh, so he nicknamed it &quot;laughing gas&quot;. In 1800 Davy wrote about the potential anesthetic properties of nitrous oxide in relieving pain during surgery, but nobody at that time pursued the matter any further.

On 14 November 1804, Hanaoka Seishū, a Japanese doctor, became the first person to successfully perform surgery using general anesthesia. Hanaoka learned traditional Japanese medicine as well as Dutch-imported European surgery and Chinese medicine. After years of research and experimentation, he finally developed a formula which he named tsūsensan (also known as mafutsu-san), which combined Korean morning glory and other herbs.

Hanaoka&#x27;s success in performing this painless operation soon became widely known, and patients began to arrive from all parts of Japan. Hanaoka went on to perform many operations using tsūsensan, including resection of malignant tumors, extraction of bladder stones, and extremity amputations. Before his death in 1835, Hanaoka performed more than 150 operations for breast cancer. However, this finding did not benefit the rest of the world until 1854 as the national isolation policy of the Tokugawa shogunate prevented Hanaoka&#x27;s achievements from being publicized until after the isolation ended. Nearly forty years would pass before Crawford Long, who is titled as the inventor of modern anesthetics in the West, used general anesthesia in Jefferson, Georgia.

Long noticed that his friends felt no pain when they injured themselves while staggering around under the influence of diethyl ether. He immediately thought of its potential in surgery. Conveniently, a participant in one of those &quot;ether frolics&quot;, a student named James Venable, had two small tumors he wanted excised. But fearing the pain of surgery, Venable kept putting the operation off. Hence, Long suggested that he have his operation while under the influence of ether. Venable agreed, and on 30 March 1842 he underwent a painless operation. However, Long did not announce his discovery until 1849.
Horace Wells conducted the first public demonstration of the inhalational anesthetic at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston in 1845. However, the nitrous oxide was improperly administered and the person cried out in pain. On 16 October 1846, Boston dentist William Thomas Green Morton gave a successful demonstration using diethyl ether to medical students at the same venue. Morton, who was unaware of Long&#x27;s previous work, was invited to the Massachusetts General Hospital to demonstrate his new technique for painless surgery. After Morton had induced anesthesia, surgeon John Collins Warren removed a tumor from the neck of Edward Gilbert Abbott. This occurred in the surgical amphitheater now called the Ether Dome. The previously skeptical Warren was impressed and stated, &quot;Gentlemen, this is no humbug.&quot; In a letter to Morton shortly thereafter, physician and writer Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. proposed naming the state produced &quot;anesthesia&quot;, and the procedure an &quot;anesthetic&quot;.

Morton at first attempted to hide the actual nature of his anesthetic substance, referring to it as Letheon. He received a US patent for his substance, but news of the successful anesthetic spread quickly by late 1846. Respected surgeons in Europe including Liston, Dieffenbach, Pirogov, and Syme quickly undertook numerous operations with ether. An American-born physician, Boott, encouraged London dentist James Robinson to perform a dental procedure on a Miss Lonsdale. This was the first case of an operator-anesthetist. On the same day, 19 December 1846, in Dumfries Royal Infirmary, Scotland, a Dr. Scott used ether for a surgical procedure. The first use of anesthesia in the Southern Hemisphere took place in Launceston, Tasmania, that same year. Drawbacks with ether such as excessive vomiting and its explosive flammability led to its replacement in England with chloroform.

Discovered in 1831 by an American physician Samuel Guthrie (1782–1848), and independently a few months later by Frenchman Eugène Soubeiran (1797–1859) and Justus von Liebig (1803–1873) in Germany, chloroform was named and chemically characterized in 1834 by Jean-Baptiste Dumas (1800–1884). In 1842, Dr Robert Mortimer Glover in London discovered the anaesthetic qualities of chloroform on laboratory animals.

In 1847, Scottish obstetrician James Young Simpson was the first to demonstrate the anesthetic properties of chloroform on humans and helped to popularize the drug for use in medicine. This first supply came from local pharmacists, James Duncan and William Flockhart, and its use spread quickly, with 750,000 doses weekly in Britain by 1895. Simpson arranged for Flockhart to supply Florence Nightingale. Chloroform gained royal approval in 1853 when John Snow administered it to Queen Victoria when she was in labor with Prince Leopold. For the experience of child birth itself, chloroform met all the Queen&#x27;s expectations; she stated it was &quot;delightful beyond measure&quot;. Chloroform was not without fault though. The first fatality directly attributed to chloroform administration was recorded on 28 January 1848 after the death of Hannah Greener. This was the first of many deaths to follow from the untrained handling of chloroform. Surgeons began to appreciate the need for a trained anesthetist. The need, as Thatcher writes, was for an anesthetist to &quot;(1) Be satisfied with the subordinate role that the work would require, (2) Make anesthesia their one absorbing interest, (3) not look at the situation of anesthetist as one that put them in a position to watch and learn from the surgeons technique (4) accept the comparatively low pay and (5) have the natural aptitude and intelligence to develop a high level of skill in providing the smooth anesthesia and relaxation that the surgeon demanded&quot; These qualities of an anesthetist were often found in submissive medical students and even members of the public. More often, surgeons sought out nurses to provide anesthesia. By the time of the Civil War, many nurses had been professionally trained with the support of surgeons.

John Snow of London published articles from May 1848 onwards &quot;On Narcotism by the Inhalation of Vapours&quot; in the London Medical Gazette. Snow also involved himself in the production of equipment needed for the administration of inhalational anesthetics, the forerunner of today&#x27;s anesthesia machines.

Alice Magaw, born in November 1860, is often referred to as &quot;The Mother of Anesthesia&quot;. Her renown as the personal anesthesia provider for William and Charles Mayo was solidified by Mayo&#x27;s own words in his 1905 article in which he described his satisfaction with and reliance on nurse anesthetists: &quot;The question of anaesthesia is a most important one. We have regular anaesthetists [on] whom we can depend so that I can devote my entire attention to the surgical work.&quot; Magaw kept thorough records of her cases and recorded these anesthetics. In her publication reviewing more than 14,000 surgical anesthetics, Magaw indicates she successfully provided anesthesia without an anesthetic-related death. Magaw describes
in another article, &quot;We have administered an anesthetic 1,092 times; ether alone 674 times; chloroform 245 times; ether and chloroform combined 173 times. I can report that out of this number, 1,092 cases, we have not had an accident&quot;. Magaw&#x27;s records and outcomes created a legacy defining that the delivery of anesthesia by nurses would serve the surgical community without increasing the risks to patients. In fact, Magaw&#x27;s outcomes would eclipse those of practitioners today.

The first comprehensive medical textbook on the subject, &quot;Anesthesia&quot;, was authored in 1914 by anesthesiologist Dr. James Tayloe Gwathmey and the chemist Dr. Charles Baskerville. This book served as the standard reference for the specialty for decades and included details on the history of anesthesia as well as the physiology and techniques of inhalation, rectal, intravenous, and spinal anesthesia.

Of these first famous anesthetics, only nitrous oxide is still widely used today, with chloroform and ether having been replaced by safer but sometimes more expensive general anesthetics, and cocaine by more effective local anesthetics with less abuse potential.

== Society and culture ==


Almost all healthcare providers use anesthetic drugs to some degree, but most health professions have their own field of specialists in the field including medicine, nursing and dentistry.

Doctors specializing in anaesthesiology, including perioperative care, development of an anesthetic plan, and the administration of anesthetics are known in the US as &quot;anesthesiologists&quot; and in the UK, Canada, Australia, and NZ as &quot;anaesthetists&quot; or &quot;anaesthesiologists&quot;. All anesthetics in the UK, Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong and Japan are administered by doctors. Nurse anesthetists also administer anesthesia in 109 nations. In the US, 35% of anesthetics are provided by physicians in solo practice, about 55% are provided by anesthesia care teams (ACTs) with anesthesiologists medically directing certified registered nurse anesthetists (CRNAs) or anesthesiologist assistants, and about 10% are provided by CRNAs in solo practice. There can also be anesthesiologist assistants (US) or physicians&#x27; assistants (anaesthesia) (UK) who assist with anesthesia.

== Special populations ==
There are many circumstances when anesthesia needs to be altered for special circumstances due to the procedure (such as in cardiac surgery, cardiothoracic anesthesiology or neurosurgery), the patient (such as in pediatric anesthesia, geriatric, bariatric or obstetrical anesthesia) or special circumstances (such as in trauma, prehospital care, robotic surgery or extreme environments).

== See also ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* NICE Guidelines on pre-operative tests
* ASA Physical Status Classification
* DMOZ link to anesthesia society sites
* A Comprehensive Guide to Anesthetic Drugs and Their Mechanisms of Action </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131130" start="0" end="10" title="Anesthesia" label="Anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="12" end="28" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q131130" start="33" end="44" title="Anesthesia" label="anaesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="46" end="61" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q621261" start="212" end="221" title="analgesia" label="analgesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81938" start="252" end="256" title="pain" label="pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="259" end="268" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072" start="290" end="297" title="amnesia" label="amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829165" start="320" end="335" title="unconsciousness" label="unconsciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4990531" start="372" end="382" title="anesthetic" label="anesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q357003" start="515" end="533" title="physical restraint" label="physical restraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q166543" start="666" end="684" title="General anesthesia" label="General anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="702" end="724" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="783" end="792" title="Sensation (psychology)" label="sensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q574801" start="842" end="850" title="Sedation" label="Sedation"/>
<link wikidata="Q62903" start="931" end="938" title="anxiolysis" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q18601" start="955" end="973" title="long-term memory" label="long-term memories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455662" start="1020" end="1049" title="Local anesthesia" label="Regional and local anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379667" start="1469" end="1480" title="nerve block" label="nerve block"/>
<link wikidata="Q169953" start="1510" end="1527" title="peripheral nervous system" label="peripheral nerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658237" start="1606" end="1624" title="Neuraxial blockade" label="Neuraxial blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q841215" start="1639" end="1647" title="epidural anaesthesia" label="epidural"/>
<link wikidata="Q282736" start="1652" end="1658" title="spinal anaesthesia" label="spinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755101" start="2073" end="2092" title="general anaesthetic" label="general anesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868462" start="2094" end="2110" title="local anesthetic" label="local anesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q62962" start="2113" end="2121" title="hypnotic" label="hypnotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q900394" start="2124" end="2136" title="dissociative" label="dissociative"/>
<link wikidata="Q847705" start="2139" end="2147" title="sedative" label="sedative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481887" start="2150" end="2158" title="adjunct therapy" label="adjuncts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286619" start="2160" end="2187" title="neuromuscular-blocking drug" label="neuromuscular-blocking drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q940" start="2190" end="2198" title="narcotic" label="narcotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="2205" end="2214" title="analgesic" label="analgesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q64855140" start="2610" end="2623" title="perioperative" label="perioperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="2642" end="2647" title="death" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="2649" end="2661" title="myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q220570" start="2667" end="2685" title="pulmonary embolism" label="pulmonary embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="2718" end="2751" title="nausea" label="postoperative nausea and vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324519" start="2756" end="2776" title="hospital readmission" label="hospital readmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400765" start="2827" end="2833" title="airway" label="airway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585081" start="2844" end="2866" title="malignant hyperthermia" label="malignant hyperthermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q62962" start="3051" end="3059" title="hypnotic" label="hypnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="3081" end="3094" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="3117" end="3123" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="3344" end="3352" title="hypnosis" label="hypnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q621261" start="3357" end="3366" title="analgesia" label="analgesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="3404" end="3422" title="Autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic reflexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225289" start="3426" end="3443" title="Muscle relaxant" label="muscle relaxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455662" start="3509" end="3528" title="Regional anesthesia" label="Regional anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="3563" end="3577" title="benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150262" start="3622" end="3641" title="twilight anesthesia" label="twilight anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072" start="3655" end="3662" title="amnesia" label="amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166543" start="3668" end="3687" title="general anesthesia" label="general anesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q62962" start="3958" end="3966" title="hypnotic" label="Hypnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934178" start="4018" end="4037" title="Nucleus (neuroanatomy)" label="nuclei in the brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q35831" start="4074" end="4079" title="sleep" label="sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q4338318" start="4115" end="4120" title="awareness" label="aware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067309" start="4142" end="4157" title="noxious stimulus" label="noxious stimuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="4168" end="4174" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072" start="4176" end="4183" title="amnesia" label="amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18608" start="4295" end="4306" title="Declarative memory" label="declarative"/>
<link wikidata="Q18606" start="4310" end="4325" title="Procedural memory" label="non-declarative"/>
<link wikidata="Q18599" start="4354" end="4364" title="Short-term memory" label="short-term"/>
<link wikidata="Q18601" start="4366" end="4375" title="Long-term memory" label="long-term"/>
<link wikidata="Q11337567" start="4377" end="4389" title="Working memory" label="long-lasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551556" start="4481" end="4500" title="synaptic plasticity" label="synaptic plasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q909194" start="4597" end="4621" title="Inhalational anesthetics" label="Inhalational anesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q423071" start="4762" end="4771" title="midazolam" label="midazolam"/>
<link wikidata="Q36348" start="4892" end="4897" title="dreams" label="dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q36348" start="5027" end="5032" title="dream" label="dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q166543" start="5039" end="5057" title="general anesthesia" label="general anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671572" start="5132" end="5152" title="anesthesia awareness" label="anesthesia awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q188952" start="5689" end="5704" title="medical history" label="medical history"/>
<link wikidata="Q835153" start="5706" end="5726" title="physical examination" label="physical examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671652" start="5731" end="5740" title="Medical test" label="lab tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671652" start="5991" end="6000" title="Medical test" label="Lab tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q930752" start="6350" end="6367" title="medical specialty" label="medical specialty"/>
<link wikidata="Q615057" start="6404" end="6418" title="anesthesiology" label="anesthesiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168673" start="6629" end="6646" title="perioperative nurse" label="anesthetic nurses"/>
<link wikidata="Q354153" start="6648" end="6665" title="nurse anesthetist" label="nurse anesthetist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761725" start="6668" end="6694" title="anesthesiologist assistant" label="anesthesiologist assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750810" start="6697" end="6719" title="anaesthetic technician" label="anaesthetic technician"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749498" start="6722" end="6743" title="anaesthesia associate" label="anaesthesia associate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096683" start="6746" end="6779" title="operating department practitioner" label="operating department practitioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745046" start="6785" end="6808" title="anesthesia technologist" label="anesthesia technologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="6896" end="6921" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749502" start="6930" end="6981" title="World Federation of Societies of Anaesthesiologists" label="World Federation of Societies of Anaesthesiologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475557" start="7581" end="7595" title="patient safety" label="patient safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q286949" start="7775" end="7792" title="airway management" label="airway management"/>
<link wikidata="Q779054" start="7804" end="7816" title="auscultation" label="auscultation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="7821" end="7835" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537256" start="7858" end="7887" title="WHO Surgical Safety Checklist" label="WHO Surgical Safety Checklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q189447" start="7982" end="7997" title="Risk management" label="risk assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q297199" start="8192" end="8226" title="ASA physical status classification system" label="ASA physical status classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q188952" start="8348" end="8363" title="medical history" label="medical history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585081" start="8408" end="8430" title="malignant hyperthermia" label="malignant hyperthermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7254644" start="8434" end="8465" title="pseudocholinesterase deficiency" label="pseudocholinesterase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q662860" start="8476" end="8483" title="smoking" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="8485" end="8489" title="drug abuse" label="drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713263" start="8494" end="8505" title="Alcohol dependence" label="alcohol use"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="8537" end="8544" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400765" start="8560" end="8566" title="airway" label="airway"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="8608" end="8615" title="Cardiovascular disease" label="cardiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q199804" start="8620" end="8640" title="Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease" label="respiratory diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q835153" start="8680" end="8700" title="physical examination" label="physical examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q34581" start="9003" end="9013" title="childbirth" label="childbirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="9062" end="9068" title="Cancer" label="Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="9074" end="9079" title="tumor" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400765" start="9106" end="9112" title="airway" label="throat"/>
<link wikidata="Q166543" start="9142" end="9160" title="general anesthesia" label="general anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105932" start="9470" end="9485" title="surgical stress" label="surgical stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="9663" end="9685" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="9794" end="9803" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829165" start="9806" end="9821" title="unconsciousness" label="unconsciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640582" start="9843" end="9858" title="Fight-or-flight response" label="stress response"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105932" start="10162" end="10177" title="surgical stress" label="surgical stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q380038" start="10205" end="10219" title="Harvey Williams Cushing" label="Harvey Cushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531594" start="10260" end="10273" title="hernia repair" label="hernia repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="10376" end="10390" title="mortality rate" label="mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q166543" start="10445" end="10463" title="general anesthesia" label="general anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q918783" start="10727" end="10764" title="theories of general anaesthetic action" label="theories of general anesthetic action"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="10914" end="10926" title="paralysis" label="immobilizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="10987" end="10998" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936963" start="11129" end="11159" title="minimum alveolar concentration" label="minimum alveolar concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q245359" start="11580" end="11591" title="injectable" label="intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q422740" start="11857" end="11865" title="propofol" label="propofol"/>
<link wikidata="Q407541" start="11917" end="11925" title="fentanyl" label="fentanyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q423071" start="11973" end="11982" title="midazolam" label="midazolam"/>
<link wikidata="Q419394" start="12023" end="12034" title="sevoflurane" label="sevoflurane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316377" start="12324" end="12342" title="anesthetic machine" label="anesthetic machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316377" start="12351" end="12360" title="anesthetic vaporizer" label="vaporizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q813243" start="12363" end="12373" title="medical ventilator" label="ventilator"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="12839" end="12850" title="Intravenous" label="Intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q607561" start="12885" end="12890" title="Bolus (medicine)" label="bolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201035" start="12903" end="12916" title="infusion pump" label="infusion pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q286949" start="12966" end="12983" title="airway management" label="airway management"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738789" start="13033" end="13049" title="Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetist" label="modern machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392940" start="13078" end="13087" title="fail-safe" label="fail-safe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421432" start="13253" end="13263" title="monitoring (medicine)" label="monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q466833" start="13297" end="13334" title="American Society of Anesthesiologists" label="American Society of Anesthesiologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073121" start="13811" end="13821" title="heart rate" label="heart rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294669" start="13823" end="13840" title="oxygen saturation" label="oxygen saturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="13842" end="13856" title="blood pressure" label="blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="13902" end="13908" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="13910" end="13924" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q190402" start="14060" end="14083" title="central venous pressure" label="central venous pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q206280" start="14085" end="14110" title="pulmonary artery pressure" label="pulmonary artery pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414127" start="14115" end="14150" title="pulmonary wedge pressure" label="pulmonary artery occlusion pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q596579" start="14152" end="14166" title="cardiac output" label="cardiac output"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918396" start="14168" end="14185" title="Bispectral index" label="cerebral activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="14585" end="14593" title="Hypnotic state" label="hypnotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q574801" start="14595" end="14603" title="sedation" label="sedative"/>
<link wikidata="Q62903" start="14605" end="14615" title="anxiolytic" label="anxiolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072" start="14617" end="14624" title="amnesic" label="amnesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q576618" start="14626" end="14640" title="anticonvulsant" label="anticonvulsant"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="14878" end="14892" title="benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q940" start="14941" end="14950" title="narcotics" label="narcotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868462" start="14955" end="14972" title="local anesthetics" label="local anesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="15038" end="15049" title="analgesic" label="pain relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="15259" end="15273" title="benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422740" start="15276" end="15284" title="propofol" label="propofol"/>
<link wikidata="Q410179" start="15286" end="15296" title="thiopental" label="thiopental"/>
<link wikidata="Q243547" start="15298" end="15306" title="ketamine" label="ketamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q750195" start="15469" end="15488" title="tracheal intubation" label="tracheal intubation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766250" start="15492" end="15514" title="mechanical ventilation" label="mechanical ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="15554" end="15575" title="cardiovascular system" label="cardiovascular system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868462" start="15719" end="15736" title="local anesthetics" label="local anesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q184753" start="16268" end="16278" title="laceration" label="laceration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165531" start="16285" end="16304" title="Continuous wound infiltration" label="continuous infusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379667" start="16379" end="16401" title="Nerve block" label="Peripheral nerve block"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147104" start="16633" end="16649" title="Inferior alveolar nerve anaesthesia" label="Mandibular block"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16651" end="16682" title="Fascia Iliaca Compartment Block" label="Fascia Iliaca Compartment Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671581" start="16693" end="16724" title="Intravenous regional anesthesia" label="Intravenous regional anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671581" start="16746" end="16756" title="Bier block" label="Bier block"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132870" start="16826" end="16836" title="tourniquet" label="tourniquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824862" start="17108" end="17126" title="Topical anesthetic" label="Topical anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019783" start="17281" end="17293" title="Lidocaine/prilocaine" label="EMLA patches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852613" start="17304" end="17324" title="Tumescent anesthesia" label="Tumescent anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164665" start="17402" end="17421" title="subcutaneous tissue" label="subcutaneous tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798704" start="17561" end="17577" title="neuropathic pain" label="neuropathic pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q81938" start="17688" end="17717" title="persistent postoperative pain" label="persistent postoperative pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340337" start="17754" end="17765" title="thoracotomy" label="thoracotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q228036" start="17795" end="17804" title="Caesarean section" label="caesarean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868462" start="18056" end="18072" title="local anesthetic" label="local anesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379667" start="18186" end="18197" title="nerve block" label="nerve block"/>
<link wikidata="Q385981" start="18280" end="18296" title="mandibular nerve" label="mandibular nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q141615" start="18384" end="18396" title="scalene muscles" label="interscalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550323" start="18422" end="18439" title="Psoas major muscle" label="psoas compartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q234904" start="18518" end="18528" title="Medical ultrasonography" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658237" start="19293" end="19321" title="Neuraxial blockade" label="Central neuraxial anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868462" start="19342" end="19358" title="local anesthetic" label="local anesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="19370" end="19381" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q9597" start="19410" end="19417" title="abdomen" label="abdomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q713102" start="19419" end="19425" title="human pelvis" label="pelvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6027402" start="19429" end="19446" title="Human leg" label="lower extremities"/>
<link wikidata="Q268930" start="19501" end="19519" title="subarachnoid space" label="subarachnoid space"/>
<link wikidata="Q841215" start="19585" end="19593" title="epidural" label="epidural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051445" start="19632" end="19644" title="cauda equina" label="cauda equina"/>
<link wikidata="Q282736" start="19763" end="19780" title="Spinal anesthesia" label="Spinal anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286619" start="19938" end="19960" title="neuromuscular blockade" label="neuromuscular blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q841215" start="19987" end="20006" title="Epidural anesthesia" label="Epidural anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9655" start="20266" end="20274" title="arterial" label="arterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q9609" start="20279" end="20285" title="venous" label="venous"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859627" start="20286" end="20298" title="vasodilation" label="vasodilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="20310" end="20324" title="blood pressure" label="blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="20392" end="20410" title="circulatory system" label="circulatory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896673" start="20446" end="20458" title="blood volume" label="blood volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q578786" start="20540" end="20557" title="thoracic vertebrae" label="thoracic vertebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q62903" start="20612" end="20622" title="anxiolysis" label="anxiolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q574801" start="20626" end="20634" title="sedation" label="sedation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734305" start="20710" end="20721" title="Nociception" label="Nociception"/>
<link wikidata="Q427523" start="21275" end="21281" title="opioid" label="opioid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188724" start="21285" end="21322" title="non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs" label="non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="21381" end="21394" title="nitrous oxide" label="nitrous oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q243547" start="21398" end="21406" title="ketamine" label="ketamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382057" start="21519" end="21547" title="patient-controlled analgesia" label="patient-controlled analgesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q616003" start="21818" end="21842" title="Aortic aneurysm" label="abdominal aortic surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q750195" start="22016" end="22035" title="tracheal intubation" label="tracheal intubation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766250" start="22095" end="22117" title="mechanical ventilation" label="mechanical ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="22122" end="22143" title="myocardial infarction" label="myocardial infarction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="22293" end="22302" title="Disease" label="morbidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168672" start="22359" end="22368" title="Perioperative mortality" label="mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="22692" end="22710" title="Stress (physiology)" label="physiologic stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q178061" start="22778" end="22783" title="Shock (circulatory)" label="shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="23230" end="23251" title="myocardial infarction" label="myocardial infarction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="23253" end="23262" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220570" start="23264" end="23282" title="pulmonary embolism" label="pulmonary embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="23284" end="23298" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q736715" start="23299" end="23321" title="chronic kidney disease" label="chronic kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065932" start="23337" end="23358" title="cognitive dysfunction" label="cognitive dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732120" start="23363" end="23370" title="Allergic reactions to anaesthesia" label="allergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="23388" end="23394" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142611" start="23620" end="23633" title="relative risk" label="relative risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284418" start="25344" end="25355" title="Obstetrical" label="Obstetrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930246" start="26439" end="26451" title="hazard ratio" label="hazard ratio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26560" end="26569" title="General anaesthesia#Emergence" label="emergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="26692" end="26698" title="Nausea" label="Nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q286949" start="26810" end="26824" title="airway management" label="airway support"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366695" start="26847" end="26864" title="urinary retention" label="urinary retention"/>
<link wikidata="Q275419" start="26913" end="26924" title="hypotension" label="hypotension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="26934" end="26945" title="Hypothermia" label="Hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q956181" start="27269" end="27304" title="Postoperative cognitive dysfunction" label="Postoperative cognitive dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="27388" end="27397" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q394116" start="27454" end="27472" title="emergence delirium" label="emergence delirium"/>
<link wikidata="Q842165" start="27910" end="27949" title="David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA" label="David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q275466" start="28924" end="28935" title="Embolism" label="microemboli"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="29159" end="29174" title="herbalism" label="herbal remedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="29191" end="29201" title="prehistory" label="prehistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="29203" end="29210" title="Ethanol" label="Alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q847705" start="29238" end="29246" title="sedative" label="sedative"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="29275" end="29286" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="29371" end="29376" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q131584" start="29390" end="29408" title="Papaver somniferum" label="Papaver somniferum"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="29454" end="29457" title="BCE" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q212742" start="29603" end="29611" title="Mandragora (genus)" label="mandrake"/>
<link wikidata="Q855326" start="29630" end="29638" title="Bian Que" label="Bian Que"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="29640" end="29647" title="Chinese character" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q208442" start="29653" end="29663" title="Wade–Giles" label="Wade–Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11180" start="29721" end="29730" title="Internal medicine" label="internist"/>
<link wikidata="Q31749" start="29850" end="29857" title="Hua Tuo" label="Hua Tuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q146555" start="30081" end="30088" title="Solanum" label="Solanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832080" start="30121" end="30137" title="tropane alkaloid" label="tropane alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q327534" start="30187" end="30207" title="Theodoric Borgognoni" label="Theodoric Borgognoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="30405" end="30422" title="Inca civilization" label="Inca civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="30429" end="30436" title="Shamanism" label="shamans"/>
<link wikidata="Q66793593" start="30444" end="30448" title="coca" label="coca"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="30560" end="30567" title="Cocaine" label="Cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q760348" start="30657" end="30668" title="eye surgery" label="eye surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q84585" start="30680" end="30691" title="Karl Koller (ophthalmologist)" label="Karl Koller"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="30714" end="30727" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q69260" start="30744" end="30755" title="August Bier" label="August Bier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320251" start="30801" end="30812" title="intrathecal" label="intrathecal"/>
<link wikidata="Q427523" start="30911" end="30917" title="opioid" label="opioid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145271" start="31111" end="31137" title="Schola Medica Salernitana" label="Salerno school of medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772416" start="31170" end="31184" title="Ugo Borgognoni" label="Ugo Borgognoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q327534" start="31294" end="31314" title="Theodoric Borgognoni" label="Theodoric Borgognoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651366" start="31409" end="31419" title="mandrake" label="mandragora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31681" end="31686" title="Diethyl ether#history" label="ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q83428" start="31871" end="31881" title="Paracelsus" label="Paracelsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="32038" end="32055" title="recreational drug" label="recreational drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="32096" end="32112" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="32132" end="32145" title="nitrous oxide" label="nitrous oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q424418" start="32233" end="32247" title="nitrogen oxide" label="nitrogen oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q131761" start="32297" end="32309" title="Humphry Davy" label="Humphry Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376935" start="32658" end="32672" title="Hanaoka Seishū" label="Hanaoka Seishū"/>
<link wikidata="Q166543" start="32755" end="32773" title="General anaesthesia" label="general anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q877637" start="32832" end="32846" title="Rangaku" label="Dutch-imported"/>
<link wikidata="Q30959" start="33031" end="33051" title="Datura stramonium" label="Korean morning glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483951" start="33294" end="33303" title="Malignancy" label="malignant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="33304" end="33309" title="tumor" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178623" start="33326" end="33340" title="Urolithiasis" label="bladder stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q332075" start="33535" end="33560" title="Sakoku" label="national isolation policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="33568" end="33586" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q248037" start="33717" end="33730" title="Crawford Long" label="Crawford Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="33791" end="33795" title="Western world" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966822" start="33824" end="33842" title="Jefferson, Georgia" label="Jefferson, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q733410" start="34460" end="34472" title="Horace Wells" label="Horace Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q126412" start="34552" end="34582" title="Massachusetts General Hospital" label="Massachusetts General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="34586" end="34592" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="34615" end="34628" title="nitrous oxide" label="nitrous oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q81938" start="34685" end="34689" title="pain" label="pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q319689" start="34726" end="34753" title="William T. G. Morton" label="William Thomas Green Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q202218" start="34792" end="34805" title="diethyl ether" label="diethyl ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q126412" start="34918" end="34948" title="Massachusetts General Hospital" label="Massachusetts General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q969253" start="35049" end="35068" title="John Collins Warren (surgeon, born 1778)" label="John Collins Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343108" start="35102" end="35123" title="Edward Gilbert Abbott" label="Edward Gilbert Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q257073" start="35183" end="35193" title="Ether Dome" label="Ether Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q319829" start="35358" end="35383" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr." label="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3039740" start="35612" end="35621" title="US patent" label="US patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q715460" start="35747" end="35753" title="Robert Liston" label="Liston"/>
<link wikidata="Q66531" start="35755" end="35766" title="Johann Friedrich Dieffenbach" label="Dieffenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q315266" start="35768" end="35775" title="Nikolay Ivanovich Pirogov" label="Pirogov"/>
<link wikidata="Q518407" start="35781" end="35785" title="James Syme" label="Syme"/>
<link wikidata="Q19325052" start="35897" end="35911" title="James Robinson (dentist)" label="James Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q339527" start="36206" end="36226" title="Launceston, Tasmania" label="Launceston, Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q910035" start="36310" end="36322" title="flammability" label="flammability"/>
<link wikidata="Q172275" start="36362" end="36372" title="chloroform" label="chloroform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682959" start="36678" end="36700" title="Robert Mortimer Glover" label="Robert Mortimer Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q470140" start="36817" end="36836" title="James Young Simpson" label="James Young Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q107301346" start="37035" end="37052" title="William Flockhart" label="William Flockhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q37103" start="37169" end="37189" title="Florence Nightingale" label="Florence Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q356407" start="37237" end="37246" title="John Snow (physician)" label="John Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="37266" end="37280" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q160541" start="37308" end="37322" title="Prince Leopold, Duke of Albany" label="Prince Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q494230" start="38380" end="38396" title="medical school" label="medical students"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="38510" end="38519" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q909194" start="38833" end="38857" title="inhalational anesthetics" label="inhalational anesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316377" start="38890" end="38909" title="anaesthetic machine" label="anesthesia machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q30315128" start="40282" end="40303" title="James Tayloe Gwathmey" label="James Tayloe Gwathmey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075459" start="40324" end="40343" title="Charles Baskerville" label="Charles Baskerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755101" start="40736" end="40754" title="general anesthetic" label="general anesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868462" start="40787" end="40803" title="local anesthetic" label="local anesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="41051" end="41058" title="Physician" label="Doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q615057" start="41075" end="41090" title="anaesthesiology" label="anaesthesiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q354153" start="41453" end="41471" title="Nurse anesthetists" label="Nurse anesthetists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761725" start="41840" end="41866" title="anesthesiologist assistant" label="anesthesiologist assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749498" start="41876" end="41917" title="physicians&amp;#x27; assistant (anaesthesia)" label="physicians&amp;#x27; assistants (anaesthesia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q235007" start="42102" end="42117" title="cardiac surgery" label="cardiac surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038722" start="42119" end="42148" title="cardiothoracic anesthesiology" label="cardiothoracic anesthesiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q188449" start="42152" end="42164" title="neurosurgery" label="neurosurgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q123028" start="42191" end="42211" title="Pediatrics" label="pediatric anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550834" start="42213" end="42222" title="geriatric anesthesia" label="geriatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470093" start="42224" end="42233" title="bariatric" label="bariatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284418" start="42237" end="42259" title="Obstetrics" label="obstetrical anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12421818" start="42298" end="42304" title="Trauma (medicine)" label="trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q860447" start="42306" end="42322" title="prehospital care" label="prehospital care"/>
<link wikidata="Q942348" start="42324" end="42339" title="robotic surgery" label="robotic surgery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56565" wikidata="Q208353" url="?curid=56565" title="Circadian rhythm">
<text>A circadian rhythm (), or circadian cycle, is a natural oscillation that repeats roughly every 24 hours. Circadian rhythms can refer to any process that originates within an organism (i.e., endogenous) and responds to the environment (is entrained by the environment). Circadian rhythms are regulated by a circadian clock whose primary function is to rhythmically co-ordinate biological processes so they occur at the correct time to maximize the fitness of an individual. Circadian rhythms have been widely observed in animals, plants, fungi and cyanobacteria and there is evidence that they evolved independently in each of these kingdoms of life.

The term &quot;circadian&quot; comes from the Latin &#x27;, meaning &quot;around&quot;, and&#x27;, meaning &quot;day&quot;. Processes with 24-hour cycles are more generally called diurnal rhythms; diurnal rhythms should not be called circadian rhythms unless they can be confirmed as endogenous, and not environmental.

Although circadian rhythms are endogenous, they are adjusted to the local environment by external cues called zeitgebers (from German &quot;&quot; (; )), which include light, temperature and redox cycles. In clinical settings, an abnormal circadian rhythm in humans is known as a circadian rhythm sleep disorder.

== History==
The earliest recorded account of a circadian process is credited to Theophrastus, dating from the 4th century BC, probably provided to him by report of Androsthenes, a ship&#x27;s captain serving under Alexander the Great. In his book, &#x27;Περὶ φυτῶν ἱστορία&#x27;, or &#x27;Enquiry into plants&#x27;, Theophrastus describes a &quot;tree with many leaves like the rose, and that this closes at night, but opens at sunrise, and by noon is completely unfolded; and at evening again it closes by degrees and remains shut at night, and the natives say that it goes to sleep.&quot; The tree mentioned by him was much later identified as the tamarind tree by the botanist, H Bretzl, in his book on the botanical findings of the Alexandrian campaigns.

The observation of a circadian or diurnal process in humans is mentioned in Chinese medical texts dated to around the 13th century, including the &quot;Noon and Midnight Manual&quot; and the &quot;Mnemonic Rhyme to Aid in the Selection of Acu-points According to the Diurnal Cycle, the Day of the Month and the Season of the Year&quot;.

In 1729, French scientist Jean-Jacques d&#x27;Ortous de Mairan conducted the first experiment designed to distinguish an endogenous clock from responses to daily stimuli. He noted that 24-hour patterns in the movement of the leaves of the plant &quot;Mimosa pudica&quot; persisted, even when the plants were kept in constant darkness.

In 1896, Patrick and Gilbert observed that during a prolonged period of sleep deprivation, sleepiness increases and decreases with a period of approximately 24 hours. In 1918, J.S. Szymanski showed that animals are capable of maintaining 24-hour activity patterns in the absence of external cues such as light and changes in temperature.

In the early 20th century, circadian rhythms were noticed in the rhythmic feeding times of bees. Auguste Forel, Ingeborg Beling, and Oskar Wahl conducted numerous experiments to determine whether this rhythm was attributable to an endogenous clock. The existence of circadian rhythm was independently discovered in fruit flies in 1935 by two German zoologists, Hans Kalmus and Erwin Bünning.

In 1954, an important experiment reported by Colin Pittendrigh demonstrated that eclosion (the process of pupa turning into adult) in &quot;Drosophila pseudoobscura&quot; was a circadian behaviour. He demonstrated that while temperature played a vital role in eclosion rhythm, the period of eclosion was delayed but not stopped when temperature was decreased.

The term &quot;circadian&quot; was coined by Franz Halberg in 1959. According to Halberg&#x27;s original definition:
In 1977, the International Committee on Nomenclature of the International Society for Chronobiology formally adopted the definition:
Ron Konopka and Seymour Benzer identified the first clock mutation in &quot;Drosophila&quot; in 1971, naming the gene &quot;period&quot; (&quot;per&quot;) gene, the first discovered genetic determinant of behavioral rhythmicity. The &quot;per&quot; gene was isolated in 1984 by two teams of researchers. Konopka, Jeffrey Hall, Michael Roshbash and their team showed that &quot;per&quot; locus is the centre of the circadian rhythm, and that loss of &quot;per&quot; stops circadian activity. At the same time, Michael W. Young&#x27;s team reported similar effects of &quot;per&quot;, and that the gene covers 7.1-kilobase (kb) interval on the X chromosome and encodes a 4.5-kb poly(A)+ RNA. They went on to discover the key genes and neurones in &quot;Drosophila&quot; circadian system, for which Hall, Rosbash and Young received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 2017.

Joseph Takahashi discovered the first mammalian circadian clock mutation (&quot;clockΔ19&quot;) using mice in 1994. However, recent studies show that deletion of &quot;clock&quot; does not lead to a behavioral phenotype (the animals still have normal circadian rhythms), which questions its importance in rhythm generation.

The first human clock mutation was identified in an extended Utah family by Chris Jones, and genetically characterized by Ying-Hui Fu and Louis Ptacek. Affected individuals are extreme &#x27;morning larks&#x27; with 4-hour advanced sleep and other rhythms. This form of familial advanced sleep phase syndrome is caused by a single amino acid change, S662➔G, in the human PER2 protein.

==Criteria==

To be called circadian, a biological rhythm must meet these three general criteria: 
# The rhythm has an endogenously derived free-running period of time that lasts approximately 24 hours. The rhythm persists in constant conditions, i.e. constant darkness, with a period of about 24 hours. The period of the rhythm in constant conditions is called the free-running period and is denoted by the Greek letter τ (tau). The rationale for this criterion is to distinguish circadian rhythms from simple responses to daily external cues. A rhythm cannot be said to be endogenous unless it has been tested and persists in conditions without external periodic input. In diurnal animals (active during daylight hours), in general τ is slightly greater than 24 hours, whereas, in nocturnal animals (active at night), in general τ is shorter than 24 hours.
# The rhythms are entrainable. The rhythm can be reset by exposure to external stimuli (such as light and heat), a process called entrainment. The external stimulus used to entrain a rhythm is called the zeitgeber, or &quot;time giver&quot;. Travel across time zones illustrates the ability of the human biological clock to adjust to the local time; a person will usually experience jet lag before entrainment of their circadian clock has brought it into sync with local time.
# The rhythms exhibit temperature compensation. In other words, they maintain circadian periodicity over a range of physiological temperatures. Many organisms live at a broad range of temperatures, and differences in thermal energy will affect the kinetics of all molecular processes in their . In order to keep track of time, the organism&#x27;s circadian clock must maintain roughly a 24-hour periodicity despite the changing kinetics, a property known as temperature compensation. The Q10 temperature coefficient is a measure of this compensating effect. If the Q10 coefficient remains approximately 1 as temperature increases, the rhythm is considered to be temperature-compensated.

==Origin==

Circadian rhythms allow organisms to anticipate and prepare for precise and regular environmental changes. They thus enable organisms to make better use of environmental resources (e.g. light and food) compared to those that cannot predict such availability. It has therefore been suggested that circadian rhythms put organisms at a selective advantage in evolutionary terms. However, rhythmicity appears to be as important in regulating and coordinating &quot;internal&quot; metabolic processes, as in coordinating with the &quot;environment&quot;. This is suggested by the maintenance (heritability) of circadian rhythms in fruit flies after several hundred generations in constant laboratory conditions, as well as in creatures in constant darkness in the wild, and by the experimental elimination of behavioral—but not physiological—circadian rhythms in quail.

What drove circadian rhythms to evolve has been an enigmatic question. Previous hypotheses emphasized that photosensitive proteins and circadian rhythms may have originated together in the earliest cells, with the purpose of protecting replicating DNA from high levels of damaging ultraviolet radiation during the daytime. As a result, replication was relegated to the dark. However, evidence for this is lacking: in fact the simplest organisms with a circadian rhythm, the cyanobacteria, do the opposite of this: they divide more in the daytime. Recent studies instead highlight the importance of co-evolution of redox proteins with circadian oscillators in all three domains of life following the Great Oxidation Event approximately 2.3 billion years ago. The current view is that circadian changes in environmental oxygen levels and the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the presence of daylight are likely to have driven a need to evolve circadian rhythms to preempt, and therefore counteract, damaging redox reactions on a daily basis.

The simplest known circadian clocks are bacterial circadian rhythms, exemplified by the prokaryote cyanobacteria. Recent research has demonstrated that the circadian clock of &quot;Synechococcus elongatus&quot; can be reconstituted &quot;in vitro&quot; with just the three proteins (KaiA, KaiB, KaiC) of their central oscillator. This clock has been shown to sustain a 22-hour rhythm over several days upon the addition of ATP. Previous explanations of the prokaryotic circadian timekeeper were dependent upon a DNA transcription/translation feedback mechanism.

A defect in the human homologue of the &quot;Drosophila&quot; &quot;period&quot; gene was identified as a cause of the sleep disorder FASPS (Familial advanced sleep phase syndrome), underscoring the conserved nature of the molecular circadian clock through evolution. Many more genetic components of the biological clock are now known. Their interactions result in an interlocked feedback loop of gene products resulting in periodic fluctuations that the cells of the body interpret as a specific time of the day.

It is now known that the molecular circadian clock can function within a single cell. That is, it is cell-autonomous. This was shown by Gene Block in isolated mollusk basal retinal neurons (BRNs). At the same time, different cells may communicate with each other resulting in a synchronized output of electrical signaling. These may interface with endocrine glands of the brain to result in periodic release of hormones. The receptors for these hormones may be located far across the body and synchronize the peripheral clocks of various organs. Thus, the information of the time of the day as relayed by the eyes travels to the clock in the brain, and, through that, clocks in the rest of the body may be synchronized. This is how the timing of, for example, sleep/wake, body temperature, thirst, and appetite are coordinately controlled by the biological clock.

==Importance in animals==
Circadian rhythmicity is present in the sleeping and feeding patterns of animals, including human beings. There are also clear patterns of core body temperature, brain wave activity, hormone production, cell regeneration, and other biological activities. In addition, photoperiodism, the physiological reaction of organisms to the length of day or night, is vital to both plants and animals, and the circadian system plays a role in the measurement and interpretation of day length. Timely prediction of seasonal periods of weather conditions, food availability, or predator activity is crucial for survival of many species. Although not the only parameter, the changing length of the photoperiod (day length) is the most predictive environmental cue for the seasonal timing of physiology and behavior, most notably for timing of migration, hibernation, and reproduction.

===Effect of circadian disruption===
Mutations or deletions of clock genes in mice have demonstrated the importance of body clocks to ensure the proper timing of cellular/metabolic events; clock-mutant mice are hyperphagic and obese, and have altered glucose metabolism. In mice, deletion of the Rev-ErbA alpha clock gene can result in diet-induced obesity and changes the balance between glucose and lipid utilization, predisposing to diabetes. However, it is not clear whether there is a strong association between clock gene polymorphisms in humans and the susceptibility to develop the metabolic syndrome.

===Effect of light–dark cycle===
The rhythm is linked to the light–dark cycle. Animals, including humans, kept in total darkness for extended periods eventually function with a free-running rhythm. Their sleep cycle is pushed back or forward each &quot;day&quot;, depending on whether their &quot;day&quot;, their endogenous period, is shorter or longer than 24 hours. The environmental cues that reset the rhythms each day are called zeitgebers. Totally blind subterranean mammals (e.g., blind mole rat &quot;Spalax&quot; sp.) are able to maintain their endogenous clocks in the apparent absence of external stimuli. Although they lack image-forming eyes, their photoreceptors (which detect light) are still functional; they do surface periodically as well.

Free-running organisms that normally have one or two consolidated sleep episodes will still have them when in an environment shielded from external cues, but the rhythm is not entrained to the 24-hour light–dark cycle in nature. The sleep–wake rhythm may, in these circumstances, become out of phase with other circadian or ultradian rhythms such as metabolic, hormonal, CNS electrical, or neurotransmitter rhythms.

Recent research has influenced the design of spacecraft environments, as systems that mimic the light–dark cycle have been found to be highly beneficial to astronauts. Light therapy has been trialed as a treatment for sleep disorders.

===Arctic animals===
Norwegian researchers at the University of Tromsø have shown that some Arctic animals (e.g., ptarmigan, reindeer) show circadian rhythms only in the parts of the year that have daily sunrises and sunsets. In one study of reindeer, animals at 70 degrees North showed circadian rhythms in the autumn, winter and spring, but not in the summer. Reindeer on Svalbard at 78 degrees North showed such rhythms only in autumn and spring. The researchers suspect that other Arctic animals as well may not show circadian rhythms in the constant light of summer and the constant dark of winter.

A 2006 study in northern Alaska found that day-living ground squirrels and nocturnal porcupines strictly maintain their circadian rhythms through 82 days and nights of sunshine. The researchers speculate that these two rodents notice that the apparent distance between the sun and the horizon is shortest once a day, and thus have a sufficient signal to entrain (adjust) by.

===Butterflies and moths===
The navigation of the fall migration of the Eastern North American monarch butterfly (&quot;Danaus plexippus&quot;) to their overwintering grounds in central Mexico uses a time-compensated sun compass that depends upon a circadian clock in their antennae. Circadian rhythm is also known to control mating behavioral in certain moth species such as &quot;Spodoptera littoralis&quot;, where females produce specific pheromone that attracts and resets the male circadian rhythm to induce mating at night.

==In plants==
Plant circadian rhythms tell the plant what season it is and when to flower for the best chance of attracting pollinators. Behaviors showing rhythms include leaf movement (Nyctinasty), growth, germination, stomatal/gas exchange, enzyme activity, photosynthetic activity, and fragrance emission, among others. Circadian rhythms occur as a plant entrains to synchronize with the light cycle of its surrounding environment. These rhythms are endogenously generated, self-sustaining and are relatively constant over a range of ambient temperatures. Important features include two interacting transcription-translation feedback loops: proteins containing PAS domains, which facilitate protein-protein interactions; and several photoreceptors that fine-tune the clock to different light conditions. Anticipation of changes in the environment allows appropriate changes in a plant&#x27;s physiological state, conferring an adaptive advantage. A better understanding of plant circadian rhythms has applications in agriculture, such as helping farmers stagger crop harvests to extend crop availability and securing against massive losses due to weather.

Light is the signal by which plants synchronize their internal clocks to their environment and is sensed by a wide variety of photoreceptors. Red and blue light are absorbed through several phytochromes and cryptochromes. Phytochrome A, phyA, is light labile and allows germination and de-etiolation when light is scarce. Phytochromes B–E are more stable with , the main phytochrome in seedlings grown in the light. The cryptochrome (cry) gene is also a light-sensitive component of the circadian clock and is thought to be involved both as a photoreceptor and as part of the clock&#x27;s endogenous pacemaker mechanism. Cryptochromes 1–2 (involved in blue–UVA) help to maintain the period length in the clock through a whole range of light conditions.

The central oscillator generates a self-sustaining rhythm and is driven by two interacting feedback loops that are active at different times of day. The morning loop consists of CCA1 (Circadian and Clock-Associated 1) and LHY (Late Elongated Hypocotyl), which encode closely related MYB transcription factors that regulate circadian rhythms in &quot;Arabidopsis&quot;, as well as PRR 7 and 9 (Pseudo-Response Regulators.) The evening loop consists of GI (Gigantea) and ELF4, both involved in regulation of flowering time genes. When CCA1 and LHY are overexpressed (under constant light or dark conditions), plants become arrhythmic, and mRNA signals reduce, contributing to a negative feedback loop. Gene expression of CCA1 and LHY oscillates and peaks in the early morning, whereas TOC1 gene expression oscillates and peaks in the early evening. While it was previously hypothesised that these three genes model a negative feedback loop in which over-expressed CCA1 and LHY repress TOC1 and over-expressed TOC1 is a positive regulator of CCA1 and LHY, it was shown in 2012 by Andrew Millar and others that TOC1, in fact, serves as a repressor not only of CCA1, LHY, and PRR7 and 9 in the morning loop but also of GI and ELF4 in the evening loop. This finding and further computational modeling of TOC1 gene functions and interactions suggest a reframing of the plant circadian clock as a triple negative-component repressilator model rather than the positive/negative-element feedback loop characterizing the clock in mammals.

In 2018, researchers found that the expression of PRR5 and TOC1 hnRNA nascent transcripts follows the same oscillatory pattern as processed mRNA transcripts rhythmically in &quot;A. thaliana&quot;. LNKs binds to the 5&#x27;region of PRR5 and TOC1 and interacts with RNAP II and other transcription factors. Moreover, RVE8-LNKs interaction enables a permissive histone-methylation pattern (H3K4me3) to be modified and the histone-modification itself parallels the oscillation of clock gene expression.

It has previously been found that matching a plant&#x27;s circadian rhythm to its external environment&#x27;s light and dark cycles has the potential to positively affect the plant. Researchers came to this conclusion by performing experiments on three different varieties of &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot;. One of these varieties had a normal 24-hour circadian cycle. The other two varieties were mutated, one to have a circadian cycle of more than 27 hours, and one to have a shorter than normal circadian cycle of 20 hours.

The &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; with the 24-hour circadian cycle was grown in three different environments. One of these environments had a 20-hour light and dark cycle (10 hours of light and 10 hours of dark), the other had a 24-hour light and dark cycle (12 hours of light and 12 hours of dark),and the final environment had a 28-hour light and dark cycle (14 hours of light and 14 hours of dark). The two mutated plants were grown in both an environment that had a 20-hour light and dark cycle and in an environment that had a 28-hour light and dark cycle. It was found that the variety of &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; with a 24-hour circadian rhythm cycle grew best in an environment that also had a 24-hour light and dark cycle. Overall, it was found that all the varieties of &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; had greater levels of chlorophyll and increased growth in environments whose light and dark cycles matched their circadian rhythm.

Researchers suggested that a reason for this could be that matching an &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; circadian rhythm to its environment could allow the plant to be better prepared for dawn and dusk, and thus be able to better synchronize its processes. In this study, it was also found that the genes that help to control chlorophyll peaked a few hours after dawn. This appears to be consistent with the proposed phenomenon known as metabolic dawn.

According to the metabolic dawn hypothesis, sugars produced by photosynthesis have potential to help regulate the circadian rhythm and certain photosynthetic and metabolic pathways. As the sun rises, more light becomes available, which normally allows more photosynthesis to occur. The sugars produced by photosynthesis repress PRR7. This repression of PRR7 then leads to the increased expression of CCA1. On the other hand, decreased photosynthetic sugar levels increase PRR7 expression and decrease CCA1 expression. This feedback loop between CCA1 and PRR7 is what is proposed to cause metabolic dawn.

==In &quot;Drosophila&quot;==
The molecular mechanism of circadian rhythm and light perception are best understood in &quot;Drosophila&quot;. Clock genes are discovered from &quot;Drosophila&quot;, and they act together with the clock neurones. There are two unique rhythms, one during the process of hatching (called eclosion) from the pupa, and the other during mating. The clock neurones are located in distinct clusters in the central brain. The best-understood clock neurones are the large and small lateral ventral neurons (l-LNvs and s-LNvs) of the optic lobe. These neurones produce pigment dispersing factor (PDF), a neuropeptide that acts as a circadian neuromodulator between different clock neurones.
&quot;Drosophila&quot; circadian rhythm is through a transcription-translation feedback loop. The core clock mechanism consists of two interdependent feedback loops, namely the PER/TIM loop and the CLK/CYC loop. The CLK/CYC loop occurs during the day and initiates the transcription of the &quot;per&quot; and &quot;tim&quot; genes. But their proteins levels remain low until dusk, because during daylight also activates the &quot;doubletime&quot; (&quot;dbt&quot;) gene. DBT protein causes phosphorylation and turnover of monomeric PER proteins. TIM is also phosphorylated by shaggy until sunset. After sunset, DBT disappears, so that PER molecules stably bind to TIM. PER/TIM dimer enters the nucleus several at night, and binds to CLK/CYC dimers. Bound PER completely stops the transcriptional activity of CLK and CYC.

In the early morning, light activates the &quot;cry&quot; gene and its protein CRY causes the breakdown of TIM. Thus PER/TIM dimer dissociates, and the unbound PER becomes unstable. PER undergoes progressive phosphorylation and ultimately degradation. Absence of PER and TIM allows activation of &quot;clk&quot; and &quot;cyc&quot; genes. Thus, the clock is reset to start the next circadian cycle.

===PER-TIM model===
This protein model was developed based on the oscillations of the PER and TIM proteins in the &quot;Drosophila&quot;. It is based on its predecessor, the PER model where it was explained how the PER gene and its protein influence the biological clock. The model includes the formation of a nuclear PER-TIM complex which influences the transcription of the PER and the TIM genes (by providing negative feedback) and the multiple phosphorylation of these two proteins. The circadian oscillations of these two proteins seem to synchronise with the light-dark cycle even if they are not necessarily dependent on it. Both PER and TIM proteins are phosphorylated and after they form the PER-TIM nuclear complex they return inside the nucleus to stop the expression of the PER and TIM mRNA. This inhibition lasts as long as the protein, or the mRNA is not degraded. When this happens, the complex releases the inhibition. Here can also be mentioned that the degradation of the TIM protein is sped up by light.

==In mammals==

The primary circadian clock in mammals is located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (or nuclei) (SCN), a pair of distinct groups of cells located in the hypothalamus. Destruction of the SCN results in the complete absence of a regular sleep–wake rhythm. The SCN receives information about illumination through the eyes. The retina of the eye contains &quot;classical&quot; photoreceptors (&quot;rods&quot; and &quot;cones&quot;), which are used for conventional vision. But the retina also contains specialized ganglion cells that are directly photosensitive, and project directly to the SCN, where they help in the entrainment (synchronization) of this master circadian clock. The proteins involved in the SCN clock are homologous to those found in the fruit fly.

These cells contain the photopigment melanopsin and their signals follow a pathway called the retinohypothalamic tract, leading to the SCN. If cells from the SCN are removed and cultured, they maintain their own rhythm in the absence of external cues.

The SCN takes the information on the lengths of the day and night from the retina, interprets it, and passes it on to the pineal gland, a tiny structure shaped like a pine cone and located on the epithalamus. In response, the pineal secretes the hormone melatonin. Secretion of melatonin peaks at night and ebbs during the day and its presence provides information about night-length.

Several studies have indicated that pineal melatonin feeds back on SCN rhythmicity to modulate circadian patterns of activity and other processes. However, the nature and system-level significance of this feedback are unknown.

The circadian rhythms of humans can be entrained to slightly shorter and longer periods than the Earth&#x27;s 24 hours. Researchers at Harvard have shown that human subjects can at least be entrained to a 23.5-hour cycle and a 24.65-hour cycle.

=== Humans ===

Early research into circadian rhythms suggested that most people preferred a day closer to 25 hours when isolated from external stimuli like daylight and timekeeping. However, this research was faulty because it failed to shield the participants from artificial light. Although subjects were shielded from time cues (like clocks) and daylight, the researchers were not aware of the phase-delaying effects of indoor electric lights. The subjects were allowed to turn on light when they were awake and to turn it off when they wanted to sleep. Electric light in the evening delayed their circadian phase. A more stringent study conducted in 1999 by Harvard University estimated the natural human rhythm to be closer to 24 hours and 11 minutes: much closer to the solar day. Consistent with this research was a more recent study from 2010, which also identified sex differences, with the circadian period for women being slightly shorter (24.09 hours) than for men (24.19 hours). In this study, women tended to wake up earlier than men and exhibit a greater preference for morning activities than men, although the underlying biological mechanisms for these differences are unknown.

=== Biological markers and effects ===
The classic phase markers for measuring the timing of a mammal&#x27;s circadian rhythm are:
* melatonin secretion by the pineal gland,
* core body temperature minimum, and
* plasma level of cortisol.
For temperature studies, subjects must remain awake but calm and semi-reclined in near darkness while their rectal temperatures are taken continuously. Though variation is great among normal chronotypes, the average human adult&#x27;s temperature reaches its minimum at about 5:00 a.m., about two hours before habitual wake time. Baehr et al. found that, in young adults, the daily body temperature minimum occurred at about 04:00 (4 a.m.) for morning types, but at about 06:00 (6 a.m.) for evening types. This minimum occurred at approximately the middle of the eight-hour sleep period for morning types, but closer to waking in evening types.

Melatonin is absent from the system or undetectably low during daytime. Its onset in dim light, &quot;dim-light melatonin onset&quot; (DLMO), at roughly 21:00 (9 p.m.) can be measured in the blood or the saliva. Its major metabolite can also be measured in morning urine. Both DLMO and the midpoint (in time) of the presence of the hormone in the blood or saliva have been used as circadian markers. However, newer research indicates that the melatonin &quot;offset&quot; may be the more reliable marker. Benloucif et al. found that melatonin phase markers were more stable and more highly correlated with the timing of sleep than the core temperature minimum. They found that both sleep offset and melatonin offset are more strongly correlated with phase markers than the onset of sleep. In addition, the declining phase of the melatonin levels is more reliable and stable than the termination of melatonin synthesis.

Other physiological changes that occur according to a circadian rhythm include heart rate and many cellular processes &quot;including oxidative stress, cell metabolism, immune and inflammatory responses, epigenetic modification, hypoxia/hyperoxia response pathways, endoplasmic reticular stress, autophagy, and regulation of the stem cell environment.&quot; In a study of young men, it was found that the heart rate reaches its lowest average rate during sleep, and its highest average rate shortly after waking.

In contradiction to previous studies, it has been found that there is no effect of body temperature on performance on psychological tests. This is likely due to evolutionary pressures for higher cognitive function compared to the other areas of function examined in previous studies.

===Outside the &quot;master clock&quot;===
More-or-less independent circadian rhythms are found in many organs and cells in the body outside the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN), the &quot;master clock&quot;. Indeed, neuroscientist Joseph Takahashi and colleagues stated in a 2013 article that &quot;almost every cell in the body contains a circadian clock&quot;. For example, these clocks, called peripheral oscillators, have been found in the adrenal gland, oesophagus, lungs, liver, pancreas, spleen, thymus, and skin. There is also some evidence that the olfactory bulb and prostate may experience oscillations, at least when cultured.

Though oscillators in the skin respond to light, a systemic influence has not been proven. In addition, many oscillators, such as liver cells, for example, have been shown to respond to inputs other than light, such as feeding.

==Light and the biological clock==
Light resets the biological clock in accordance with the phase response curve (PRC). Depending on the timing, light can advance or delay the circadian rhythm. Both the PRC and the required illuminance vary from species to species, and lower light levels are required to reset the clocks in nocturnal rodents than in humans.

==Enforced longer or shorter cycles==
Various studies on humans have made use of enforced sleep/wake cycles strongly different from 24 hours, such as those conducted by Nathaniel Kleitman in 1938 (28 hours) and Derk-Jan Dijk and Charles Czeisler in the 1990s (20 hours). Because people with a normal (typical) circadian clock cannot entrain to such abnormal day/night rhythms, this is referred to as a forced desynchrony protocol. Under such a protocol, sleep and wake episodes are uncoupled from the body&#x27;s endogenous circadian period, which allows researchers to assess the effects of circadian phase (i.e., the relative timing of the circadian cycle) on aspects of sleep and wakefulness including sleep latency and other functions - both physiological, behavioral, and cognitive.

Studies also show that &quot;Cyclosa turbinata&quot; is unique in that its locomotor and web-building activity cause it to have an exceptionally short-period circadian clock, about 19 hours. When &quot;C. turbinata&quot; spiders are placed into chambers with periods of 19, 24, or 29 hours of evenly split light and dark, none of the spiders exhibited decreased longevity in their own circadian clock. These findings suggest that &quot;C. turbinata&quot; do not have the same costs of extreme desynchronization as do other species of animals.

==Human health==
===Foundation of circadian medicine===
The leading edge of circadian biology research is translation of basic body clock mechanisms into clinical tools, and this is especially relevant to the treatment of cardiovascular disease. Timing of medical treatment in coordination with the body clock, chronotherapeutics, may also benefit patients with hypertension (high blood pressure) by significantly increasing efficacy and reduce drug toxicity or adverse reactions. 3) &quot;Circadian Pharmacology&quot; or drugs targeting the circadian clock mechanism have been shown experimentally in rodent models to significantly reduce the damage due to heart attacks and prevent heart failure. Importantly, for rational translation of the most promising Circadian Medicine therapies to clinical practice, it is imperative that we understand how it helps treat disease in both biological sexes.

=== Causes of disruption to circadian rhythms ===

==== Indoor lighting ====
Lighting requirements for circadian regulation are not simply the same as those for vision; planning of indoor lighting in offices and institutions is beginning to take this into account. Animal studies on the effects of light in laboratory conditions have until recently considered light intensity (irradiance) but not color, which can be shown to &quot;act as an essential regulator of biological timing in more natural settings&quot;.

Blue LED lighting suppresses melatonin production five times more than the orange-yellow high-pressure sodium (HPS) light; a metal halide lamp, which is white light, suppresses melatonin at a rate more than three times greater than HPS. Depression symptoms from long term nighttime light exposure can be undone by returning to a normal cycle.

==== Airline pilots and cabin crew ====
Due to the nature of work of airline pilots, who often cross several time zones and regions of sunlight and darkness in one day, and spend many hours awake both day and night, they are often unable to maintain sleep patterns that correspond to the natural human circadian rhythm; this situation can easily lead to fatigue. The NTSB cites this as contributing to many accidents, and has conducted several research studies in order to find methods of combating fatigue in pilots.

==== Effect of drugs ====
Studies conducted on both animals and humans show major bidirectional relationships between the circadian system and abusive drugs. It is indicated that these abusive drugs affect the central circadian pacemaker. Individuals with substance use disorder display disrupted rhythms. These disrupted rhythms can increase the risk for substance abuse and relapse. It is possible that genetic and/or environmental disturbances to the normal sleep and wake cycle can increase the susceptibility to addiction.

It is difficult to determine if a disturbance in the circadian rhythm is at fault for an increase in prevalence for substance abuse—or if other environmental factors such as stress are to blame.
Changes to the circadian rhythm and sleep occur once an individual begins abusing drugs and alcohol. Once an individual stops using drugs and alcohol, the circadian rhythm continues to be disrupted.

Alcohol consumption disrupts circadian rhythms, with acute intake causing dose-dependent alterations in melatonin and cortisol levels, as well as core body temperature, which normalize the following morning, while chronic alcohol use leads to more severe and persistent disruptions that are associated with alcohol use disorders (AUD) and withdrawal symptoms.

The stabilization of sleep and the circadian rhythm might possibly help to reduce the vulnerability to addiction and reduce the chances of relapse.

Circadian rhythms and clock genes expressed in brain regions outside the suprachiasmatic nucleus may significantly influence the effects produced by drugs such as cocaine. Moreover, genetic manipulations of clock genes profoundly affect cocaine&#x27;s actions.

=== Consequences of disruption to circadian rhythms ===

==== Disruption ====

Disruption to rhythms usually has a negative effect. Many travelers have experienced the condition known as jet lag, with its associated symptoms of fatigue, disorientation and insomnia.

A number of other disorders, such as bipolar disorder, depression, and some sleep disorders such as delayed sleep phase disorder (DSPD), are associated with irregular or pathological functioning of circadian rhythms.

Disruption to rhythms in the longer term is believed to have significant adverse health consequences for peripheral organs outside the brain, in particular in the development or exacerbation of cardiovascular disease.

Studies have shown that maintaining normal sleep and circadian rhythms is important for many aspects of brain and health. A number of studies have also indicated that a power-nap, a short period of sleep during the day, can reduce stress and may improve productivity without any measurable effect on normal circadian rhythms. Circadian rhythms also play a part in the reticular activating system, which is crucial for maintaining a state of consciousness. A reversal in the sleep–wake cycle may be a sign or complication of uremia, azotemia or acute kidney injury. Studies have also helped elucidate how light has a direct effect on human health through its influence on the circadian biology.

==== Relationship with cardiovascular disease ====

One of the first studies to determine how disruption of circadian rhythms causes cardiovascular disease was performed in the Tau hamsters, which have a genetic defect in their circadian clock mechanism. When maintained in a 24-hour light-dark cycle that was &quot;out of sync&quot; with their normal 22 circadian mechanism they developed profound cardiovascular and renal disease; however, when the Tau animals were raised for their entire lifespan on a 22-hour daily light-dark cycle they had a healthy cardiovascular system. The adverse effects of circadian misalignment on human physiology has been studied in the laboratory using a misalignment protocol, and by studying shift workers. Circadian misalignment is associated with many risk factors of cardiovascular disease. High levels of the atherosclerosis biomarker, resistin, have been reported in shift workers indicating the link between circadian misalignment and plaque build up in arteries. Additionally, elevated triacylglyceride levels (molecules used to store excess fatty acids) were observed and contribute to the hardening of arteries, which is associated with cardiovascular diseases including heart attack, stroke and heart disease. Shift work and the resulting circadian misalignment is also associated with hypertension.

==== Obesity and diabetes ====
Obesity and diabetes are associated with lifestyle and genetic factors. Among those factors, disruption of the circadian clockwork and/or misalignment of the circadian timing system with the external environment (e.g., light–dark cycle) can play a role in the development of metabolic disorders.

Shift work or chronic jet lag have profound consequences for circadian and metabolic events in the body. Animals that are forced to eat during their resting period show increased body mass and altered expression of clock and metabolic genes. In humans, shift work that favours irregular eating times is associated with altered insulin sensitivity, diabetes and higher body mass.

==== Cognitive effects ====
Reduced cognitive function has been associated with circadian misalignment. Chronic shift workers display increased rates of operational error, impaired visual-motor performance and processing efficacy which can lead to both a reduction in performance and potential safety issues. Increased risk of dementia is associated with chronic night shift workers compared to day shift workers, particularly for individuals over 50 years old.

== Society and culture ==
In 2017, Jeffrey C. Hall, Michael W. Young, and Michael Rosbash were awarded Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine &quot;for their discoveries of molecular mechanisms controlling the circadian rhythm&quot;.

Circadian rhythms was taken as an example of scientific knowledge being transferred into the public sphere.

== See also ==

* Actigraphy (also known as actimetry)
* ARNTL
* ARNTL2
* Bacterial circadian rhythms
* Circadian rhythm sleep disorders, such as
** Advanced sleep phase disorder
** Delayed sleep phase disorder
** Non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder
* Chronobiology
*Chronodisruption
* CLOCK
* Circasemidian rhythm
* Circaseptan, 7-day biological cycle
* Cryptochrome
* CRY1 and CRY2: the cryptochrome family genes
* Diurnal cycle
* Light effects on circadian rhythm
* Light in school buildings
* PER1, PER2, and PER3: the period family genes
* Photosensitive ganglion cell: part of the eye which is involved in regulating circadian rhythm.
* Polyphasic sleep
* Rev-ErbA alpha
* Segmented sleep
* Sleep architecture (sleep in humans)
* Sleep in non-human animals
* Stefania Follini
* Ultradian rhythm
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="2" end="18" title="Circadian rhythm" label="circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="26" end="41" title="Circadian rhythm" label="circadian cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q285982" start="190" end="200" title="Endogeny (biology)" label="endogenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345068" start="238" end="247" title="Entrainment (chronobiology)" label="entrained"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121352" start="306" end="321" title="circadian clock" label="circadian clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="520" end="527" title="animals" label="animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="529" end="535" title="plants" label="plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="537" end="542" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="547" end="560" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="697" end="702" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="703" end="742" title="Circadian rhythm" label="&amp;#x27;, meaning &amp;quot;around&amp;quot;, and"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="831" end="846" title="Circadian rhythm" label="diurnal rhythms"/>
<link wikidata="Q185962" start="1081" end="1090" title="zeitgeber" label="zeitgeber"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1098" end="1104" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="1162" end="1167" title="redox" label="redox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712607" start="1251" end="1282" title="circadian rhythm sleep disorder" label="circadian rhythm sleep disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q160362" start="1366" end="1378" title="Theophrastus" label="Theophrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q324140" start="1450" end="1462" title="Androsthenes of Thasos" label="Androsthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q849424" start="1466" end="1485" title="Sea captain" label="ship&amp;#x27;s captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="1500" end="1519" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q34687" start="1664" end="1668" title="rose" label="rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q80235" start="1936" end="1944" title="tamarind" label="tamarind"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="2122" end="2143" title="History of Chinese medicine" label="Chinese medical texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q55028639" start="2410" end="2446" title="Jean-Jacques d&amp;#x27;Ortous de Mairan" label="Jean-Jacques d&amp;#x27;Ortous de Mairan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148532" start="2635" end="2648" title="Mimosa pudica" label="Mimosa pudica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364801" start="2792" end="2809" title="sleep deprivation" label="sleep deprivation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2896" end="2910" title="J.S. Szymanski" label="J.S. Szymanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q22530" start="3156" end="3169" title="Auguste Forel" label="Auguste Forel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198546" start="3171" end="3186" title="Ingeborg Beling" label="Ingeborg Beling"/>
<link wikidata="Q130888" start="3374" end="3385" title="Drosophila melanogaster" label="fruit flies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3420" end="3431" title="Hans Kalmus" label="Hans Kalmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q86872" start="3436" end="3449" title="Erwin Bünning" label="Erwin Bünning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108635" start="3497" end="3514" title="Colin Pittendrigh" label="Colin Pittendrigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="3533" end="3541" title="eclosion" label="eclosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="3558" end="3562" title="pupa" label="pupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314678" start="3592" end="3616" title="Drosophila pseudoobscura" label="Drosophila pseudoobscura"/>
<link wikidata="Q639831" start="3858" end="3871" title="Franz Halberg" label="Franz Halberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3990" end="4029" title="International Society for Chronobiology" label="International Society for Chronobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364042" start="4063" end="4074" title="Ron Konopka" label="Ron Konopka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975294" start="4079" end="4093" title="Seymour Benzer" label="Seymour Benzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168611" start="4187" end="4193" title="period (gene)" label="period"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="4896" end="4938" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287342" start="4941" end="4957" title="Joseph Takahashi" label="Joseph Takahashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489550" start="5457" end="5470" title="Lark (person)" label="morning larks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125121" start="5536" end="5574" title="familial advanced sleep phase syndrome" label="familial advanced sleep phase syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="5597" end="5607" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q285982" start="6227" end="6237" title="endogenous" label="endogenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345068" start="6641" end="6652" title="Entrainment (chronobiology)" label="entrainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q185962" start="6715" end="6724" title="zeitgeber" label="zeitgeber"/>
<link wikidata="Q12143" start="6767" end="6776" title="time zone" label="time zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192579" start="6894" end="6901" title="jet lag" label="jet lag"/>
<link wikidata="Q209082" start="7236" end="7244" title="Chemical kinetics" label="kinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q129609" start="7476" end="7503" title="Q10 (temperature coefficient)" label="Q10 temperature coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072584" start="8546" end="8551" title="quail" label="quail"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="8835" end="8846" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="9168" end="9173" title="redox" label="redox"/>
<link wikidata="Q837561" start="9253" end="9274" title="Great Oxidation Event" label="Great Oxidation Event"/>
<link wikidata="Q424361" start="9408" end="9431" title="reactive oxygen species" label="reactive oxygen species"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="9574" end="9589" title="Redox" label="redox reactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121352" start="9628" end="9643" title="circadian clock" label="circadian clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454009" start="9649" end="9676" title="bacterial circadian rhythms" label="bacterial circadian rhythms"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="9708" end="9721" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q18845307" start="9790" end="9813" title="Synechococcus elongatus" label="Synechococcus elongatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24772823" start="9892" end="9896" title="KaiA" label="KaiA"/>
<link wikidata="Q30633982" start="9898" end="9902" title="KaiB" label="KaiB"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155036" start="9904" end="9908" title="KaiC" label="KaiC"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="10032" end="10035" title="Adenosine triphosphate" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="10066" end="10077" title="prokaryotic" label="prokaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q312154" start="10217" end="10227" title="Drosophila" label="Drosophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168611" start="10240" end="10246" title="period (gene)" label="period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125121" start="10313" end="10351" title="Familial advanced sleep phase syndrome" label="Familial advanced sleep phase syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531151" start="10823" end="10833" title="Gene Block" label="Gene Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q324663" start="11035" end="11050" title="endocrine gland" label="endocrine gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q430024" start="11296" end="11299" title="Human eye" label="eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q60442" start="11740" end="11750" title="Neural oscillation" label="brain wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="11761" end="11768" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q259028" start="11846" end="11860" title="photoperiodism" label="photoperiodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="12488" end="12496" title="Mutation" label="Mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q656732" start="12501" end="12510" title="Deletion (genetics)" label="deletions"/>
<link wikidata="Q14908739" start="12514" end="12519" title="CLOCK" label="clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q653267" start="12662" end="12673" title="Polyphagia" label="hyperphagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15323365" start="12747" end="12761" title="Rev-ErbA alpha" label="Rev-ErbA alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="12800" end="12807" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="12840" end="12847" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="12887" end="12895" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499626" start="13239" end="13251" title="free-running sleep" label="free-running"/>
<link wikidata="Q285982" start="13376" end="13386" title="endogenous" label="endogenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q14153702" start="13551" end="13565" title="blind mole rat" label="blind mole rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q748049" start="13725" end="13739" title="Photoreceptor cell" label="photoreceptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q377893" start="14146" end="14155" title="ultradian" label="ultradian"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="14212" end="14228" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q752783" start="14284" end="14294" title="human spaceflight" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q243570" start="14407" end="14420" title="Light therapy" label="Light therapy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14443" end="14472" title="Circadian rhythm sleep disorder#Treatment" label="treatment for sleep disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q279724" start="14525" end="14545" title="University of Tromsø" label="University of Tromsø"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14567" end="14581" title="Arctic#Flora and fauna" label="Arctic animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q205930" start="14589" end="14598" title="Rock Ptarmigan" label="ptarmigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="14600" end="14608" title="reindeer" label="reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255254" start="14738" end="14754" title="70th parallel north" label="70 degrees North"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="14849" end="14857" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255460" start="14861" end="14877" title="78th parallel north" label="78 degrees North"/>
<link wikidata="Q389250" start="15134" end="15149" title="ground squirrel" label="ground squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223829" start="15165" end="15174" title="porcupine" label="porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q212398" start="15528" end="15568" title="monarch butterfly" label="Eastern North American monarch butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453196" start="15838" end="15859" title="Spodoptera littoralis" label="Spodoptera littoralis"/>
<link wikidata="Q167377" start="15898" end="15907" title="pheromone" label="pheromone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917842" start="16173" end="16183" title="Nyctinasty" label="Nyctinasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381543" start="16230" end="16245" title="enzyme activity" label="enzyme activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="16247" end="16261" title="Photosynthesis" label="photosynthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q285982" start="16440" end="16450" title="endogenous" label="endogenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064141" start="16589" end="16629" title="Transcription translation feedback loop" label="transcription-translation feedback loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="16631" end="16638" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q24779306" start="17337" end="17348" title="phytochrome" label="phytochrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754737" start="17354" end="17366" title="cryptochrome" label="cryptochrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326554" start="18079" end="18083" title="CCA1" label="CCA1"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790445" start="18123" end="18126" title="LHY" label="LHY"/>
<link wikidata="Q18029694" start="18184" end="18209" title="MYB (gene)" label="MYB transcription factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q30692852" start="18281" end="18292" title="Pseudo-response regulator" label="PRR 7 and 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q62527" start="18577" end="18594" title="negative feedback" label="negative feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156633" start="18684" end="18693" title="TOC1 gene" label="TOC1 gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156633" start="19199" end="19208" title="TOC1 gene" label="TOC1 gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q933128" start="19316" end="19329" title="repressilator" label="repressilator"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="20214" end="20234" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="Arabidopsis thaliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q43177" start="21290" end="21301" title="chlorophyll" label="chlorophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="22768" end="22776" title="eclosion" label="eclosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340030" start="23006" end="23016" title="Optic lobe (arthropods)" label="optic lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121352" start="25438" end="25453" title="circadian clock" label="circadian clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="25457" end="25463" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156516" start="25483" end="25506" title="suprachiasmatic nucleus" label="suprachiasmatic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="25555" end="25560" title="cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="25576" end="25588" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="25747" end="25753" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q748049" start="25796" end="25810" title="photoreceptor cell" label="photoreceptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q505544" start="25818" end="25822" title="Rod cell" label="rods"/>
<link wikidata="Q147298" start="25839" end="25844" title="Cone cell" label="cones"/>
<link wikidata="Q934475" start="25934" end="25947" title="Photosensitive ganglion cell" label="ganglion cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q92594" start="26226" end="26236" title="melanopsin" label="melanopsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918596" start="26283" end="26307" title="retinohypothalamic tract" label="retinohypothalamic tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q198654" start="26564" end="26576" title="pineal gland" label="pineal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22710" start="26609" end="26618" title="pine cone" label="pine cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q849277" start="26638" end="26649" title="epithalamus" label="epithalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180912" start="26696" end="26705" title="melatonin" label="melatonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="27965" end="27983" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q192854" start="28079" end="28088" title="Solar time" label="solar day"/>
<link wikidata="Q180912" start="28632" end="28641" title="melatonin" label="melatonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q198654" start="28659" end="28671" title="pineal gland" label="pineal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16679262" start="28675" end="28696" title="Human body temperature" label="core body temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="28728" end="28736" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q184869" start="28929" end="28939" title="chronotype" label="chronotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q407595" start="29606" end="29616" title="metabolite" label="metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073121" start="30383" end="30393" title="heart rate" label="heart rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q898814" start="30438" end="30454" title="oxidative stress" label="oxidative stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="30456" end="30471" title="cell metabolism" label="cell metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q26939" start="30508" end="30518" title="epigenetics" label="epigenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="30533" end="30540" title="Hypoxia (medical)" label="hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958429" start="30541" end="30550" title="hyperoxia" label="hyperoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14633900" start="30570" end="30598" title="Unfolded protein response" label="endoplasmic reticular stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q288322" start="30600" end="30609" title="autophagy" label="autophagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48196" start="30633" end="30642" title="stem cell" label="stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q173710" start="31559" end="31569" title="oesophagus" label="oesophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="31571" end="31576" title="lungs" label="lungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="31578" end="31583" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q9618" start="31585" end="31593" title="pancreas" label="pancreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9371" start="31595" end="31601" title="spleen" label="spleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q163987" start="31603" end="31609" title="thymus" label="thymus"/>
<link wikidata="Q827450" start="31870" end="31881" title="liver cells" label="liver cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180960" start="32061" end="32081" title="phase response curve" label="phase response curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q194411" start="32193" end="32204" title="illuminance" label="illuminance"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="32294" end="32303" title="Nocturnality" label="nocturnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q967413" start="32498" end="32516" title="Nathaniel Kleitman" label="Nathaniel Kleitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150598" start="32540" end="32553" title="Derk-Jan Dijk" label="Derk-Jan Dijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076617" start="32558" end="32574" title="Charles Czeisler" label="Charles Czeisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121352" start="32639" end="32654" title="circadian clock" label="circadian clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539763" start="33034" end="33047" title="sleep latency" label="sleep latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q608783" start="33147" end="33164" title="Cyclosa turbinata" label="Cyclosa turbinata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114262" start="33973" end="33991" title="Chronotherapy (treatment scheduling)" label="chronotherapeutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q830654" start="34939" end="34949" title="irradiance" label="irradiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q180912" start="35107" end="35116" title="melatonin" label="melatonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q743231" start="35167" end="35199" title="Sodium-vapor lamp" label="high-pressure sodium (HPS) light"/>
<link wikidata="Q853887" start="35203" end="35220" title="metal halide lamp" label="metal halide lamp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35315" end="35334" title="Biology of depression#Circadian rhythm" label="Depression symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="35776" end="35783" title="fatigue (physical)" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053145" start="35789" end="35793" title="NTSB" label="NTSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="36865" end="36872" title="Alcohol (drug)" label="Alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q14908739" start="37397" end="37402" title="CLOCK" label="clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156516" start="37448" end="37471" title="suprachiasmatic nucleus" label="suprachiasmatic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="37538" end="37545" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192579" start="37824" end="37831" title="jet lag" label="jet lag"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="37865" end="37872" title="fatigue (physical)" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937869" start="37874" end="37888" title="disorientation" label="disorientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="37893" end="37901" title="insomnia" label="insomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="37941" end="37957" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="37959" end="37969" title="Major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q177190" start="37980" end="37994" title="sleep disorder" label="sleep disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470530" start="38004" end="38032" title="delayed sleep phase disorder" label="delayed sleep phase disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142393" start="38510" end="38519" title="power-nap" label="power-nap"/>
<link wikidata="Q750588" start="38709" end="38736" title="reticular activating system" label="reticular activating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365776" start="38865" end="38871" title="uremia" label="uremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q794072" start="38873" end="38881" title="azotemia" label="azotemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q424337" start="38885" end="38904" title="acute kidney injury" label="acute kidney injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546168" start="38957" end="38970" title="Light effects on circadian rhythm" label="direct effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="40413" end="40420" title="Obesity" label="Obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="40425" end="40433" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068683" start="40710" end="40720" title="Shift work" label="Shift work"/>
<link wikidata="Q192579" start="40732" end="40739" title="jet lag" label="jet lag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686435" start="41588" end="41603" title="Jeffrey C. Hall" label="Jeffrey C. Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929672" start="41605" end="41621" title="Michael W. Young" label="Michael W. Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297741" start="41627" end="41642" title="Michael Rosbash" label="Michael Rosbash"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="41656" end="41693" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422201" start="41914" end="41924" title="Actigraphy" label="Actigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18016440" start="41953" end="41958" title="ARNTL" label="ARNTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q15323879" start="41961" end="41967" title="ARNTL2" label="ARNTL2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454009" start="41970" end="41997" title="Bacterial circadian rhythms" label="Bacterial circadian rhythms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712607" start="42000" end="42032" title="Circadian rhythm sleep disorders" label="Circadian rhythm sleep disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125121" start="42045" end="42074" title="Advanced sleep phase disorder" label="Advanced sleep phase disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470530" start="42078" end="42106" title="Delayed sleep phase disorder" label="Delayed sleep phase disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773215" start="42110" end="42141" title="Non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder" label="Non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q506874" start="42144" end="42157" title="Chronobiology" label="Chronobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q120629938" start="42159" end="42175" title="Chronodisruption" label="Chronodisruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q14908739" start="42178" end="42183" title="CLOCK" label="CLOCK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121355" start="42186" end="42206" title="Circasemidian rhythm" label="Circasemidian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121356" start="42209" end="42220" title="Circaseptan" label="Circaseptan"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754737" start="42247" end="42259" title="Cryptochrome" label="Cryptochrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754737" start="42262" end="42266" title="CRY1" label="CRY1"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754737" start="42271" end="42275" title="CRY2" label="CRY2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469559" start="42309" end="42322" title="Diurnal cycle" label="Diurnal cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546168" start="42325" end="42358" title="Light effects on circadian rhythm" label="Light effects on circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546189" start="42361" end="42386" title="Light in school buildings" label="Light in school buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326762" start="42389" end="42393" title="PER1" label="PER1"/>
<link wikidata="Q15323251" start="42395" end="42399" title="PER2" label="PER2"/>
<link wikidata="Q15323153" start="42405" end="42409" title="PER3" label="PER3"/>
<link wikidata="Q934475" start="42437" end="42465" title="Photosensitive ganglion cell" label="Photosensitive ganglion cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q939906" start="42535" end="42551" title="Polyphasic sleep" label="Polyphasic sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q15323365" start="42554" end="42568" title="Rev-ErbA alpha" label="Rev-ErbA alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q939906" start="42571" end="42586" title="Segmented sleep" label="Segmented sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q35831" start="42589" end="42607" title="Sleep architecture" label="Sleep architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318283" start="42628" end="42654" title="Sleep in non-human animals" label="Sleep in non-human animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606366" start="42657" end="42673" title="Stefania Follini" label="Stefania Follini"/>
<link wikidata="Q377893" start="42676" end="42692" title="Ultradian rhythm" label="Ultradian rhythm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56566" wikidata="Q506874" url="?curid=56566" title="Chronobiology">
<text>Chronobiology is a field of biology that examines timing processes, including periodic (cyclic) phenomena in living organisms, such as their adaptation to solar- and lunar-related rhythms. These cycles are known as biological rhythms. Chronobiology comes from the ancient Greek (&quot;chrónos&quot;, meaning &quot;time&quot;), and biology, which pertains to the study, or science, of life. The related terms &quot;chronomics&quot; and &quot;chronome&quot; have been used in some cases to describe either the molecular mechanisms involved in chronobiological phenomena or the more quantitative aspects of chronobiology, particularly where comparison of cycles between organisms is required.

Chronobiological studies include but are not limited to comparative anatomy, physiology, genetics, molecular biology and behavior of organisms related to their biological rhythms. Other aspects include epigenetics, development, reproduction, ecology and evolution.

==The subject==
Chronobiology studies variations of the timing and duration of biological activity in living organisms which occur for many essential biological processes. These occur (a) in animals (eating, sleeping, mating, hibernating, migration, cellular regeneration, etc.), (b) in plants (leaf movements, photosynthetic reactions, etc.), and in microbial organisms such as fungi and protozoa. They have even been found in bacteria, especially among the cyanobacteria (aka blue-green algae, see bacterial circadian rhythms). The best studied rhythm in chronobiology is the circadian rhythm, a roughly 24-hour cycle shown by physiological processes in all these organisms. The term &quot;circadian&quot; comes from the Latin &quot;circa&quot;, meaning &quot;around&quot; and &quot;dies&quot;, &quot;day&quot;, meaning &quot;approximately a day.&quot; It is regulated by circadian clocks.

The circadian rhythm can further be broken down into routine cycles during the 24-hour day:
* Diurnal, which describes organisms active during daytime
* Nocturnal, which describes organisms active in the night
* Crepuscular, which describes animals primarily active during the dawn and dusk hours (ex: domestic cats, white-tailed deer, some bats)

While circadian rhythms are defined as regulated by endogenous processes, other biological cycles may be regulated by exogenous signals. In some cases, multi-trophic systems may exhibit rhythms driven by the circadian clock of one of the members (which may also be influenced or reset by external factors). The endogenous plant cycles may regulate the activity of the bacterium by controlling availability of plant-produced photosynthate.

Many other important cycles are also studied, including:
* Infradian rhythms, which are cycles longer than a day. Examples include circannual or annual cycles that govern migration or reproduction cycles in many plants and animals, or the human menstrual cycle.
* Ultradian rhythms, which are cycles shorter than 24 hours, such as the 90-minute REM cycle, the 4-hour nasal cycle, or the 3-hour cycle of growth hormone production.
* Tidal rhythms, commonly observed in marine life, which follow the roughly 12.4-hour transition from high to low tide and back.
* Lunar rhythms, which follow the lunar month (29.5 days). They are relevant e.g. for marine life, as the level of the tides is modulated across the lunar cycle. 
* Gene oscillations – some genes are expressed more during certain hours of the day than during other hours.

Within each cycle, the time period during which the process is more active is called the &quot;&quot;. When the process is less active, the cycle is in its &quot;&quot; or &quot;trough&quot; phase. The particular moment of highest activity is the &quot;peak&quot; or &quot;maximum&quot;; the lowest point is the &quot;nadir&quot;.

==History==
A circadian cycle was first observed in the 18th century in the movement of plant leaves by the French scientist Jean-Jacques d&#x27;Ortous de Mairan. In 1751 Swedish botanist and naturalist Carl Linnaeus (Carl von Linné) designed a flower clock using certain species of flowering plants. By arranging the selected species in a circular pattern, he designed a clock that indicated the time of day by the flowers that were open at each given hour. For example, among members of the daisy family, he used the hawk&#x27;s beard plant which opened its flowers at 6:30 am and the hawkbit which did not open its flowers until 7 am.

The 1960 symposium at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory laid the groundwork for the field of chronobiology.

It was also in 1960 that Patricia DeCoursey invented the phase response curve, one of the major tools used in the field since.

Franz Halberg of the University of Minnesota, who coined the word &quot;circadian&quot;, is widely considered the &quot;father of American chronobiology.&quot; However, it was Colin Pittendrigh and not Halberg who was elected to lead the &quot;Society for Research in Biological Rhythms&quot; in the 1970s. Halberg wanted more emphasis on the human and medical issues while Pittendrigh had his background more in evolution and ecology. With Pittendrigh as leader, the Society members did basic research on all types of organisms, plants as well as animals. More recently it has been difficult to get funding for such research on any other organisms than mice, rats, humans and fruit flies.

==The role of Retinal Ganglion cells==
===Melanopsin as a circadian photopigment===
In 2002, Hattar and his colleagues showed that melanopsin plays a key role in a variety of photic responses, including pupillary light reflex, and synchronization of the biological clock to daily light-dark cycles. He also described the role of melanopsin in ipRGCs. Using a rat melanopsin gene, a melanopsin-specific antibody, and fluorescent immunocytochemistry, the team concluded that melanopsin is expressed in some RGCs. Using a Beta-galactosidase assay, they found that these RGC axons exit the eyes together with the optic nerve and project to the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the primary circadian pacemaker in mammals. They also demonstrated that the RGCs containing melanopsin were intrinsically photosensitive. Hattar concluded that melanopsin is the photopigment in a small subset of RGCs that contributes to the intrinsic photosensitivity of these cells and is involved in their non-image forming functions, such as photic entrainment and pupillary light reflex.

===Melanopsin cells relay inputs from rods and cones===

Hattar, armed with the knowledge that melanopsin was the photopigment responsible for the photosensitivity of ipRGCs, set out to study the exact role of the ipRGC in photoentrainment. In 2008, Hattar and his research team transplanted diphtheria toxin genes into the mouse melanopsin gene locus to create mutant mice that lacked ipRGCs. The research team found that while the mutants had little difficulty identifying visual targets, they could not entrain to light-dark cycles. These results led Hattar and his team to conclude that ipRGCs do not affect image-forming vision, but significantly affect non-image forming functions such as photoentrainment.

===Distinct ipRGCs===
Further research has shown that ipRGCs project to different brain nuclei to control both non-image forming and image forming functions. These brain regions include the SCN, where input from ipRGCs is necessary to photoentrain circadian rhythms, and the olivary pretectal nucleus (OPN), where input from ipRGCs control the pupillary light reflex. Hattar and colleagues conducted research that demonstrated that ipRGCs project to hypothalamic, thalamic, stratal, brainstem and limbic structures. Although ipRGCs were initially viewed as a uniform population, further research revealed that there are several subtypes with distinct morphology and physiology. Since 2011, Hattar&#x27;s laboratory has contributed to these findings and has successfully distinguished subtypes of ipRGCs.

===Diversity of ipRGCs===
Hattar and colleges utilized Cre-based strategies for labeling ipRGCs to reveal that there are at least five ipRGC subtypes that project to a number of central targets. Five classes of ipRGCs, M1 through M5, have been characterized to date in rodents. These classes differ in morphology, dendritic localization, melanopsin content, electrophysiological profiles, and projections.

===Diversity in M1 cells===
Hattar and his co-workers discovered that, even among the subtypes of ipRGC, there can be designated sets that differentially control circadian versus pupillary behavior. In experiments with M1 ipRGCs, they discovered that the transcription factor Brn3b is expressed by M1 ipRGCs that target the OPN, but not by ones that target the SCN. Using this knowledge, they designed an experiment to cross Melanopsin-Cre mice with mice that conditionally expressed a toxin from the Brn3b locus. This allowed them to selectively ablate only the OPN projecting M1 ipRGCS, resulting in a loss of pupil reflexes. However, this did not impair circadian photo entrainment. This demonstrated that the M1 ipRGC consist of molecularly distinct subpopulations that innervate different brain regions and execute specific light-induced functions. This isolation of a &#x27;labeled line&#x27; consisting of differing molecular and functional properties in a highly specific ipRGC subtype was an important first for the field. It also underscored the extent to which molecular signatures can be used to distinguish between RGC populations that would otherwise appear the same, which in turn facilitates further investigation into their specific contributions to visual processing.

==Psychological impact of light exposure==
Previous studies in circadian biology have established that exposure to light during abnormal hours leads to sleep deprivation and disruption of the circadian system, which affect mood and cognitive functioning. While this indirect relationship had been corroborated, not much work had been done to examine whether there was a direct relationship between irregular light exposure, aberrant mood, cognitive function, normal sleep patterns and circadian oscillations. In a study published in 2012, the Hattar Laboratory was able to show that deviant light cycles directly induce depression-like symptoms and lead to impaired learning in mice, independent of sleep and circadian oscillations.

===Effect on mood===
ipRGCs project to areas of the brain that are important for regulating circadian rhythmicity and sleep, most notably the SCN, subparaventricular nucleus, and the ventrolateral preoptic area. In addition, ipRGCs transmit information to many areas in the limbic system, which is strongly tied to emotion and memory. To examine the relationship between deviant light exposure and behavior, Hattar and his colleagues studied mice exposed to alternating 3.5-hour light and dark periods (T7 mice) and compared them with mice exposed to alternating 12-hour light and dark periods (T24 mice). Compared to a T24 cycle, the T7 mice got the same amount of total sleep and their circadian expression of PER2, an element of the SCN pacemaker, was not disrupted. Through the T7 cycle, the mice were exposed to light at all circadian phases. Light pulses presented at night lead to expression of the transcription factor c-Fos in the amygdala, lateral habenula, and subparaventricular nucleus further implicating light&#x27;s possible influence on mood and other cognitive functions.

Mice subjected to the T7 cycle exhibited depression-like symptoms, exhibiting decreased preference for sucrose (sucrose anhedonia) and exhibiting more immobility than their T24 counterparts in the forced swim test (FST). Additionally, T7 mice maintained rhythmicity in serum corticosterone, however the levels were elevated compared to the T24 mice, a trend that is associated with depression. Chronic administration of the antidepressant Fluoxetine lowered corticosterone levels in T7 mice and reduced depression-like behavior while leaving their circadian rhythms unaffected.

===Effect on learning===
The hippocampus is a structure in the limbic system that receives projections from ipRGCs. It is required for the consolidation of short-term memories into long-term memories as well as spatial orientation and navigation. Depression and heightened serum corticosterone levels are linked to impaired hippocampal learning. Hattar and his team analyzed the T7 mice in the Morris water maze (MWM), a spatial learning task that places a mouse in a small pool of water and tests the mouse&#x27;s ability to locate and remember the location of a rescue platform located just below the waterline. Compared to the T24 mice, the T7 mice took longer to find the platform in subsequent trials and did not exhibit a preference for the quadrant containing the platform. In addition, T7 mice exhibited impaired hippocampal long-term potentiation (LTP) when subjected to theta burst stimulation (TBS). Recognition memory was also affected, with T7 mice failing to show preference for novel objects in the novel object recognition test.

===Necessity of ipRGCs===
Mice without (Opn4aDTA/aDTA mice) are not susceptible to the negative effects of an aberrant light cycle, indicating that light information transmitted through these cells plays an important role in regulation of mood and cognitive functions such as learning and memory.

==Research developments==
;Light and melatonin
More recently, light therapy and melatonin administration have been explored by Alfred J. Lewy (OHSU), Josephine Arendt (University of Surrey, UK) and other researchers as a means to reset animal and human circadian rhythms. Additionally, the presence of low-level light at night accelerates circadian re-entrainment of hamsters of all ages by 50%; this is thought to be related to simulation of moonlight.

In the second half of 20th century, substantial contributions and formalizations have been made by Europeans such as Jürgen Aschoff and Colin Pittendrigh, who pursued different but complementary views on the phenomenon of entrainment of the circadian system by light (parametric, continuous, tonic, gradual vs. nonparametric, discrete, phasic, instantaneous, respectively).

;Chronotypes
Humans can have a propensity to be morning people or evening people; these behavioral preferences are called chronotypes for which there are various assessment questionnaires and biological marker correlations.

;Mealtimes
There is also a food-entrainable biological clock, which is not confined to the suprachiasmatic nucleus. The location of this clock has been disputed. Working with mice, however, Fuller &quot;et al.&quot; concluded that the food-entrainable clock seems to be located in the dorsomedial hypothalamus. During restricted feeding, it takes over control of such functions as activity timing, increasing the chances of the animal successfully locating food resources.

;Diurnal patterns on the Internet
In 2018 a study published in PLoS ONE showed how 73 psychometric indicators measured on Twitter Content follow a diurnal pattern.
A followup study appeared on Chronobiology International in 2021 showed that these patterns were not disrupted by the 2020 UK lockdown.

;Modulators of circadian rhythms
In 2021, scientists reported the development of a light-responsive days-lasting modulator of circadian rhythms of tissues via Ck1 inhibition. Such modulators may be useful for chronobiology research and repair of organs that are &quot;out of sync&quot;.

==Other fields==
Chronobiology is an interdisciplinary field of investigation. It interacts with medical and other research fields such as sleep medicine, endocrinology, geriatrics, sports medicine, space medicine, psychiatry and photoperiodism.

==See also==
* Bacterial circadian rhythms
* Biological clock (aging)
* Circadian rhythm
* Circannual cycle
* Circaseptan, 7-day biological cycle
* Familial sleep traits
* Frank A. Brown, Jr.
* Hitoshi Okamura
* Light effects on circadian rhythm
* Photoperiodism
* Suprachiasmatic nucleus
* Scotobiology
* Time perception
* Malcolm von Schantz

==References==
==Further reading==

* Hastings, Michael, &quot;The brain, circadian rhythms, and clock genes&quot;. Clinical review&quot; &quot;BMJ&quot; 1998;317:1704-1707 19 December.
* U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, &quot;&quot;Biological Rhythms: Implications for the Worker&quot;. U.S. Government Printing Office, September 1991. Washington, DC. OTA-BA-463. NTIS PB92-117589
* Ashikari, M., Higuchi, S., Ishikawa, F., and Tsunetsugu, Y., &quot;Interdisciplinary Symposium on &#x27;Human Beings and Environments&#x27;: Approaches from Biological Anthropology, Social Anthropology and Developmental Psychology&quot;. Sunday, 25 August 2002
*&quot;Biorhythm experiment management plan&quot;, NASA, Ames Research Center. Moffett Field, 1983.
* &quot;Biological Rhythms and Human Adaptation to the Environment&quot;. US Army Medical Research and Materiel Command (AMRMC), US Army Research Institute of Environmental Medicine.
* Ebert, D., K.P. Ebmeier, T. Rechlin, and W.P. Kaschka, &quot;Biological Rhythms and Behavior&quot;&quot;, &quot;Advances in Biological Psychiatry&quot;. ISSN 0378-7354
* Horne, J.A. (Jim) &amp; Östberg, Olov (1976). A Self-Assessment Questionnaire to determine Morningness-Eveningness in Human Circadian Rhythms. International Journal of Chronobiology, 4, 97–110.
* Roenneberg, Till, Cologne (2010). Wie wir ticken – Die Bedeutung der Chronobiologie für unser Leben, Dumont, .
* The Linnean Society of London
==External links==
*Halberg Chronobiology Center at the University of Minnesota, founded by Franz Halberg, the &quot;Father of Chronobiology&quot;
*The University of Virginia offers an online tutorial on chronobiology.
*See the Science Museum of Virginia publication Can plants tell time?
*The University of Manchester has an informative Biological Clock Web Site
*S Ertel&#x27;s analysis of Chizhevsky&#x27;s work</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q506874" start="0" end="13" title="Chronobiology" label="Chronobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="28" end="35" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="50" end="66" title="Time" label="timing processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="155" end="160" title="sun" label="solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="166" end="171" title="moon" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="331" end="338" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="384" end="388" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="508" end="517" title="molecular" label="molecular"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="759" end="766" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="768" end="778" title="physiology" label="physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="780" end="788" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="790" end="807" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="812" end="820" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848483" start="851" end="868" title="biological rhythm" label="biological rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q26939" start="893" end="904" title="epigenetics" label="epigenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="1268" end="1282" title="photosynthetic" label="photosynthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="1385" end="1393" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="1416" end="1429" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454009" start="1457" end="1484" title="bacterial circadian rhythms" label="bacterial circadian rhythms"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="1535" end="1551" title="circadian rhythm" label="circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1680" end="1685" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121352" start="1831" end="1846" title="circadian clock" label="circadian clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284186" start="1944" end="1951" title="Diurnality" label="Diurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="2003" end="2012" title="Nocturnal" label="Nocturnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255068" start="2062" end="2073" title="Crepuscular" label="Crepuscular"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="2204" end="2221" title="circadian rhythms" label="circadian rhythms"/>
<link wikidata="Q285982" start="2250" end="2260" title="endogenous" label="endogenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662652" start="2697" end="2713" title="Infradian rhythm" label="Infradian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q30674010" start="2769" end="2779" title="Circannual Cycle" label="circannual"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="2883" end="2898" title="menstrual cycle" label="menstrual cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q377893" start="2902" end="2918" title="Ultradian rhythm" label="Ultradian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q211402" start="2983" end="2992" title="REM cycle" label="REM cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q820801" start="3005" end="3016" title="nasal cycle" label="nasal cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="3041" end="3055" title="growth hormone" label="growth hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="3070" end="3083" title="Tide" label="Tidal rhythms"/>
<link wikidata="Q428973" start="3199" end="3212" title="Lunar rhythms" label="Lunar rhythms"/>
<link wikidata="Q591259" start="3231" end="3242" title="lunar month" label="lunar month"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106408" start="3362" end="3379" title="Gene oscillations" label="Gene oscillations"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="3397" end="3406" title="gene expression" label="expressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q55028639" start="3927" end="3963" title="Jean-Jacques d&amp;#x27;Ortous de Mairan" label="Jean-Jacques d&amp;#x27;Ortous de Mairan"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="3981" end="3989" title="botanist" label="botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="3994" end="4004" title="naturalist" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="4005" end="4018" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q886314" start="4047" end="4059" title="Linnaeus&amp;#x27; flower clock" label="flower clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="4085" end="4100" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25400" start="4295" end="4307" title="daisy family" label="daisy family"/>
<link wikidata="Q727610" start="4321" end="4338" title="Crepis" label="hawk&amp;#x27;s beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q27909" start="4389" end="4396" title="hawkbit" label="hawkbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q609768" start="4463" end="4492" title="Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory" label="Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728462" start="4571" end="4589" title="Patricia DeCoursey" label="Patricia DeCoursey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180960" start="4603" end="4623" title="phase response curve" label="phase response curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q639831" start="4674" end="4687" title="Franz Halberg" label="Franz Halberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="4695" end="4718" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108635" start="4850" end="4867" title="Colin Pittendrigh" label="Colin Pittendrigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q130888" start="5351" end="5362" title="Drosophila melanogaster" label="fruit flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q19904182" start="5458" end="5464" title="Samer Hattar" label="Hattar"/>
<link wikidata="Q92594" start="5496" end="5506" title="melanopsin" label="melanopsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306768" start="5568" end="5590" title="pupillary light reflex" label="pupillary light reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="5619" end="5635" title="Circadian rhythm" label="biological clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q934475" start="5708" end="5714" title="intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cell" label="ipRGCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005502" start="5781" end="5812" title="Immunocytochemistry" label="fluorescent immunocytochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q286379" start="5884" end="5902" title="Beta-galactosidase" label="Beta-galactosidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="5936" end="5941" title="axons" label="axons"/>
<link wikidata="Q186029" start="5974" end="5985" title="optic nerve" label="optic nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156516" start="6005" end="6028" title="suprachiasmatic nucleus" label="suprachiasmatic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="6071" end="6077" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q118906177" start="6652" end="6668" title="Photoentrainment (chronobiology)" label="photoentrainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q134649" start="6721" end="6731" title="diphtheria" label="diphtheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="6738" end="6743" title="genes" label="genes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="6753" end="6758" title="mouse" label="mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="6791" end="6797" title="mutation" label="mutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q640536" start="7418" end="7443" title="pretectal area" label="olivary pretectal nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994856" start="8003" end="8012" title="Cre-Lox recombination" label="Cre-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030672" start="8631" end="8636" title="POU4F2" label="Brn3b"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994856" start="8791" end="8794" title="Cre-Lox recombination" label="Cre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364801" start="9794" end="9811" title="sleep deprivation" label="sleep deprivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="9874" end="9895" title="Cognition" label="cognitive functioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="10262" end="10272" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q35831" start="10341" end="10346" title="sleep" label="sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156516" start="10518" end="10521" title="Suprachiasmatic nucleus" label="SCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q192560" start="10650" end="10663" title="limbic system" label="limbic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q15323251" start="11088" end="11092" title="PER2" label="PER2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745522" start="11303" end="11308" title="c-Fos" label="c-Fos"/>
<link wikidata="Q338924" start="11316" end="11324" title="amygdala" label="amygdala"/>
<link wikidata="Q267641" start="11326" end="11342" title="habenula" label="lateral habenula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027534" start="11570" end="11577" title="sucrose" label="sucrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880745" start="11664" end="11686" title="behavioural despair test" label="forced swim test (FST)"/>
<link wikidata="Q422543" start="11742" end="11756" title="corticosterone" label="corticosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q422244" start="11906" end="11916" title="Fluoxetine" label="Fluoxetine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48360" start="12075" end="12086" title="hippocampus" label="hippocampus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18599" start="12202" end="12221" title="short-term memory" label="short-term memories"/>
<link wikidata="Q18601" start="12227" end="12245" title="long-term memory" label="long-term memories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417562" start="12440" end="12463" title="Morris water navigation task" label="Morris water maze (MWM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805481" start="12879" end="12901" title="long-term potentiation" label="long-term potentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q263962" start="12926" end="12949" title="Theta Burst Stimulation" label="theta burst stimulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q243570" start="13452" end="13465" title="light therapy" label="light therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111956020" start="13470" end="13479" title="melatonin (medication)" label="melatonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722924" start="13517" end="13531" title="Alfred J. Lewy" label="Alfred J. Lewy"/>
<link wikidata="Q282097" start="13533" end="13537" title="OHSU" label="OHSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q29642279" start="13540" end="13556" title="Josephine Arendt" label="Josephine Arendt"/>
<link wikidata="Q546976" start="13558" end="13578" title="University of Surrey" label="University of Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q75270" start="13962" end="13976" title="Jürgen Aschoff" label="Jürgen Aschoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108635" start="13981" end="13998" title="Colin Pittendrigh" label="Colin Pittendrigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345068" start="14067" end="14078" title="entrainment (chronobiology)" label="entrainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q184869" start="14342" end="14352" title="chronotype" label="chronotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="14742" end="14754" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15375" end="15393" title="Casein kinase 1#Circadian rhythm" label="via Ck1 inhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q744029" start="15647" end="15661" title="sleep medicine" label="sleep medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q162606" start="15663" end="15676" title="endocrinology" label="endocrinology"/>
<link wikidata="Q10384" start="15678" end="15688" title="geriatrics" label="geriatrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q840545" start="15690" end="15705" title="sports medicine" label="sports medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430622" start="15707" end="15721" title="space medicine" label="space medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="15723" end="15733" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q259028" start="15738" end="15752" title="photoperiodism" label="photoperiodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454009" start="15770" end="15797" title="Bacterial circadian rhythms" label="Bacterial circadian rhythms"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154683" start="15800" end="15824" title="Biological clock (aging)" label="Biological clock (aging)"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="15827" end="15843" title="Circadian rhythm" label="Circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q30674010" start="15846" end="15862" title="Circannual cycle" label="Circannual cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121356" start="15865" end="15876" title="Circaseptan" label="Circaseptan"/>
<link wikidata="Q106830464" start="15903" end="15924" title="Familial sleep traits" label="Familial sleep traits"/>
<link wikidata="Q56255549" start="15927" end="15946" title="Frank A. Brown, Jr." label="Frank A. Brown, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q20640926" start="15949" end="15964" title="Hitoshi Okamura" label="Hitoshi Okamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546168" start="15967" end="16000" title="Light effects on circadian rhythm" label="Light effects on circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q259028" start="16003" end="16017" title="Photoperiodism" label="Photoperiodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156516" start="16020" end="16043" title="Suprachiasmatic nucleus" label="Suprachiasmatic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435721" start="16046" end="16058" title="Scotobiology" label="Scotobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q185961" start="16061" end="16076" title="Time perception" label="Time perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367263" start="16079" end="16098" title="Malcolm von Schantz" label="Malcolm von Schantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="17610" end="17633" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q639831" start="17646" end="17659" title="Franz Halberg" label="Franz Halberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="17706" end="17728" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433575" start="17782" end="17808" title="Science Museum of Virginia" label="Science Museum of Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56567" wikidata="Q204034" url="?curid=56567" title="Hyperbolic functions">
<text>In mathematics, hyperbolic functions are analogues of the ordinary trigonometric functions, but defined using the hyperbola rather than the circle. Just as the points form a circle with a unit radius, the points form the right half of the unit hyperbola. Also, similarly to how the derivatives of and are and respectively, the derivatives of and are and respectively.

Hyperbolic functions are used to express the angle of parallelism in hyperbolic geometry. They are used to express Lorentz boosts as hyperbolic rotations in special relativity. They also occur in the solutions of many linear differential equations (such as the equation defining a catenary), cubic equations, and Laplace&#x27;s equation in Cartesian coordinates. Laplace&#x27;s equations are important in many areas of physics, including electromagnetic theory, heat transfer, and fluid dynamics.

The basic hyperbolic functions are:
* hyperbolic sine &quot;&quot; (),
* hyperbolic cosine &quot;&quot; (),
from which are derived:
* hyperbolic tangent &quot;&quot; (),
* hyperbolic cotangent &quot;&quot; (),
* hyperbolic secant &quot;&quot; (),
* hyperbolic cosecant &quot; or &quot; ()
corresponding to the derived trigonometric functions.

The inverse hyperbolic functions are:
* inverse hyperbolic sine &quot; (also denoted &quot;, &quot; or sometimes &quot;)
* inverse hyperbolic cosine &quot; (also denoted &quot;, &quot; or sometimes &quot;)
* inverse hyperbolic tangent &quot; (also denoted &quot;, &quot; or sometimes &quot;)
* inverse hyperbolic cotangent &quot; (also denoted &quot;, &quot; or sometimes &quot;)
* inverse hyperbolic secant &quot; (also denoted &quot;, &quot; or sometimes &quot;)
* inverse hyperbolic cosecant &quot; (also denoted &quot;, &quot;, &quot;,&quot;, &quot;, or sometimes &quot; or &quot;)
The hyperbolic functions take a real argument called a hyperbolic angle. The magnitude of a hyperbolic angle is the area of its hyperbolic sector to &quot;xy&quot; = 1. The hyperbolic functions may be defined in terms of the legs of a right triangle covering this sector.

In complex analysis, the hyperbolic functions arise when applying the ordinary sine and cosine functions to an imaginary angle. The hyperbolic sine and the hyperbolic cosine are entire functions. As a result, the other hyperbolic functions are meromorphic in the whole complex plane.

By Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem, the hyperbolic functions have a transcendental value for every non-zero algebraic value of the argument.

Hyperbolic functions were introduced in the 1760s independently by Vincenzo Riccati and Johann Heinrich Lambert. Riccati used and () to refer to circular functions and and () to refer to hyperbolic functions. Lambert adopted the names, but altered the abbreviations to those used today. The abbreviations , , , are also currently used, depending on personal preference.

== Notation ==
==Definitions==

There are various equivalent ways to define the hyperbolic functions.

=== Exponential definitions ===

In terms of the exponential function:

* Hyperbolic sine: the odd part of the exponential function, that is, formula_1
* Hyperbolic cosine: the even part of the exponential function, that is, formula_2
* Hyperbolic tangent: formula_3
* Hyperbolic cotangent: for , formula_4
* Hyperbolic secant: formula_5
* Hyperbolic cosecant: for , formula_6

=== Differential equation definitions ===

The hyperbolic functions may be defined as solutions of differential equations: The hyperbolic sine and cosine are the solution of the system
formula_7
with the initial conditions formula_8 The initial conditions make the solution unique; without them any pair of functions formula_9 would be a solution.

 and are also the unique solution of the equation ,
such that , for the hyperbolic cosine, and , for the hyperbolic sine.

=== Complex trigonometric definitions ===

Hyperbolic functions may also be deduced from trigonometric functions with complex arguments:

* Hyperbolic sine: formula_10
* Hyperbolic cosine: formula_11
* Hyperbolic tangent: formula_12
* Hyperbolic cotangent: formula_13
* Hyperbolic secant: formula_14
* Hyperbolic cosecant:formula_15
where is the imaginary unit with .

The above definitions are related to the exponential definitions via Euler&#x27;s formula (See below).

== Characterizing properties==

=== Hyperbolic cosine ===

It can be shown that the area under the curve of the hyperbolic cosine (over a finite interval) is always equal to the arc length corresponding to that interval:
formula_16

===Hyperbolic tangent===

The hyperbolic tangent is the (unique) solution to the differential equation , with .

==Useful relations==

The hyperbolic functions satisfy many identities, all of them similar in form to the trigonometric identities. In fact, Osborn&#x27;s rule states that one can convert any trigonometric identity (up to but not including sinhs or implied sinhs of 4th degree) for formula_17, formula_18, formula_19 or formula_17 and formula_21 into a hyperbolic identity, by expanding it completely in terms of integral powers of sines and cosines, changing sine to sinh and cosine to cosh, and switching the sign of every term containing a product of two sinhs.

Odd and even functions:
formula_22

Hence:
formula_23

Thus, and are even functions; the others are odd functions.

formula_24

Hyperbolic sine and cosine satisfy:
formula_25

which are analogous to Euler&#x27;s formula, and

formula_26

which is analogous to the Pythagorean trigonometric identity.

One also has
formula_27

for the other functions.

===Sums of arguments===
formula_28
particularly
formula_29

Also:
formula_30

===Subtraction formulas===
formula_31

Also:
formula_32

===Half argument formulas===
formula_33

where is the sign function.

If , then

formula_34
===Square formulas===
formula_35

===Inequalities===

The following inequality is useful in statistics:
formula_36

It can be proved by comparing the Taylor series of the two functions term by term.

==Inverse functions as logarithms==
formula_37

==Derivatives==
formula_38
formula_39
so:
formula_40

Thus, hyperbolic functions are periodic with respect to the imaginary component, with period formula_41 (formula_42 for hyperbolic tangent and cotangent).

==See also==
* e (mathematical constant)
* Equal incircles theorem, based on sinh
* Hyperbolastic functions
* Hyperbolic growth
* Inverse hyperbolic functions
* List of integrals of hyperbolic functions
* Poinsot&#x27;s spirals
* Sigmoid function
* Soboleva modified hyperbolic tangent
* Trigonometric functions

==References==
==External links==
*Hyperbolic functions on PlanetMath
*GonioLab: Visualization of the unit circle, trigonometric and hyperbolic functions (Java Web Start)
*Web-based calculator of hyperbolic functions</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q204034" start="16" end="36" title="Hyperbolic functions" label="hyperbolic functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="67" end="89" title="trigonometric function" label="trigonometric function"/>
<link wikidata="Q165301" start="114" end="123" title="hyperbola" label="hyperbola"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="140" end="146" title="circle" label="circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q203425" start="174" end="199" title="unit circle" label="circle with a unit radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887128" start="239" end="253" title="unit hyperbola" label="unit hyperbola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617405" start="414" end="434" title="angle of parallelism" label="angle of parallelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q209306" start="438" end="457" title="hyperbolic geometry" label="hyperbolic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q217255" start="484" end="497" title="Lorentz boost" label="Lorentz boost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582218" start="502" end="521" title="hyperbolic rotation" label="hyperbolic rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="526" end="544" title="special relativity" label="special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="594" end="615" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214561" start="650" end="658" title="catenary" label="catenary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="661" end="676" title="Cubic equation#Hyperbolic solution for one real root" label="cubic equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q339444" start="682" end="705" title="Laplace&amp;#x27;s equation" label="Laplace&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="709" end="730" title="Cartesian coordinates" label="Cartesian coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q339444" start="732" end="755" title="Laplace&amp;#x27;s equation" label="Laplace&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="788" end="795" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="807" end="829" title="electromagnetic theory" label="electromagnetic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q179635" start="831" end="844" title="heat transfer" label="heat transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="850" end="864" title="fluid dynamics" label="fluid dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q204034" start="905" end="920" title="Hyperbolic functions" label="hyperbolic sine"/>
<link wikidata="Q204034" start="940" end="957" title="Hyperbolic functions" label="hyperbolic cosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q204034" start="1001" end="1019" title="Hyperbolic functions" label="hyperbolic tangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q204034" start="1039" end="1059" title="Hyperbolic functions" label="hyperbolic cotangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q204034" start="1079" end="1096" title="Hyperbolic functions" label="hyperbolic secant"/>
<link wikidata="Q204034" start="1116" end="1135" title="Hyperbolic functions" label="hyperbolic cosecant"/>
<link wikidata="Q640600" start="1215" end="1243" title="inverse hyperbolic functions" label="inverse hyperbolic functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q204034" start="1251" end="1274" title="Hyperbolic functions" label="inverse hyperbolic sine"/>
<link wikidata="Q204034" start="1334" end="1359" title="Hyperbolic functions" label="inverse hyperbolic cosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q204034" start="1419" end="1445" title="Hyperbolic functions" label="inverse hyperbolic tangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q204034" start="1505" end="1533" title="Hyperbolic functions" label="inverse hyperbolic cotangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q204034" start="1593" end="1618" title="Hyperbolic functions" label="inverse hyperbolic secant"/>
<link wikidata="Q204034" start="1678" end="1705" title="Hyperbolic functions" label="inverse hyperbolic cosecant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="1829" end="1833" title="Real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027788" start="1834" end="1842" title="argument of a function" label="argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003216" start="1852" end="1868" title="hyperbolic angle" label="hyperbolic angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11500" start="1913" end="1917" title="area" label="area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235577" start="1925" end="1942" title="hyperbolic sector" label="hyperbolic sector"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2022" end="2046" title="hyperbolic sector#Hyperbolic triangle" label="legs of a right triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193756" start="2073" end="2089" title="complex analysis" label="complex analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q847600" start="2248" end="2263" title="entire function" label="entire function"/>
<link wikidata="Q217616" start="2314" end="2325" title="meromorphic function" label="meromorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572474" start="2358" end="2387" title="Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem" label="Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q173091" start="2421" end="2441" title="transcendental number" label="transcendental value"/>
<link wikidata="Q168817" start="2461" end="2476" title="algebraic number" label="algebraic value"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121731" start="2562" end="2578" title="Vincenzo Riccati" label="Vincenzo Riccati"/>
<link wikidata="Q122999" start="2583" end="2606" title="Johann Heinrich Lambert" label="Johann Heinrich Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q168698" start="3018" end="3038" title="exponential function" label="exponential function"/>
<link wikidata="Q126592" start="3064" end="3072" title="odd part of a function" label="odd part"/>
<link wikidata="Q126592" start="3146" end="3155" title="even part of a function" label="even part"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="3446" end="3467" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="3908" end="3930" title="trigonometric function" label="trigonometric function"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="3937" end="3944" title="complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q193796" start="4165" end="4179" title="imaginary unit" label="imaginary unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q184871" start="4257" end="4277" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s formula" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="4376" end="4396" title="area under the curve" label="area under the curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q670036" start="4470" end="4480" title="arc length" label="arc length"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="4606" end="4627" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q273008" start="4745" end="4769" title="trigonometric identity" label="trigonometric identities"/>
<link wikidata="Q126592" start="5274" end="5287" title="even function" label="even function"/>
<link wikidata="Q126592" start="5305" end="5318" title="odd functions" label="odd functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q184871" start="5404" end="5424" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s formula" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039117" start="5469" end="5503" title="Pythagorean trigonometric identity" label="Pythagorean trigonometric identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q236813" start="5746" end="5759" title="sign function" label="sign function"/>
<link wikidata="Q184743" start="6117" end="6125" title="periodic function" label="periodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82435" start="6257" end="6282" title="e (mathematical constant)" label="e (mathematical constant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384150" start="6285" end="6308" title="Equal incircles theorem" label="Equal incircles theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q96381522" start="6326" end="6349" title="Hyperbolastic functions" label="Hyperbolastic functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392326" start="6352" end="6369" title="Hyperbolic growth" label="Hyperbolic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q640600" start="6372" end="6399" title="Inverse hyperbolic function" label="Inverse hyperbolic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q484632" start="6403" end="6444" title="List of integrals of hyperbolic functions" label="List of integrals of hyperbolic functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q527907" start="6447" end="6469" title="Poinsot&amp;#x27;s spirals" label="Poinsot&amp;#x27;s spirals"/>
<link wikidata="Q526668" start="6472" end="6488" title="Sigmoid function" label="Sigmoid function"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207943" start="6491" end="6527" title="Soboleva modified hyperbolic tangent" label="Soboleva modified hyperbolic tangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="6530" end="6553" title="Trigonometric functions" label="Trigonometric functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130535" start="6614" end="6624" title="PlanetMath" label="PlanetMath"/>
<link wikidata="Q33079" start="6710" end="6724" title="Java Web Start" label="Java Web Start"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56568" wikidata="Q13423" url="?curid=56568" title="Pleiades">
<text>The Pleiades (), also known as Seven Sisters and Messier 45 (M45), is an asterism of an open star cluster containing young B-type stars in the northwest of the constellation Taurus. At a distance of about 444 light-years, it is among the nearest star clusters to Earth and the nearest Messier object to Earth, being the most obvious star cluster to the naked eye in the night sky. It is also observed to house the reflection nebula NGC 1432, an HII region. Around 2330 BC it marked the vernal point. 

The cluster is dominated by hot blue luminous stars that have formed within the last 100 million years. Reflection nebulae around the brightest stars were once thought to be leftover material from their formation, but are now considered likely to be an unrelated dust cloud in the interstellar medium through which the stars are currently passing. This dust cloud is estimated to be moving at a speed of approximately 18 km/s relative to the stars in the cluster.

Computer simulations have shown that the Pleiades were probably formed from a compact configuration that once resembled the Orion Nebula. Astronomers estimate that the cluster will survive for approximately another 250 million years, after which the clustering will be lost due to gravitational interactions with the galactic neighborhood.

Together with the open star cluster of the Hyades, the Pleiades form the Golden Gate of the Ecliptic. The Pleiades have been said to &quot;resemble a tiny dipper,&quot; and should not be confused with the &quot;Little Dipper,&quot; or Ursa Minor.

== Origin of name ==
The name, Pleiades, comes from . It probably derives from ( &#x27;to sail&#x27;) because of the cluster&#x27;s importance in delimiting the sailing season in the Mediterranean Sea: &quot;the season of navigation began with their heliacal rising&quot;. In Classical Greek mythology the name was used for seven divine sisters called the Pleiades. In time, the name was said to be derived from that of a mythical mother, Pleione, effectively meaning &quot;daughters of Pleione&quot;. In reality, the ancient name of the star cluster related to sailing almost certainly came first in the culture, naming of a relationship to the sister deities followed, and eventually appearing in later myths, to interpret the group name, a mother, Pleione.

== Astronomical role of M45 in antiquity ==
The M45 group played an important role in ancient times for the establishment of many calendars thanks to the combination of two remarkable elements. The first, which is still valid, is its unique and easily identifiable appearance on the celestial vault near the ecliptic. The second, essential for the ancients, is that in the middle of the third millennium BC, this asterism (a prominent pattern or group of stars that is smaller than a constellation) marked the vernal point. (2330 BC with ecliptic latitude about +3.5° according to Stellarium)
The importance of this asterism is also evident in northern Europe. The Pleiades cluster is displayed on the Nebra sky disc that was found in Germany and is dated to around 1600 BC. On the disk the cluster is represented in a high position between the Sun and the Moon.

This asterism also marks the beginning of several ancient calendars:
* In ancient India, it constitutes, in the Atharvaveda, compiled around 1200-1000 BC, the first (Sanskrit name for lunar stations), which is called (), a revealing name since it literally means &#x27;the Cuttings&#x27;,&quot; i.e. &quot;&quot;Those that mark the break of the year&quot;. This is so before the classic list lowers this to third place, henceforth giving the first to the star couple &quot;β Arietis&quot; and &quot;γ Arietis&quot;, which, notably in Hipparchus, at that time, marks the equinox.
* In Mesopotamia, the &quot;MUL.APIN compendium&quot;, the first known Mesopotamian astronomy treatise, discovered at Nineveh in the library of Assurbanipal and dating from no later than 627 BC, presents a list of deities [holders of stars] who stand on &quot;the path of the Moon&quot;, a list which begins with mul.MUL.
* In Greece, the () are a group whose name is probably functional before having a mythological meaning, as André Lebœuffle points out, who has his preference for the explanation by the Indo-European root that expresses the idea of &#x27;multiplicity, crowd, assembly&#x27;.
* Similarly, the Ancient Arabs begin their old parapegma type calendar, that of the , with M45 under the name of (). And this before their classic calendar, that of the or &#x27;lunar stations&#x27;, also begins with the star couple &quot;β Arietis&quot; and &quot;γ Arietis&quot; whose name, (), is literally &quot;the Two Marks [of entering the equinox]&quot;
Although M45 is no longer at the vernal point, the asterism still remains important, both functionally and symbolically. In addition to the changes in the calendars based on the lunar stations among the Indians and the Arabs, consider the case of an ancient Yemeni calendar in which the months are designated according to an astronomical criterion that caused it to be named &quot;Calendar of the Pleiades&quot;: the month of , literally &#x27;five&#x27;, is that during which the Sun and , i.e. the Pleiades, deviate from each other by five &quot;movements of the Moon&quot;, i.e. five times the path that the Moon travels on average in one day and one night, to use the terminology of .

== Nomenclature and mythology==
The Pleiades are a prominent sight in winter in the Northern Hemisphere, and are easily visible from mid-southern latitudes. They have been known since antiquity to cultures all around the world, including the Celts (, ); pre-colonial Filipinos (who called it , or , among other names), for whom it indicated the beginning of the year; Hawaiians (who call them ), Māori (who call them ); Indigenous Australians (from several traditions); the Achaemenid Empire, whence in Persians (who called them or ); the Arabs (who call them ; ); the Chinese (who called them ; ); the Quechua (who call them Qullqa or the storehouse); the Japanese (who call them ; , ); the Maya; the Aztec; the Sioux; the Kiowa; and the Cherokee. In Hinduism, the Pleiades are known as and are scripturally associated with the war deity and are also identified or associated with the (Seven Mothers). Hindus celebrate the first day (new moon) of the month of Kartik (month) as Diwali, a festival of abundance and lamps. The Pleiades are also mentioned three times in the Bible.
The earliest known depiction of the Pleiades is likely a Northern German Bronze Age artifact known as the Nebra sky disk, dated to approximately 1600 BC. The Babylonian star catalogues name the Pleiades (), meaning &#x27;stars&#x27; (literally &#x27;star star&#x27;), and they head the list of stars along the ecliptic, reflecting the fact that they were close to the point of the vernal equinox around the twenty-third century BC. The Ancient Egyptians may have used the names &quot;Followers&quot; and &quot;Ennead&quot; in the prognosis texts of the Calendar of Lucky and Unlucky Days of papyrus Cairo 86637. Some Greek astronomers considered them to be a distinct constellation, and they are mentioned by Hesiod&#x27;s &quot;Works and Days&quot;, Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot; and &quot;Odyssey&quot;, and the &quot;Geoponica&quot;. The Pleiades was the most well-known &quot;star&quot; among pre-Islamic Arabs and so often referred to simply as &quot;the Star&quot; (; ). Some scholars of Islam suggested that the Pleiades are the &quot;star&quot; mentioned in (&#x27;The Star&#x27;) in the Quran.

On numerous cylinder seals from the beginning of the first millennium BC, M45 is represented by seven points, while the &quot;Seven Gods&quot; appear, on low-reliefs of Neo-Assyrian royal palaces, wearing long open robes and large cylindrical headdresses surmounted by short feathers and adorned with three frontal rows of horns and a crown of feathers, while carrying both an ax and a knife, as well as a bow and a quiver.

As noted by scholar Stith Thompson, the constellation was &quot;nearly always imagined&quot; as a group of seven sisters, and their myths explain why there are only six. Some scientists suggest that these may come from observations back when Pleione was farther from Atlas and more visible as a separate star as far back as 100,000 BC.

=== Subaru ===
In Japan, the cluster is mentioned under the name (&quot;six stars&quot;) in the eighth-century &quot;Kojiki&quot;. The cluster is now known in Japan as Subaru.

The name was chosen for that of the Subaru Telescope, the flagship telescope of the National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, located at the Mauna Kea Observatory on the island of Hawaii. It had the largest monolithic primary mirror in the world from its commissioning in 1998 until 2005.

It also was chosen as the brand name of Subaru automobiles to reflect the origins of the firm as the joining of five companies, and is depicted in the firm&#x27;s six-star logo.

=== Tolkien&#x27;s Legendarium ===
In J. R. R. Tolkien&#x27;s legendarium, where &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; is set, Pleiades is referred to as Remmirath, the netted star, as are several other celestial bodies, such as the constellation Orion as Menelvagor, swordsman of the Sky.

== Observational history ==
Galileo Galilei was the first astronomer to view the Pleiades through a telescope. He thereby discovered that the cluster contains many stars too dim to be seen with the naked eye. He published his observations, including a sketch of the Pleiades showing 36 stars, in his treatise &quot;Sidereus Nuncius&quot; in March 1610.

The Pleiades have long been known to be a physically related group of stars rather than any chance alignment. John Michell calculated in 1767 that the probability of a chance alignment of so many bright stars was only 1 in 500,000, and so surmised that the Pleiades and many other clusters must consist of physically related stars. When studies were first made of the proper motions of the stars, it was found that they are all moving in the same direction across the sky, at the same rate, further demonstrating that they were related.

Charles Messier measured the position of the cluster and included it as &quot;M45&quot; in his catalogue of comet-like objects, published in 1771. Along with the Orion Nebula and the Praesepe cluster, Messier&#x27;s inclusion of the Pleiades has been noted as curious, as most of Messier&#x27;s objects were much fainter and more easily confused with comets—something that seems scarcely possible for the Pleiades. One possibility is that Messier simply wanted to have a larger catalogue than his scientific rival Lacaille, whose 1755 catalogue contained 42 objects, and so he added some bright, well-known objects to boost the number on his list.

Edme-Sébastien Jeaurat then drew in 1782 a map of 64 stars of the Pleiades from his observations in 1779, which he published in 1786.

== Distance ==

The distance to the Pleiades can be used as a key first step to calibrate the cosmic distance ladder. As the cluster is relatively close to the Earth, the distance should be relatively easy to measure and has been estimated by many methods. Accurate knowledge of the distance allows astronomers to plot a Hertzsprung–Russell diagram for the cluster, which, when compared with those plotted for clusters whose distance is not known, allows their distances to be estimated. Other methods may then extend the distance scale from open clusters to galaxies and clusters of galaxies, and a cosmic distance ladder may be constructed. Ultimately astronomers&#x27; understanding of the age and future evolution of the universe is influenced by their knowledge of the distance to the Pleiades. Yet some authors argue that the controversy over the distance to the Pleiades discussed below is a red herring, since the cosmic distance ladder can (presently) rely on a suite of other nearby clusters where consensus exists regarding the distances as established by the &quot;Hipparcos&quot; satellite and independent means (e.g., the Hyades, the Coma Berenices cluster, etc.).

Measurements of the distance have elicited much controversy. Results prior to the launch of the &quot;Hipparcos&quot; satellite generally found that the Pleiades were approximately 135 parsecs (pc) away from Earth. Data from &quot;Hipparcos&quot; yielded a surprising result, namely a distance of only 118 pc, by measuring the parallax of stars in the cluster—a technique that should yield the most direct and accurate results. Later work consistently argued that the &quot;Hipparcos&quot; distance measurement for the Pleiades was erroneous: In particular, distances derived to the cluster via the Hubble Space Telescope and infrared color–magnitude diagram fitting (so-called &quot;spectroscopic parallax&quot;) favor a distance between 135 and 140 pc; a dynamical distance from optical interferometric observations of the inner pair of stars within Atlas (a bright triple star in the Pleiades) favors a distance of 133 to 137 pc. However, the author of the 2007–2009 catalog of revised &quot;Hipparcos&quot; parallaxes reasserted that the distance to the Pleiades is ~120 pc and challenged the dissenting evidence. In 2012, Francis and Anderson proposed that a systematic effect on &quot;Hipparcos&quot; parallax errors for stars in clusters would bias calculation using the weighted mean; they gave a &quot;Hipparcos&quot; parallax distance of 126 pc and photometric distance of 132 pc based on stars in the AB Doradus, Tucana-Horologium and Beta Pictoris moving groups, which are all similar in age and composition to the Pleiades. Those authors note that the difference between these results may be attributed to random error.
More recent results using very-long-baseline interferometry (VLBI) (August 2014), and preliminary solutions using Gaia Data Release 1 (September 2016) and Gaia Data Release 2 (August 2018), determine distances of 136.2 ± 1.2 pc, 134 ± 6 pc and 136.2 ± 5.0 pc, respectively. The Gaia Data Release 1 team were cautious about their result, and the VLBI authors assert &quot;that the &quot;Hipparcos&quot;-measured distance to the Pleiades cluster is in error&quot;.

The most recent distance estimate of the distance to the Pleiades based on the Gaia Data Release 3 is .

== Composition ==

The cluster core radius is approximately 8 light-years and tidal radius is approximately 43 light-years. The cluster contains more than 1,000 statistically confirmed members, not counting the number that would be added if all binary stars could be resolved. Its light is dominated by young, hot blue stars, up to 14 of which may be seen with the naked eye, depending on local observing conditions and visual acuity of the observer. The brightest stars form a shape somewhat similar to that of Ursa Major and Ursa Minor. The total mass contained in the cluster is estimated to be approximately 800 solar masses and is dominated by fainter and redder stars. An estimate of the frequency of binary stars in the Pleiades is approximately 57%.

The cluster contains many brown dwarfs, such as Teide 1. These are objects with less than approximately 8% of the Sun&#x27;s mass, insufficient for nuclear fusion reactions to start in their cores and become proper stars. They may constitute up to 25% of the total population of the cluster, although they contribute less than 2% of the total mass. Astronomers have made great efforts to find and analyze brown dwarfs in the Pleiades and other young clusters, because they are still relatively bright and observable, while brown dwarfs in older clusters have faded and are much more difficult to study.

== Brightest stars ==
The brightest stars of the cluster are named the Seven Sisters in early Greek mythology: Sterope, Merope, Electra, Maia, Taygeta, Celaeno, and Alcyone. Later, they were assigned parents, Pleione and Atlas. As daughters of Atlas, the Hyades were sisters of the Pleiades.

The following table gives details of the brightest stars in the cluster:

== Age and future evolution ==

Ages for star clusters may be estimated by comparing the Hertzsprung–Russell diagram for the cluster with theoretical models of stellar evolution. Using this technique, ages for the Pleiades of between 75 and 150 million years have been estimated. The wide spread in estimated ages is a result of uncertainties in stellar evolution models, which include factors such as convective overshoot, in which a convective zone within a star penetrates an otherwise non-convective zone, resulting in higher apparent ages.

Another way of estimating the age of the cluster is by looking at the lowest-mass objects. In normal main-sequence stars, lithium is rapidly destroyed in nuclear fusion reactions. Brown dwarfs can retain their lithium, however. Due to lithium&#x27;s very low ignition temperature of 2.5 × 106 K, the highest-mass brown dwarfs will burn it eventually, and so determining the highest mass of brown dwarfs still containing lithium in the cluster may give an idea of its age. Applying this technique to the Pleiades gives an age of about 115 million years.

The cluster is slowly moving in the direction of the feet of what is currently the constellation of Orion. Like most open clusters, the Pleiades will not stay gravitationally bound forever. Some component stars will be ejected after close encounters with other stars; others will be stripped by tidal gravitational fields. Calculations suggest that the cluster will take approximately 250 million years to disperse, because of gravitational interactions with giant molecular clouds and the spiral arms of our galaxy hastening its demise.

== Reflection nebulosity ==
With larger amateur telescopes, the nebulosity around some of the stars may be easily seen, especially when long-exposure photographs are taken. Under ideal observing conditions, some hint of nebulosity around the cluster may be seen even with small telescopes or average binoculars. It is a reflection nebula, caused by dust reflecting the blue light of the hot, young stars.

It was formerly thought that the dust was left over from the formation of the cluster, but at the age of approximately 100 million years generally accepted for the cluster, almost all the dust originally present would have been dispersed by radiation pressure. Instead, it seems that the cluster is simply passing through a particularly dusty region of the interstellar medium.

Studies show that the dust responsible for the nebulosity is not uniformly distributed, but is concentrated mainly in two layers along the line of sight to the cluster. These layers may have been formed by deceleration due to radiation pressure as the dust has moved toward the stars.

== Possible planets ==
Analyzing deep-infrared images obtained by the Spitzer Space Telescope and Gemini North telescope, astronomers discovered that one of the stars in the cluster, HD 23514, which has a mass and luminosity a bit greater than that of the Sun, is surrounded by an extraordinary number of hot dust particles. This could be evidence for planet formation around HD 23514.

== Videos ==

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Stozhary
* Matrikas
* The Seven Sages

== References ==
== External links ==

* Information on the Pleiades from SEDS</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13423" start="4" end="12" title="Pleiades" label="Pleiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423" start="31" end="44" title="Pleiades" label="Seven Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423" start="49" end="59" title="Pleiades" label="Messier 45"/>
<link wikidata="Q9262" start="73" end="81" title="Asterism (astronomy)" label="asterism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387" start="88" end="105" title="open cluster" label="open star cluster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123" end="135" title="Stellar classification#Class B" label="B-type stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q10570" start="174" end="180" title="Taurus (constellation)" label="Taurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="209" end="219" title="light-year" label="light-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q168845" start="246" end="258" title="star cluster" label="star cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="263" end="268" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="285" end="299" title="Messier object" label="Messier object"/>
<link wikidata="Q506254" start="353" end="362" title="naked eye" label="naked eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153471" start="370" end="379" title="night sky" label="night sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q13434" start="432" end="440" title="NGC 1432" label="NGC 1432"/>
<link wikidata="Q11282" start="445" end="455" title="HII region" label="HII region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315" start="486" end="498" title="vernal point" label="vernal point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5886" start="530" end="553" title="OB star" label="hot blue luminous stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q203958" start="606" end="623" title="Reflection nebula" label="Reflection nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="783" end="802" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q13903" start="1091" end="1103" title="Orion Nebula" label="Orion Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q13511" start="1351" end="1357" title="Hyades (star cluster)" label="Hyades"/>
<link wikidata="Q673673" start="1381" end="1408" title="Golden Gate of the Ecliptic" label="Golden Gate of the Ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10478" start="1519" end="1532" title="Little Dipper" label="Little Dipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1739" end="1756" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q368373" start="1806" end="1821" title="heliacal rising" label="heliacal rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q922942" start="1912" end="1920" title="Pleiades (Greek mythology)" label="Pleiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q463865" start="1995" end="2002" title="Pleione (mythology)" label="Pleione"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="2625" end="2633" title="ecliptic" label="ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315" start="2827" end="2839" title="Equinox" label="vernal point"/>
<link wikidata="Q119931" start="2898" end="2908" title="Stellarium_(software)" label="Stellarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q157094" start="3019" end="3033" title="Nebra sky disc" label="Nebra sky disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q236092" start="3293" end="3304" title="Atharvaveda" label="Atharvaveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13215" start="3648" end="3669" title="Beta Arietis" label="&amp;quot;β Arietis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q970572" start="3674" end="3695" title="Gamma Arietis" label="&amp;quot;γ Arietis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q159905" start="3715" end="3725" title="Hipparchus" label="Hipparchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83076" start="3788" end="3796" title="MUL.APIN" label="MUL.APIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="4267" end="4280" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q171341" start="4403" end="4412" title="parapegma" label="parapegma"/>
<link wikidata="Q13215" start="4589" end="4610" title="Beta Arietis" label="&amp;quot;β Arietis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q970572" start="4615" end="4636" title="Gamma Arietis" label="&amp;quot;γ Arietis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="5492" end="5511" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="5650" end="5655" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="5675" end="5684" title="Filipino people" label="Filipinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="5776" end="5785" title="Native Hawaiians" label="Hawaiians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647357" start="5804" end="5809" title="Māori culture" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="5828" end="5850" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous Australians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5857" end="5875" title="Australian Aboriginal astronomy#Pleiades" label="several traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="5882" end="5899" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="5911" end="5919" title="Persians" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="5947" end="5952" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="5977" end="5984" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q134936" start="6011" end="6018" title="Quechua people" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408955" start="6034" end="6040" title="Quyllurit&amp;#x27;i" label="Qullqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="6065" end="6070" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="6100" end="6104" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="6110" end="6115" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="6121" end="6126" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q117100" start="6132" end="6137" title="Kiowa" label="Kiowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="6147" end="6155" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="6160" end="6168" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q475279" start="6369" end="6383" title="Kartik (month)" label="Kartik (month)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10244" start="6387" end="6393" title="Diwali" label="Diwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="6481" end="6486" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="6561" end="6571" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q157094" start="6594" end="6608" title="Nebra sky disk" label="Nebra sky disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450794" start="6646" end="6672" title="Babylonian star catalogues" label="Babylonian star catalogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q12889843" start="6869" end="6883" title="March equinox" label="vernal equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="7105" end="7110" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="7156" end="7169" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="7197" end="7203" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q667285" start="7217" end="7231" title="Works and Days" label="Works and Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="7239" end="7244" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="7258" end="7263" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="7280" end="7287" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235421" start="7309" end="7318" title="Geoponica" label="Geoponica"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="7483" end="7488" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="7585" end="7590" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q428220" start="8038" end="8052" title="Stith Thompson" label="Stith Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13440" start="8260" end="8267" title="Pleione (star)" label="Pleione"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427" start="8285" end="8290" title="Atlas (star)" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="8373" end="8378" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q813031" start="8472" end="8478" title="Kojiki" label="Kojiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q841079" start="8568" end="8584" title="Subaru Telescope" label="Subaru Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327713" start="8616" end="8658" title="National Astronomical Observatory of Japan" label="National Astronomical Observatory of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q831790" start="8675" end="8696" title="Mauna Kea Observatory" label="Mauna Kea Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="8714" end="8720" title="Hawaii (island)" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8741" end="8751" title="Segmented mirror#Application" label="monolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q613628" start="8752" end="8766" title="primary mirror" label="primary mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q172741" start="8864" end="8870" title="Subaru" label="Subaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="9041" end="9057" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="9090" end="9111" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="9318" end="9333" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="9348" end="9358" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="9390" end="9399" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457297" start="9605" end="9621" title="Sidereus Nuncius" label="Sidereus Nuncius"/>
<link wikidata="Q373097" start="9754" end="9766" title="John Michell" label="John Michell"/>
<link wikidata="Q193223" start="10012" end="10025" title="proper motion" label="proper motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524" start="10182" end="10197" title="Charles Messier" label="Charles Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="10277" end="10286" title="Messier object" label="catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="10290" end="10295" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q13903" start="10344" end="10356" title="Orion Nebula" label="Orion Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q13760" start="10365" end="10373" title="Beehive Cluster" label="Praesepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q202703" start="10696" end="10704" title="Nicolas-Louis de Lacaille" label="Lacaille"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338802" start="10831" end="10853" title="Edme-Sébastien Jeaurat" label="Edme-Sébastien Jeaurat"/>
<link wikidata="Q618164" start="11060" end="11082" title="cosmic distance ladder" label="cosmic distance ladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270143" start="11287" end="11314" title="Hertzsprung–Russell diagram" label="Hertzsprung–Russell diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q572959" start="11865" end="11876" title="red herring" label="red herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q555846" start="12043" end="12052" title="Hipparcos" label="Hipparcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q13511" start="12102" end="12108" title="Hyades (star cluster)" label="Hyades"/>
<link wikidata="Q84275359" start="12114" end="12136" title="Coma Star Cluster" label="Coma Berenices cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129" start="12331" end="12337" title="parsec" label="parsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="12473" end="12481" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="12745" end="12767" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270143" start="12781" end="12804" title="Hertzsprung–Russell diagram" label="color–magnitude diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349524" start="12830" end="12852" title="spectroscopic parallax" label="spectroscopic parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="12927" end="12950" title="Interferometry" label="optical interferometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427" start="12998" end="13003" title="Atlas (star)" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q729113" start="13424" end="13437" title="Weighted arithmetic mean" label="weighted mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073340" start="13505" end="13516" title="Photometry (astronomy)" label="photometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q94879" start="13558" end="13568" title="AB Doradus moving group" label="AB Doradus"/>
<link wikidata="Q86743704" start="13570" end="13587" title="Tucana-Horologium association" label="Tucana-Horologium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014842" start="13592" end="13605" title="Beta Pictoris moving group" label="Beta Pictoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148351" start="13805" end="13838" title="very-long-baseline interferometry" label="very-long-baseline interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q767805" start="13893" end="13897" title="Gaia (spacecraft)" label="Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37859523" start="14322" end="14341" title="Gaia Data Release 3" label="Gaia Data Release 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="14410" end="14420" title="light-year" label="light-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276" start="14426" end="14438" title="tidal radius" label="tidal radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q50053" start="14593" end="14604" title="binary star" label="binary star"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="14662" end="14672" title="stellar classification" label="blue stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8918" start="14860" end="14870" title="Ursa Major" label="Ursa Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q10478" start="14875" end="14885" title="Ursa Minor" label="Ursa Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="14964" end="14974" title="solar mass" label="solar mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q50053" start="15055" end="15066" title="binary star" label="binary star"/>
<link wikidata="Q101600" start="15133" end="15144" title="brown dwarf" label="brown dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q484148" start="15155" end="15162" title="Teide 1" label="Teide 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="15221" end="15224" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="15255" end="15269" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q922942" start="15782" end="15795" title="Pleiades (Greek mythology)" label="Seven Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="15805" end="15820" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q748963" start="15822" end="15829" title="Sterope (Pleiad)" label="Sterope"/>
<link wikidata="Q735518" start="15831" end="15837" title="Merope (Pleiades)" label="Merope"/>
<link wikidata="Q858663" start="15839" end="15846" title="Electra (Pleiad)" label="Electra"/>
<link wikidata="Q205233" start="15848" end="15852" title="Maia (mythology)" label="Maia"/>
<link wikidata="Q112001" start="15854" end="15861" title="Taygete" label="Taygeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q686174" start="15863" end="15870" title="Celaeno (Pleiad)" label="Celaeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q763268" start="15876" end="15883" title="Alcyone (Pleiades)" label="Alcyone"/>
<link wikidata="Q463865" start="15920" end="15927" title="Pleione (mythology)" label="Pleione"/>
<link wikidata="Q130818" start="15932" end="15937" title="Atlas (mythology)" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q646049" start="15966" end="15972" title="Hyades (mythology)" label="Hyades"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270143" start="16167" end="16194" title="Hertzsprung–Russell diagram" label="Hertzsprung–Russell diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="16238" end="16255" title="stellar evolution" label="stellar evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166118" start="16480" end="16500" title="convective overshoot" label="convective overshoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q160329" start="16513" end="16523" title="convection" label="convective"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="16725" end="16738" title="main-sequence" label="main-sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q568" start="16746" end="16753" title="lithium" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="16778" end="16792" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q101600" start="16804" end="16815" title="Brown dwarf" label="Brown dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q192388" start="17193" end="17206" title="relative motion" label="slowly moving"/>
<link wikidata="Q8860" start="17278" end="17283" title="Orion (constellation)" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="17637" end="17659" title="molecular cloud" label="giant molecular clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488" start="17668" end="17679" title="Spiral galaxy" label="spiral arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q203958" start="18037" end="18054" title="reflection nebula" label="reflection nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="18184" end="18193" title="star formation" label="formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q649036" start="18364" end="18382" title="radiation pressure" label="radiation pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="18480" end="18499" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="18728" end="18737" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q201953" start="18858" end="18881" title="Spitzer Space Telescope" label="Spitzer Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q744667" start="18886" end="18908" title="Gemini Observatory" label="Gemini North telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207687" start="18971" end="18979" title="HD 23514" label="HD 23514"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978020" start="19220" end="19228" title="Stozhary" label="Stozhary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789401" start="19231" end="19239" title="Matrikas" label="Matrikas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19242" end="19257" title="Saptarishi#Astronomy" label="The Seven Sages"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56569" wikidata="Q23438" url="?curid=56569" title="Ashgabat">
<text>Ashgabat (Turkmen: &quot;Aşgabat&quot;) is the capital and largest city of Turkmenistan. It lies between the Karakum Desert and the Kopetdag mountain range in Central Asia, approximately 50 km (30 mi) away from the Iran-Turkmenistan border. The city has a population of 1,030,063 (2022 census).
The city was founded in 1881 on the basis of an Ahal Teke tribal village, and made the capital of the Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic in 1924 when it was known as Poltoratsk. Much of the city was destroyed by the 1948 Ashgabat earthquake, but has since been extensively rebuilt under the rule of Saparmurat Niyazov&#x27;s &quot;White City&quot; urban renewal project, resulting in monumental projects sheathed in costly white marble. The Soviet-era Karakum Canal runs through the city, carrying waters from the Amu Darya from east to west.

Today, as the capital of an independent Turkmenistan, Ashgabat retains a multiethnic population, with ethnic Turkmen as the majority. In 2021, it celebrated 140 years of its written history.

==Etymology==
Ashgabat is called &quot;Aşgabat&quot; in Turkmen, () in Russian from 1925 to 1991, and () in Persian. Before 1991, the name was usually spelled Ashkhabad in English, a transliteration of the Russian form. It has also been variously spelled Ashkhabat and Ashgabad. From 1919 until 1927, the city was renamed Poltoratsk after a local revolutionary, Pavel Poltoratskiy.

Although the name literally means &quot;city of love&quot; or &quot;city of devotion&quot; in modern Persian, the name might be modified through folk etymology. Turkmen historian Ovez Gundogdiyev believes that the name goes back to the Parthian era, 3rd century BC, deriving from the name of the founder of the Parthian Empire, Arsaces I of Parthia, in Persian Ashk-Abad (the city of &quot;Ashk&quot;/Arsaces).

==Geography==
Ashgabat is in near proximity, approximately 50 km (30 mi), to the Iranian border. It occupies a highly seismically active oasis plain bounded on the south by the foothills of the Kopet Dag mountains () and on the north by the Karakum Desert. It is surrounded by, but not part of, Ahal Province (). The highest point in the city is the high sandhill upon which the Yyldyz Hotel was built, but most of the city lies between of elevation. The Karakum Canal runs through the city.

Like the rest of Turkmenistan, Ashgabat&#x27;s soil is primarily sediment that accumulated on the bottom of the Paratethys Ocean. The Kopet Dag mountains emerged toward the end of the Cretaceous Period.

===Urban layout===
====1881 to 1929====
Prior to 1881 any buildings other than yurts were made solely from adobe and were limited to one story in height due to the seismic risk. As of 1900 only one building in the city was two stories tall, the municipal museum. City planning began following the Russian conquest, with &quot;very simple planning schemes&quot;. The basic layout of downtown streets &quot;has been preserved to this day and defined the unique character of the city structure combining linear and radial types of layout of blocks&quot;. The Russian writer Vasily Yan, who lived in Askhabad from 1901 to 1904, described the city as &quot;a little tidy town consisting of numerous clay houses, surrounded by fruit gardens with straight streets, planted with slim cottonwood, chestnut, and white acacia planned by the hand of military engineers&quot;. Another description noted,
: The fortress was the center of the bureaucratic part of the city. Here stood especially sturdy thick-walled houses, with strong window grates and corner buttresses. Earthquakes were less frightening in such houses, and behind the thick walls even in the hottest months some measure of indoor coolness was retained. Each house had a garden around it, on maintenance of which residents spared neither expenditures nor water...Nearer the rail station lived the railroad workers and craftsmen. Here the houses were shorter and more densely spaced, gardens smaller, and dust on the streets greater...
: Gradually a third center of Ashkhabad started to emerge, of the merchants. Roughly equidistant from the rail station and the fortress was laid out a sad marketplace, becoming not only a center of stores and stalls, but a center of gravity for merchants&#x27; residence.

====1930 to 1948====
In 1930, asphalt was used for the first time to pave Ashgabat&#x27;s streets. The water supply was increased by piping water from springs in neighboring Gämi and Bagyr.

The first master plan for Ashgabat, developed between 1935 and 1937 at the Moscow Institute of Geodesy, Aerial Imagery, and Cartography, envisioned expansion to the west, including irrigation and greening of the Bikrova canyon (today Bekrewe). The city architect&#x27;s office was created in 1936 but was unable to implement the new master plan &quot;as it implied significant demolition of the existing buildings&quot;. A description of Ashgabat published in 1948 just before the earthquake noted, &quot;In Ashgabat there are nearly no tall buildings, thus every two-story building is visible from above...&quot;, i.e., from the foothills. The tallest structures were the clock tower of the textile mill, the &quot;round smokestack of the glass factory&quot;, two &quot;exceptionally thin minarets&quot; of the &quot;former mosque&quot;, and &quot;two splendid towers over the long building of the main city hotel&quot;.

====Impact of the 1948 earthquake====

During the 1948 earthquake, since the bulk of Ashgabat at that time was built of either adobe or fired brick, all but a very few buildings collapsed or were damaged beyond repair (the reinforced concrete grain elevator, Church of St. Alexander Nevsky, and Kärz Bank were among the structures that survived). According to Turkmenistan&#x27;s official news agency,
: Nearly all one-story residential buildings in the city made of mud brick were destroyed, 95 percent of all one-story buildings made of fired brick, and the remaining structures were damaged beyond repair. The number of inhabitable buildings was in single digits, and at that, only after capital renovation.

A new general plan was hastily developed by July 1949. The city was divided into four zones: central, northern, eastern, and southwestern. Reconstruction of the city began in that year. Thus from the early 1950s through 1991 Ashgabat&#x27;s skyline was dominated by the Brutalist Style favored by post-Stalin Soviet architects. The city&#x27;s central avenue, Magtymguly (former Kuropatkin, Freedom, and Stalin Avenue), featured &quot;monotonous and primarily two-story construction of administrative and residential buildings&quot;. This reconstruction &quot;preserved the existing network of city streets as it was economically unjustified to redesign them&quot;. The city was described as &quot;...a Communist-era backwater, rebuilt into a typically drab provincial Soviet city...&quot; The plan was updated in 1959.

Among the buildings erected in the 1950s and 1960s were the headquarters of the Central Committee of the Turkmenistan Communist Party, the Council of Ministers Building, the Mollanepes Academic Drama Theater, the former Ashkhabad Hotel (now renamed Paytagt), the Academy of Sciences complex, and the downtown library building. On then-Karl Marx Square stood a monument to the Soviet &quot;fighters for victory of Soviet power in Turkmenistan&quot;.

====The 1960s master plan====
The Turkmen State Project Institute undertook a feasibility study in the mid-1960s to forecast Ashgabat&#x27;s development to the year 2000, and on that basis to develop a new master plan. Up until then the city had largely expanded to the east, but now the plan called for development to the south and west. This plan was used for about 20 years, and led to construction of the city&#x27;s first four-story apartment buildings in the Howdan () microdistricts, formerly the site of the Ashgabat-South aerodrome, as well as annexation of three collective farms in the near suburbs and their conversion into residential neighborhoods, one of which, Leningrad kolkhoz, to this day is referred to informally by its former name. The plan was reworked in 1974, and this resulted in relocation of several industrial plants away from the city center, and thus creation of the industrial zones to the northwest, south, southeast, and northeast.

Between 1961 and 1987 the city architect was Abdulla Ahmedov, who introduced Soviet modernism to Ashgabat. Ahmedov&#x27;s greatest architectural accomplishment during this period is considered the Ashgabat Hotel (today renamed Paytagt Hotel), built between 1964 and 1970, &quot;a harmonious synthesis of architecture and monumental art&quot;.

===Growth===
In 1948 Ashgabat was described before the earthquake as lying &quot;on a sloping plain of the Kopet-Dag foothills, stretching seven kilometers from west to east and five kilometers from the railroad right-of-way to the south, in the direction of the mountains&quot;. Through the mid-1970s, Ashgabat was a compact city, as shown by the 1974 Soviet military&#x27;s General Staff map J-40-081. The village of Köşi, collective farm &quot;Leningrad&quot;, airport, and suburbs to the north were outside the city limits.

Beginning in the 1970s, Ashgabat&#x27;s boundaries shifted outward, with the aforementioned municipalities annexed, the aerodrome at Howdan redeveloped, and creation of the Parahat () neighborhoods to the south and industrial parks to the east. In 2013, Ashgabat annexed a portion of the then-Ruhabat district of Ahal Province as well as the city of Abadan (previously named Büzmeýin, and renamed that as a neighborhood) plus all land and villages in between. The southern boundary of Ashgabat was extended southward to the foothills of the Kopet Dag mountains. Overall, Ashgabat&#x27;s land area rose by 37,654 hectares. The following municipalities were abolished due to their incorporation into the city of Ashgabat: city of Abadan, towns of Jülge and Ruhabat, villages of Gökje, Gypjak, Birleşik, Magaryf, Herrikgala, Ýalkym, Gurtly, Hellewler, Ylmy-Tejribe bazasy, Ýasmansalyk, Köne Gurtly, Gulantäzekli, Serdar ýoly, Gaňtar, Gyzyljagala, Inerçýage, Tarhan, Topurly, and Ussagulla. A further expansion occurred January 5, 2018, when additional land to the north was annexed, incorporating the Gurtly Reservoir and two greenfield residential construction projects, known today as Täze Zaman. This statute also established the current four boroughs of Ashgabat.

==Climate==
The Kopet Dag mountain range is about to the south, and Ashgabat&#x27;s northern boundary touches the Kara-Kum desert. Because of this Ashgabat has a cold desert climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;BWk&quot;, bordering on &quot;BWh&quot;) with mediterranean influences. It features very hot, dry summers and cool, short, somewhat moist, winters. The average high temperature in July is . Nighttimes in the summer are warm, with an average minimum temperature in July of . The average January high temperature is , and the average low temperature is . The highest temperature ever recorded in Ashgabat is , recorded in June 2015. A low temperature of was recorded in January 1969. Snow is infrequent in the area. Annual precipitation is only ; March and April are the wettest months, and June to September are the driest months. In May 2022, , 1,352% of the monthly normal, was reported.

==History==
Ashgabat grew on the ruins of the Silk Road city of Konjikala, first mentioned as a wine-producing village in the 1st-2nd century BC and leveled by an earthquake in the 1st century BC. Konjikala was rebuilt because of its advantageous location on the Silk Road and it flourished until its destruction by Mongols in the 13th century. After that it survived as a small village until Russians took over in the 19th century.

The near suburb of Köşi, until 2013 a separate village but in that year annexed by Ashgabat, may have been site of a Parthian fortress constructed to protect the capital city, Nisa, based on discoveries of pottery and other artifacts in the 1970s and as recently as 2020. Other artifacts indicating settlement during the Parthian period were reportedly discovered during laying of telephone cables on the site of the Gülistan (Russian) Bazaar in downtown Ashgabat.

According to Muradov, the first mention of the settlement in modern times is found in Khiva chronicles of 1811.

British Lieutenant Colonel H.C. Stuart reported in 1881 that the Ahal branch of the Teke tribe of the Turkmen ethnic group arrived in the area around 1830 and established several semi-nomadic villages (&quot;auls&quot;) between what are now the city of Gyzylarbat and village of Gäwers, inclusive. One of these villages was named Askhabad. The first Russian reference to Ashgabat dates to 1850, in a document kept in the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs archives listing 43 Ahal fortresses, &quot;Ishkhabad&quot; among them. It was described as a &quot;typical Turkmen &quot;aul&quot;&quot;.

It was formally part of Persia but &quot;de facto&quot; autonomous under Turkoman tribal control until Russian forces defeated the Teke army at the Battle of Geok Tepe in January 1881. Persia ceded Askhabad to the Russian Empire in September 1881 under the terms of the Akhal Treaty.

===Russian Empire===
The city was officially founded January 18, 1881, as a fortified garrison and was named after the Turkmen village on that site. Russian military engineers platted the garrison settlement &quot;on the western edge of the &quot;aul&quot; (village) of Askhabad on the Gaudan (Howdan) road leading to Persia. The fortress stood on a hill 12 meters high, on which was constructed a citadel-redoubt, and below [it], the residential area, surrounded by walls and a moat.&quot; Sixty-seven Turkmen families were compensated for the land confiscated from them for this construction.

Russia developed the area due to its proximity to the border of British-influenced Persia. In 1882 a wagon road was built through the mountains to Quchan, Iran, which led to increased trade as well as settlement of Persian and Armenian merchants in Askhabad. The Trans-Caspian railway reached Askhabad in 1885. The population grew from 2,500 in 1881 to 10,000 in 1886 and 19,428 (of whom one third were Persian) by 1897. The Transcaspian Public Library was established in 1885, boys and girls high schools were founded in 1886, and the Kuropatkin School of Horticulture and Viticulture appeared in 1890. The first telephone station was installed in 1900.

The city was regarded as a pleasant municipality with European-style buildings, shops, and hotels. Several streets were named after Russian military figures, reflecting its status as a garrison town, including the main square, named in honor of General Mikhail Skobelev, commander of Russian forces during the 1880–1881 Trans-Caspian military campaign. These included as well the western boundary avenue, named in honor of General Nikolai Grodekov, and the city&#x27;s central avenue, renamed in the 1890s to honor General and Trans-Caspian Governor-General Aleksey Kuropatkin, both of whom had served in the Trans-Caspian campaign under Skobolev&#x27;s command.

In 1908, the first Bahá&#x27;í House of Worship was built in Askhabad. It was badly damaged in the 1948 earthquake and finally demolished in 1963. The community of the Bahá&#x27;í Faith in Turkmenistan was largely based in Askhabad.

By 1915 Askhabad featured branches of the Russian State Bank, Persian Accounting Loan Bank, Russian-Asian Bank, Société Générale, and Askhabat Mutual Credit Union.

===Soviet period===
Soviet rule was established in Ashgabat in December 1917. However, in July 1918, a coalition of Mensheviks, Social Revolutionaries, and Tsarist former officers of the Imperial Russian Army revolted against the Bolshevik rule emanating from Tashkent and established the Ashkhabad Executive Committee. After receiving some support (but even more promises) from General Malleson, the British withdrew in April 1919 and the Tashkent Soviet resumed control of the city.

In 1919, the city was renamed Poltoratsk (), after Pavel Poltoratskiy, the Chairman of the Soviet of National Economy of the Turkestan Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic. When the Turkmen SSR was established in 1924, Poltoratsk became its capital. The original name but in the form of &quot;Ashkhabad&quot; rather than &quot;Askhabad&quot; was restored in 1927. In keeping with standard Soviet practice, Imperial Russian street names were changed to honor prominent Communists, Russians, or socialist ideals. For example, Skobolev Square became Karl Marx Square, Grodekov Street became Ostrovskiy Street, and Kuropatkin Avenue became Freedom Avenue (and from 1953 to 1961, following Joseph Stalin&#x27;s death, Stalin Avenue). In 1927 a statue of Vladimir Lenin designed by A.A. Karelin and Ye.R. Tripolskaya was erected.

During World War II Ashgabat became a refuge for both institutions, including Moscow State University and the Kiev film studio, and individuals. Roughly 8,000 refugees were quartered in private homes during the war. Among the outsiders who escaped to Ashgabat during the war were Andrei Sakharov and author Yury Olesha. In 1944 Ukrainian motion picture director Mark Donskoy filmed &quot;Rainbow&quot; (, ) in Ashgabat, which was nominated for an Academy Award as best foreign film.

From this period onward, the city experienced rapid growth and industrialisation, although severely disrupted by a major earthquake on October 6, 1948. An estimated 7.3 on the Surface magnitude scale, the earthquake killed 110–176,000 (⅔ of the population of the city), although the official number announced by Soviet news was only 40,000. The earthquake was recorded as one of the deadliest natural disasters in Soviet history.

===Independence===

In July 2003, street names in Ashgabat were replaced by serial numbers except for nine major highways, some named after Saparmurat Niyazov, his father, and his mother. The Presidential Palace Square was designated 2000 to symbolize the beginning of the 21st century. The rest of the streets were assigned larger or smaller four-digit numerical names. Following Niyazov&#x27;s death in 2006, Soviet-era street names were restored, though in the years since, many of them have been replaced with names honoring Turkmen scholars, poets, military heroes, and figures from art and culture, as well as celebrating the nation&#x27;s independence. For example, Karl Marx Square became Garaşsyzlyk (Independence) Square, Ostrovskiy Street became Abba Annaýew (in honor of President Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov&#x27;s great-uncle), and Freedom Avenue became Magtymguly.

In 2013, the city was included in the &quot;Guinness Book of Records&quot; as possessing the world&#x27;s highest concentration of white marble buildings.

Ashgabat&#x27;s &quot;11th Line&quot; project was dedicated on June 29, 2012, including 17 high-rise apartment buildings along 10 ýyl Abadançylyk şaýoly, two secondary schools, two kindergartens, a fire station, and a health clinic. The &quot;12th Line&quot; project was completed October 1, 2014, consisting of a straightening and widening of Atamyrat Nyýazow şaýoly plus construction of 13 high-rise apartment buildings, two secondary schools, two kindergartens, a new headquarters building for the Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs, the Telekeçi shopping center, and the Development Bank. On that same date, the new Cabinet of Ministers building was also opened.

In preparation for the 2017 Asian Indoor and Martial Arts Games, the city spent $5 billion on residential construction. December 4, 2014, the president issued a decree calling for construction of 60 9-story apartment buildings in the Parahat-7 microdistrict, a greenfield project in the southeast quadrant of the city. On November 10, 2015, the &quot;13th Line&quot; was dedicated, a complete reconstruction of buildings along Oguzhan köçesi west of Garaşsyzlyk şaýoly. Projects included demolition and redevelopment of the Leningrad kolkhoz neighborhood as the &quot;14th Line&quot;, and the Gazha and Vosmushka neighborhoods as the &quot;15th Line&quot;.

Subsequent to conclusion of the Asian Indoor and Martial Arts Games, the &quot;16th Line&quot; project, a redevelopment of the Köşi neighborhood and extension of Magtymguly Avenue to the west, was begun in 2018. The &quot;16th Line&quot; was dedicated on November 10, 2020; it includes 16 high-rise apartment buildings, the Gül zemin shopping center, and a monument to the Alabay sheepdog. In addition, the Gurtly and Choganly housing complexes, both greenfield projects, were constructed. In May 2021 the government announced plans for the &quot;17th Line&quot;, consisting of a resort complex encircling Golden Lake (), the former Gurtly Reservoir, to include 268 vacation cottages plus buildings for public services and amenities.

On 23 August 2022 the government announced plans to demolish one- and two-story houses in several microdistricts of central Ashgabat and to replace them with modern apartment buildings. A map of the areas intended for urban renewal was broadcast on national television that day, but no indication of a timeline was given.

The largest current residential project is construction of &quot;Ashgabat-City&quot; &quot;()&quot; north of the Choganly residential neighborhood, which is planned to include over 200 buildings on 744 hectares, and for the first time in the city&#x27;s history to feature some buildings as tall as 35 stories. These will include 180 12- to 35-story residential buildings containing 17,836 apartments intended to house over 107,000 occupants.

Ashgabat milestones:
* 1882–1918 – administrative center of Russia&#x27;s Transcaspian Region
* 1918–1925 – administrative center of the Turkmen Oblast in the Turkestan Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic
* since February 1925 – capital of the Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic
* since October 1991 – capital of independent Turkmenistan

==Districts==
===Boroughs===
&quot;See also&quot; 

As of January 5, 2018, Ashgabat includes four boroughs (&quot;uly etraplar&quot;), each with a presidentially appointed mayor ():

# Bagtyýarlyk etraby (formerly President Niyazov, Lenin District, expanded to include former Ruhabat District plus new territory)
# Berkararlyk etraby (formerly Azatlyk, Sovetskiy District)
# Büzmeýin etraby (formerly Abadan District, expanded to include former Arçabil and Çandybil Districts)
# Köpetdag etraby (formerly Proletarskiy District)

This is a reduction from the previous number of boroughs. Arçabil and Çandybil boroughs were merged on February 4, 2015, and the new &quot;etrap&quot;, named Arçabil, was in turn renamed Büzmeýin in January 2018. At that time the Abadan borough of Ashgabat, created in 2013 by annexing the town of Abadan and surrounding villages to Abadan&#x27;s south, was abolished and its territory was merged into the newly renamed Büzmeýin borough. The former Ruhabat borough was abolished at the same time and its territory absorbed by Bagtyýarlyk borough.

On 15 June 2020, Turkmen President Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov announced intention to create a fifth borough of Ashgabat, to be called Altyn etraby, centered on the new resort zone created on the shores of the former Gurtly Water Reservoir, recently renamed &quot;Golden Lake&quot; (Altyn köl).

===Microdistricts===
Ashgabat&#x27;s boroughs are subdivided into microdistricts (, ). These are administrative units that possess no independent governance structures. They are used for management of utilities and publicly owned housing. Ashgabat includes the following microdistricts:

* 1 through 11 Etrapça
* 30 Etrapça
* Howdan A
* Howdan B
* Howdan W
* Parahat 1 through 8

==Demographics==
In 1871 a Russian visitor named Strebnitskiy counted over four thousand &quot;nomad tents&quot; (yurts), implying a population of 16 to 20 thousand Ahal Teke Turkmen, many of whom were killed or dispersed in the 1881 Battle of Geok Tepe. The population was 2,500 in 1881, virtually all Russian. By 1886 Askhabad&#x27;s population was about 10,000, mainly ethnic Russians. Construction of the Trans-Caspian Railway stimulated an influx of migrants seeking employment, particularly from the Caucasus, Volga Valley, and Iran, and Askhabad&#x27;s subsequent population growth was as follows:

1897: 19,426
1908: 39,867
1911: 45,384

Ethnic Russians dominated the population after 1881, with about 20 percent admixture of Caucasus-origin migrants (mainly Armenian). One source indicates that pre-revolutionary Askhabad had no Turkmen residents at all, and that they lived in nearby &quot;auls&quot;. This began to change in the 1920s, following imposition of Soviet power, which brought with it forced collectivization. In 1926 Ashkhabad&#x27;s population of 51,593 included 52.4% Russians, 13.53% Armenian, 4.3% Persians, and 29.8% &quot;other&quot;. By 1939, Ashkhabad counted 126,500 residents, including 11.7% Armenian. The 1959 census recorded a population of 169,900, which grew to 338,000 by 1983, including 105 nationalities, of which ethnic Armenians constituted 40 percent.

According to estimates of the 2012 Turkmen census the Turkmens form 78.5% of the city&#x27;s population. Russians form 10% of the population, followed by Turks (1.1%), Uzbeks (1.1%), and Azeris (1%).

==Architecture==

===Post-1991===
Following independence in 1991, President Saparmurat Niyazov began hiring foreign architectural and construction firms, most prominently Bouygues of France and the Turkish firms Polimeks and Gap Inşaat, the latter a subsidiary of Çalık Holding. These firms blended Persian-style domes, which Niyazov favored, with Greco-Roman architectural elements such as pillars.

Following Niyazov&#x27;s death, domes began to go out of fashion for buildings other than mosques, and public buildings began to take on more modernist characteristics, often with a motif reflecting the structure&#x27;s intended occupant. For example, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs building is topped by a globe of the Earth, inside which is a conference center; the Development Bank building is topped by a giant coin; the Ministry of Health and Medical Industry building is shaped like a stylized caduceus, the dental hospital is shaped like a molar and the international terminal of Ashgabat International Airport is shaped like a falcon. The dominant characteristic of new construction since 1991 has been nearly universal facing with white marble. Another recurring motif is the eight-pointed star of Oguz Han, the largest of which is on the television tower and has entered the Guinness Book of World Records. The official Turkmen government guide book to Ashgabat refers to the star of Oguz Khan as &quot;...the basic dominant of the whole architectural-art decor...&quot;

After independence, the city architect&#x27;s office ordered construction of many high-rise (generally 12-story) residential buildings. Modern construction techniques allow high-rise development with good seismic safety. Primarily consisting of residential towers, the first floor is typically used as retail space and for building maintenance.

===Monuments and statues===
Ashgabat features many sculptures honoring Turkmen, Turkic, and other Islamic poets and heroes. Four statues, of Lenin, Alexander Pushkin, Taras Shevchenko, and Magtymguly, date to the Soviet period, as do a statue and a bust of Turkmen composer Nury Halmammedov. Since then, however, much new sculpture has appeared. In Ylham (Inspiration) Park are found numerous busts and statues. Additional statues can be seen in the VDNH Park. A monumental statue of the current president was dedicated in May 2015 near Ashgabat Stadium. One also finds statues of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and Alp Arslan. In addition to the statue of former President Niyazov atop the Neutrality Monument, a gilded statue of him stands before the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and a gilded seated statue of him graces the entry to the Turkmen Agricultural University.

Since independence in 1991, several monuments to features of Turkmenistan&#x27;s governance have been erected: to neutrality, to the constitution, to the renaissance of Turkmenistan, to independence, as well as a special monument to former President Saparmurat Niyazov&#x27;s magnum opus, &quot;Ruhnama&quot;.

The memorial complex in Bekrewe includes a statue of a bull with the Earth balanced on its horns, symbolizing the 1948 earthquake, and a statue of two traditionally dressed Turkmen warriors guarding a widow grieving the death of her husband in World War II. The exterior wall of the museum features bas reliefs depicting events in Turkmenistan&#x27;s history.

In advance of the V Asian Indoor and Martial Arts Games held in September 2017, roughly one billion dollars was spent on widening and upgrading Ashgabat&#x27;s major thoroughfares. Several traffic circles were created, in which were placed mainly abstract monuments. As of 2020 the most recent addition to these are the Bicycle Monument (), which President Berdimuhamedov dedicated on June 3, 2020, and the Turkmen Alabay monument, dedicated on November 10, 2020.

In May 2024, a monument dedicated to the 300th anniversary of the birth of Turkmen poet and philosopher Magtymguly Pyragy was unveiled in Ashgabat, near Walk of Health at the foot of the Kopetdag mountain range. The 60-meter sculpture of the poet stands on a 20-meter pedestal, to which a majestic staircase with massive granite bowls leads.

In October 2024, a statue of Kazakh poet Abai Qunanbaiuly was unveiled in Lachyn Park in Ashgabat.

===Controversies===
Much of the urban renewal since 1991 has involved demolition of traditional single-family residential housing, commonly with allegedly forced eviction of residents, and often without compensation to the homeowners. In particular, private homes rebuilt in neighborhoods flattened by the 1948 earthquake, many of which were never formally registered with the government, were subject to confiscation and demolition without compensation, as were former dacha communities like Ruhabat, Berzengi, and Choganly, which in nearly all cases lacked formal ownership documents.

===First Baha&#x27;i Temple in the world===

When Ashgabat was under Russian rule, the number of Bahá&#x27;ís in the city rose to over 1,000, and a Bahá&#x27;í community was established, with its own schools, medical facilities and cemetery. The community elected one of the first Bahá&#x27;í local administrative institutions. In 1908 the Bahá&#x27;í community completed the construction of the first Bahá&#x27;í House of Worship, sometimes referred to by its Arabic name of &quot;mašriqu-l-&#x27;aḏkār&quot; (), where people of all religions may worship God without denominational restrictions. The building was designed under the guidance of `Abdu&#x27;l-Bahá by Ustad&#x27; Ali-Akbar Banna Yazdi who also wrote a history of the Baha&#x27;is in Ashgabat.

The House of Worship itself was surrounded by gardens, with four buildings at the four corners of the gardens: a school, a hostel where travelling Bahá&#x27;ís were entertained, a small hospital, and a building for groundskeepers.

Under the Soviet policy towards religion, the Bahá&#x27;ís, strictly adhering to their principle of obedience to legal government, abandoned these properties in 1928. For the decade from 1938 to 1948, when it was seriously damaged by the earthquake, it was an art gallery. It was demolished in 1963.

=== Other notable structures===
The Arch of Neutrality was dismantled and re-erected in its original form in the south of the capital.

Turkmenistan Tower, the television and radio broadcasting tower, at a height of 211 meters is the tallest structure in the country. It was dedicated on October 17, 2011.

The administrative center of Ashgabat as the national capital is on the Archabil highway, where several ministries and agencies, as well as educational, research, and cultural centers, are found. The former Novofiryuzenskoye shosse (New Firyuza Highway) was rebuilt by Gap Inşaat in 2004.

==Economy==
The principal industries are cotton textiles and metal working. It is a major stop on the Trans-Caspian railway. A large percentage of the employment in Ashgabat is provided by the state institutions; such as the ministries, undersecretariats, and other administrative bodies of the Turkmenistan government. There are also many foreign citizens working as diplomats or clerks in the embassies of their respective countries. Ashgabat lends its name to the Ashgabat agreement, signed by India, Oman, Iran, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan, for creating an international transport and transit corridor facilitating transportation of goods between Central Asia and the Persian Gulf.

In 2019 and 2020, Ashgabat was the most expensive city in the world for foreign expatriates in ECA International&#x27;s Cost of Living Survey. It was also listed as the second most expensive city in the world overall by the 2020 Mercer Cost of Living Survey. Its high cost of living for foreigners has been attributed to severe inflation and rising import costs.

===Industry===
Between 1881 and 1921, little industry existed in Ashgabat. Muradov relates that in 1915 the city featured &quot;68 enterprises, mainly semi-handicrafts, with a total of 200-300 workers&quot;. Another source relates that as of 1911 roughly half the workforce of somewhat more than 400 &quot;workers&quot; was employed at the railroad depot, engaged in locomotive and railcar maintenance and repair, with the rest occupied in cotton ginning, cottonseed oil extraction, flour milling, and leather-, brick-, glass-, and iron production. By 1915 the city boasted as well three printing houses, an electrical power station, three cotton gins, a creamery, a tannery, and 35 brickyards.

In 1921 Soviet authorities built a new glass plant plus a wine and spirits factory. In the years following several more factories were added, including the &quot;Red Metalworker&quot; iron-working plant (1925), the silk spinning plant (1928), a cotton spinning plant and textile plant (1929), candy factory (1930), garment factory (1933), shoe factory (1934), and a meat cannery (1938). As of 1948, Ashgabat boasted &quot;about twenty large factory-plant enterprises, which produce fabrics, glass, footwear, garments, meat products, dredges, agricultural implement parts and much else&quot;.

Annexation of the former city of Buzmeyin (), which from 2002 to 2018 was known as Abadan, brought into Ashgabat&#x27;s city limits its major industrial suburb. Today&#x27;s Buzmeyin neighborhood features the Buzmeyin State Electrical Power Plant, and factories for production of reinforced concrete, cement, asbestos roofing, pipes, and concrete blocks, as well as a carpet-weaving factory and soft-drink bottling plant.

Today more than 43 large and 128 medium-sized industrial enterprises along with over 1,700 small industrial facilities are located in Ashgabat and its suburbs. The most important are Ashneftemash, Turkmenkabel, and Turkmenbashy Textile Complex.

====Electrical power generation====
The Abadan State Power Plant (now Büzmeýin State Power Plant), commissioned in 1957, was the first large power plant in Turkmenistan. Two gas turbine plants with a capacity of 123 MW each currently generate electricity in this plant. The Ashgabat State Power Plant, located in the southern part of city, began operating in 2006. It is equipped with gas turbine generators with a total capacity of 254.2 megawatts.

Ashgabat also draws power from the Ahal State Power Plant, located outside the city in Ahal Province. It began operating in 2010 with two gas turbines producing 254.2 MW. Three small gas turbines were added in 2013 and two more gas turbines in 2014, bringing capacity to 648.1 MW.

===Shopping===

Altyn Asyr Bazaar in Choganly, also known as &quot;Tolkuchka&quot;, features manufactured items including traditional fabrics and hand-woven carpets, as well as livestock and used automobiles.

Modern shopping areas are found mostly in central streets, including the modern Berkarar Mall, Arkaç Mall, Ashgabat Shopping and Entertainment Center, Gül Zemin and Paýtagt, as well as the 15 Years of Independence Shopping Centre (), colloquially known as the &quot;Wholesale Market&quot; ().

Local residents tend to shop at traditional bazaars: Gülistan (Russian) Bazaar, Teke Bazaar, Daşoguz Bazaar, Paytagt (Mir) Bazaar, and Jennet Bazaar. The Turkish-owned Yimpaş department store closed as of December 2016.

==Transportation==

The city is served by the Ashgabat International Airport, expansion of which cost $2.3 billion and which has a design capacity of 14,000,000 passengers per year. Turkmenistan Airlines is headquartered at the airport. Ashgabat offers air service to and from all the major cities of the Turkmenistan. Since March 2020, in order to prevent the import and spread of coronavirus infection, all planes arriving in Turkmenistan from abroad are redirected to the Turkmenabat International Airport.

On 18 October 2006, the Ashgabat Cable Car opened, connecting the city with the foothills of the Kopetdag.

Ashgabat Monorail commenced service in 2016, becoming the first monorail in the Central Asia region. It is a loop 5.2 kilometers long and circulates exclusively on the territory of the Olympic Village ().

In January 2018, it was reported that black cars had been impounded for weeks in Ashgabat, a result of President Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov&#x27;s conviction that black cars bring bad luck.

The Ukrainian construction firm Interbudmontazh has proposed construction of a subway (metropolitan) line, to connect the Ashgabat-Siti residential area in the northern suburbs to downtown Ashgabat.

=== Autobahn ===

Ashgabat is linked to Tejen, Mary, Türkmenabat and neighbouring countries by the country&#x27;s 600 km autobahn network.

=== Railway ===
Ashgabat has a single central railway station. In May 2009 the restoration of the Ashgabat railway station was completed. The railway station is made in Soviet-style architecture with its long point on the building roof.

The Trans-Caspian Railway (Türkmenbaşy–Balkanabat–Bereket–Ashgabat–Mary–Türkmenabat) runs through Ashgabat from east to west. Since 2006 there is also a train line from Ashgabat to the north, the Trans-Karakum Railway.

As of July 2021, the following railway routes are scheduled from and to Ashgabat:

*Ashgabat-Balkanabat
*Ashgabat-Türkmenbaşy
* Ashgabat-Dashoguz
* Ashgabat-Sarahs
* Ashgabat-Serhetabat
* Ashgabat-Amyderýa

=== City buses and trolleybus ===
Public transport in the city consists mainly of buses. More than 100 bus lines cover a total range of more than with 700 buses running on urban routes. The city primarily uses Iran Khodro 0457 (Mercedes-Benz) and Hyundai New Super Aero City buses. Bus timetables and detailed schematic map of the route are at every stop. Distances between stops are about 300–500 meters.

Travel in the Ashgabat city public transport for the majority of the country&#x27;s population incurs a fee. Money is thrown into a box next to the driver. Large bills are given to the driver, he gives change. The fare for travel in city public transport is 50 Turkmen tenge (since 2017). Route taxi (marshrutka) is 1 manat.

Information about bus routes and stops in Ashgabat is available in the mobile application Duralga.

From November 1, 2017, the electronic system of payment for public transport came into full force in Ashgabat. Payment can be made using an electronic transport card. There are three types of electronic cards: school, for pensioners and general. When entering through the front door of the bus, the passenger must present the electronic card to the validator. The term of use of the transport electronic card is 4 years.

The new International Passenger Bus Terminal of Ashgabat was inaugurated on September 5, 2014. It offers intercity service to Bäherden, Türkmenbaşy, Dashoguz, Turkmenabat, Archman, Konye-Urgench, and Mollagara, as well as points in between. The main intracity bus terminals serving Ashgabat are near the Teke Bazaar and at the domestic airport terminal. Intercity lines are operated by Hyundai Universe Luxury, Iran Khodro SC 0457, Sahab Renault and Yutong ZK6129H.

Also, suburban communication has been established with Ýaşlyk, Geok Tepe, Gorjaw, Yzgant, Babarap, Bugdaýly, Annau, Gämi, Owadandepe, Watan, Khurmant, Onaldy, Gami Dacha, Kasamly Julge, Gäwers, Yashyldepe, Akdashayak, Niyazow, Suitchilik, Parahat. PAZ 32054 buses and Volkswagen minibuses operate on suburban routes. Some intercity buses also stop at various other points in Ashgabat, including the airport and railway station.
From 19 October 1964 to 31 December 2011 the city also had the Ashgabat trolleybus system. At the beginning of the twentieth century a narrow-gauge steam railway connected the city with the suburb of Firyuza. As of 2011, there were 7 routes in the city. As of 2011, the Ashgabat trolleybus fleet had 47 trolleybuses (Škoda 14TrM) on its balance sheet. In 2000, the last obsolete trolleybuses of the JuMZ-T2 model were written off.

=== Taxi ===
In Ashgabat and Turkmenistan, taxicabs are mostly white or yellow coloured . Taxis have a small green illuminated cylinder-like &quot;TAXI&quot; sign on the roof of the car.

Typically the taxicabs are Toyota Corolla, JAC J7 and Hyundai Elantra along with other, mainly Asian, brands. Taxicabs are either sedans, station wagons, or MPVs. Most taxicabs are automatic transmission, and some have navigation systems on board.

In Ashgabat taxis are available at any time of the day or night. Passengers may also hire taxicabs via mobile apps. Other hailing methods, such as telephone based calls or raising one&#x27;s hand on the street, are also common as well.

== Telecommunication ==
As of 2021, Ashgabat has two mobile phone service providers:
* Altyn Asyr is a Turkmen national state company for the provision of communication services, established in 2004. In 2010, the company launched a 3G network of UMTS standard, covering all districts of Ashgabat and the Ashgabat International Airport . On September 18, 2013, the 4G network was put into operation using LTE technology.
* Ashgabat City Telephone Network provides CDMA communication services (over 55 thousand subscribers). The network was created and put into operation by the company for the first time in 2003.

In addition to the mobile network providers, Turkmentelecom provides internet services.

Turkmenpochta is the official national postal operator of Turkmenistan. Based in Ashgabat, it currently operates through 38 postal offices in city.

=== Media ===

Notable newspapers published in Ashgabat include the daily newspapers &quot;Türkmenistan&quot; and &quot;Neytralny Turkmenistan&quot;.

==== TV ====
The main offices of 7 television channels are located in Ashgabat: Altyn Asyr, Yashlyk, Miras, Turkmenistan Sport, Turkmen Owazy, Ashgabat and Turkmenistan TV.

Ashgabat TV is main city channel. The channel tells about the events of social, cultural, economic life, the activities of scientific and educational institutions of the Ashgabat.

Almost 136 international TV channels are available in the IPTV playlist for subscribers of the Ashgabat City Telephone Network. Most of them are thematic channels: news, sports, scientific and educational, TV channels for children, channels of various genres of cinema, music.

Residents of Ashgabat also watch television via satellite dishes.

==== Radio ====
As of 2008, Ashgabat has 4 FM stations: Owaz, Char Tarapdan, Miras and Watan. These stations can additionally be streamed through Turkmentelecom&#x27;s website.

==Human resources==
===Science and education===


Ashgabat is the most important educational center of Turkmenistan with several institutions of higher education. Magtymguly Turkmen State University was founded in 1950. The main university building is located on Beýik Saparmyrat Türkmenbaşy şaýoly. Turkmen State Medical University is situated in Ashgabat as well. It is subordinate to the Ministry of Health and Pharmaceutical Industry of Turkmenistan. Other prominent institutions are the Turkmen State Institute of Economics and Management, a main business school founded in 1980, as well as the Turkmen State Institute of Architecture and Construction, Turkmen Agricultural University, and The National Institute of Sports and Tourism of Turkmenistan. In 2016, the English- and Japanese-medium Oguz Khan University of Engineering Technologies was opened with support of the Japanese government. The International University of Humanities and Development is another English-medium institution of higher education. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs&#x27; training ground is the Institute of International Relations.

Ashgabat is home to five military academies: the Military Institute, the Naval Institute, the Border Guards Institute, the Institute of National Security, and the Ministry of Internal Affairs Institute. In 2020 the Military Institute began accepting applications from women.

Four international secondary schools operate in Ashgabat. The Russian Embassy sponsors the Russian-medium A.S. Pushkin Russo-Turkmen School, the French construction company Bouygues sponsors a French school for children of its Francophone employees, the Turkish Embassy sponsors the Turkish-medium Turgut Ozal Turkmen-Turkish School, and the American Embassy sponsors the English-medium Ashgabat International School.

Prior to establishment of Soviet authority in Turkmenistan, Ashgabat had only 11 schools and no scientific or research centers. By 1948 Ashgabat had three institutions of higher education, 20 technical schools, 60 libraries, &quot;and approximately the same number of kindergartens&quot;.

The Turkmen Academy of Sciences was founded June 29, 1951, and includes the unique Desert Institute among its 26 scientific research institutes, as well as the State Seismological Service, 17-degree-granting schools, two medical research centers, a library, and two print shops. The Academy of Sciences is the only institution in Turkmenistan accredited to award postgraduate degrees. In 2019, President Berdimuhamedov decreed that state funding of the Academy of Sciences would end within three years. Prior to founding of the Turkmen Academy of Sciences, local scientific-research institutes, all located in a single two-story building, were subordinate to the USSR Academy of Sciences.

=== Health ===
Ashgabat is a center for healthcare and medical training of Turkmenistan. Large-scale reconstruction work on buildings and modernization of the material and technical base of existing healthcare institutions is constantly ongoing in the city.

The Directorate of International Medical Centers in Ashgabat includes International Center Ene mähri (maternity hospital), International Center of Endocrinology and Surgery, International Center of Head and Neck Diseases, International Center of Eye Diseases, Ashgabat Dental Center, International Center of Cardiology, International Center of Internal Medicine, International Center of Neurology, International Diagnostic Center, International Education and Science Center, International Diagnostic Center, International Education and Science Center, International Center of Traumatology and International Burn Center. The main medical centers are located along Professor Hans Meissner Avenue in the south of Ashgabat. In 2024, they were opened International Health and Rehabilitation Center, and the International Scientific and Clinical Center of Physiology.

Medical and preventive institutions in Ashgabat include: Scientific-Clinical Center of Oncology, Scientific-clinical center for Maternal and Child health, Treatment and Consultative centre named after S.А.Niyazov, Hospital with Scientific Clinical Centre of Cardiology, Emergency First Aid Center, Central Bureau of Pathologic Anatomy, Central Bureau of Forensic Medicine, Central Medical-Recovery Hospital, Medical Diagnostic Center.

The Directorate of Infectious Disease Centers is located in the Choganly residential complex in the north of Ashgabat, which includes Central Dermatovenerological Hospital, Treatment and prevention Center for infectious diseases, Blood Center, National AIDS Prevention Center, Center for Treatment and Prevention of Tuberculosis and Centralized Laboratory.

The central office of the State Sanitary and Epidemiological Service is located in Ashgabat. The Center for Public Health and Nutrition and the Center for the Prevention of Particularly Dangerous Infections operate in Ashgabat.

As of 2018, there are 16 outpatient clinic&#x27;s operating in the Ashgabat.

==== Medical education ====
The following higher and secondary medical educational institutions operate in Ashgabat: Turkmen State Medical University named after Myrat Garryev, Indira Gandhi Secondary Medical School of Ashgabat. The following were established at the Turkmen State Medical University: in 2011 – the Scientific and Clinical Center for Eye Diseases, in 2013 – the Educational and Industrial Center for Dentistry, and in 2015 – the Educational and Scientific Center for the Protection of Maternal and Child Health.

==== Medical industry ====
The city pays great attention to the development of the pharmaceutical industry. The following medical industry and pharmaceutical supply institutions operate in Ashgabat: Turkmendermansenagat Association, Main Pharmacy Association, Center for Drug Registration and State Quality Control, Institute of Medicinal Plants, Saglyk Pharmaceutical Enterprise, Türkmen Ajanta Pharma Limited Joint Venture, Tenekär Pharmaceutical Enterprise, Berzengi Mineral Healing Water Enterprise, Disinfectant Solutions Production Enterprise.

==== Sanatoriums ====
The Berzeňňi Sanatorium is located at the foothills of the Kopetdag mountains, 7.5 kilometers south of center of Ashgabat. Operating since 1967, a new building was inaugurated in 2012. The sanatorium features a unique mineral water source from a 1,600-meter-deep well. This water has a distinct hydrochemical composition, including magnesium sulfate, potassium, and low mineralization, and has various therapeutic properties. It is used to treat conditions such as digestive system diseases, hypertension, cardiovascular issues, and joint diseases. The sanatorium operates year-round, offering both outpatient and spa treatments.

== Culture ==
Ashgabat is the cultural heart of Turkmenistan. Ashgabat enjoys numerous theatres, museums, galleries, concert halls, cinemas and foreign cultural institutions.

=== Museums and galleries ===

On March 17, 1899, the official opening of the Trans-Caspian Regional Museum took place in Ashgabat. On November 12, 1998, the opening of the National Museum of Turkmenistan took place. Its primary goal is to chronicle Turkmenistan&#x27;s history in various forms from the earliest periods using historical and archaeological collections. Since 2013, the museum began to be called The State Museum of the State Cultural Center of Turkmenistan. The total area of the museum is 165,323.21 m2. On the ground floor of the main building there is a department of Turkmenistan Independence, a department of Turkmen carpet and temporary exhibitions, on the second floor there is a department of Ancient History, Margush, Parthia and two halls of the history of the Middle Ages. The Museum of the President of Turkmenistan of the State Museum of the State Cultural Center of Turkmenistan was commissioned in June 2009. The main objective of this museum is a thorough study of information about the domestic and foreign policies of Turkmenistan. The Museum of Ethnography and Local History of the State Museum of the State Cultural Center of Turkmenistan opened in May 2009. The exhibition on the first floor of the museum is dedicated to the nature of Turkmenistan. On the second floor there is an exhibition concerning the ethnography of Turkmenistan. The exhibition of the Museum of Nature consists of 11 sections.

Museums include the Turkmen Fine Arts Museum and Turkmen Carpet Museum, noted for their impressive collection of woven carpets as well as a Turkmen history museum and the Ashgabat National Museum of History, which displays artifacts dating back to the Parthian and Persian civilizations.

The Watan Mukaddesligi Museum is located in the southwest of Ashgabat, within the Halk Hakydasy Memorial Complex. Opened in 2014, the museum focuses on preserving and showcasing the historical and cultural heritage of Turkmenistan. It features four thematic halls dedicated to events such as the Battle of Geoktepe, World War II, the 1948 Ashgabat earthquake, and the modern development of Ashgabat. The museum houses over 1,000 exhibits.

Since 2024, a private art gallery ART-bazar has been operating in Ashgabat. ART-bazar is a creative space in Ashgabat showcasing works by artisans from various regions of Turkmenistan. It features a range of traditional crafts, including ceramics, paintings, felt tapestries, leather items, and handmade paper, offering visitors an introduction to the country’s artistic and cultural heritage.

=== Performing arts ===

Ashgabat&#x27;s major theaters are:
*Alp Arslan National Drama Theatre
*Magtymguly National Musical and Drama Theatre
*Main Drama Theatre named by Saparmurat Turkmenbashi
*Mollanepes Students Theatre
*Mukams Palace
*Pushkin State Russian Drama Theatre
*Theatre &quot;Art Ist&quot;
*Turkmen State Puppet Theatere
*Turkmen State Circus

Each of several former municipalities annexed by Ashgabat also features local a &quot;house of culture&quot; .

===Cinemas===
Ashgabat has six cinemas. In 2011, Aşgabat Cinema, the first 3D cinema in Turkmenistan, opened in Ashgabat. The Watan and Turkmenistan theaters were reconstructed. Additional cinemas are located in the Berkarar Mall, the Gül Zemin Mall and Arkach Mall.

=== Libraries ===
The State Library of Turkmenistan was founded in 1892 and has undergone several name changes since then. In 1976, a new building was constructed for the library, and in 1992, it was granted national status. Since 2007, it has been part of the State Culture Center of Turkmenistan. The library houses over 6 million items and actively develops electronic resources.

The State Children&#x27;s Library of Turkmenistan named after Bazar Amanov was established in 1935. It serves as the national repository of children&#x27;s literature and a methodological center for children&#x27;s and school libraries. The library includes specialized sections for book storage, cataloging, and services for different age groups, from preschool children to high school students, as well as an arts department. Since 2016, the library has been operating an integrated electronic library system. The library&#x27;s collection consists of over 250,000 items.

==Main sights==

Ashgabat was home to the Arch of Neutrality, a 75 m (250 ft) tall tripod crowned by a golden statue of late president Saparmurat Niyazov (also known as &quot;Turkmenbashy&quot;, or head Turkmen). The 15 m (50 ft) high statue, which rotated in order to always face the sun during daylight hours, was removed on August 26, 2010, after Niyazov&#x27;s successor, current President Berdimuhamedov, made clear earlier in the year that the statue was to be taken out of Ashgabat&#x27;s Independence Square. In 2011 a Monument to the Constitution was built, its total height of 185 m (607 ft) makes it the second tallest structure in Turkmenistan.

Alem Cultural and Entertainment Center was recognised by &quot;Guinness World Records&quot; as the world&#x27;s tallest Ferris wheel in an enclosed space. The Ashgabat Flagpole is the fifth tallest free–standing flagpole in the world, standing at tall. The Ashgabat Fountain has the world&#x27;s greatest number of fountain pools in a public place. Ashgabat also features Turkmenistan Tower which is the tallest tower in Turkmenistan, the decorative octagonal Star of Oguzkhan is recognized as the world&#x27;s largest architectural image of the star and entered in the &quot;Guinness World Records&quot;.

===Palaces===
*Oguzhan Presidential Palace, the official presidential headquarters.
*Ruhyýet Palace, a place for official state events, forums, meetings, inaugurations.
*Wedding Palace, a civil registry building.

===Parks and squares===
Ashgabat has many parks and open spaces, mainly established in the early years of the Independence and well maintained and expanded thereafter. The most important of these parks are: the Botanical Garden, Güneş, Turkmen-Turkish friendship, Independence. The oldest city park, Ashgabat, was founded in 1887 and is colloquially known as First Park. In the center of Ashgabat is the Inspiration Alley, an art-park complex which is a favorite place for many locals. The amusement park World of Turkmenbashi Tales is a local equivalent to Disneyland. Squares: 10 Years of Turkmenistan Independence, Magtymguly, Eternal Flame, Zelili, Chyrchyk, Garashsyzlyk, March 8, Gerogly, Dolphin, 15 years of Independence, Ruhyýet, 10 ýyl Abadançylyk, Ylham and Tashkent.

The Ashgabat Botanical Garden was founded on 1 October 1929, and is the oldest botanical garden in Central Asia. It covers a territory of approximately 18 hectares, and contains a live exhibition of more than 500 different species of plants coming from various parts of the world.

==== Halk Hakydasy Memorial Complex ====

Halk Hakydasy Memorial Complex was opened in 2014 in remembrance of those killed in the Battle of Geok Tepe in 1881, during World War II, and to commemorate of the victims of the 1948 Ashgabat earthquake. It is located in the southwestern part of the city on Bekreve street.

==== Magtymguly Pyragy Cultural and Park Complex ====

In 2024, monuments dedicated to 24 foreign writers and poets were erected in the Magtymguly Pyragy Cultural and Park Complex in Ashgabat. These statues honor renowned figures such as Sayat-Nova, Yanka Kupala, Du Fu, Honoré de Balzac, Shota Rustaveli, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Sándor Petőfi, Rabindranath Tagore, Hafez Shirazi, Dante Alighieri, Yasunari Kawabata, Kurmangazy Sagyrbayuly, Chingiz Aitmatov, Raja Ali Haji, Adam Mickiewicz, Mihai Eminescu, Fyodor Dostoevsky, Juan Jiménez, , Yunus Emre, Hryhorii Skovoroda, William Shakespeare, Langston Hughes and Alisher Navoi. Each sculpture captures the essence and unique spirit of the artist&#x27;s work.

===Mosques===

Major mosques in Ashgabat include:
* Türkmenbaşy Ruhy Mosque
* Ärtogrul Gazy Mosque, a gift from Turkey, was inaugurated in 1998 and resembles the Blue Mosque in Istanbul.
* Hezreti Osman Mosque in the 8th microdistrict
* Hezreti Omar Mosque in the Parahat 7 microdistrict
* Azadi Mosque on Zarpçi köçesi
* Shehitler () mosque on Görogly köçesi
* Iranian mosque near the Iranian Embassy

There are also several mosques in former towns and villages annexed by Ashgabat and thus now neighborhoods within the city limits.

===Churches===
Ashgabat has five operating Christian churches. Four are Russian Orthodox churches:

* Saint Alexander Nevsky Church, founded in 1882 as parish church of the Russian military garrison, consecrated in 1900, located in the 30th Microdistrict ()
* Temple of Saint Nicholas the Miracle-Worker, located inside the Khitrovka Cemetery ()
* Temple of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, located near the Ruhnama School ()
* Temple of the Holy Equals to Apostles Cyril and Methodius, located in Büzmeýin ()

The Roman Catholic Chapel of the Transfiguration operates on the grounds of the Apostolic nunciature.

Other Christian denominations exist but as of 2019 only two were registered with the government and thus able to operate legally. The U.S. Department of State reported that Turkmen authorities &quot;scrutinize or obstruct religious
groups attempting to purchase or lease buildings or land for religious purposes&quot;.

==Sports==
The main sporting venues in Ashgabat are the Olympic Stadium, Ashgabat Stadium, the National Olympic ice rink, Sports complex for winter sports and the Ashgabat Watersports Complex.

Ashgabat was chosen as the host city of the 2017 Asian Indoor and Martial Arts Games. Between 2010 and 2017 an Olympic Village was built by the Turkish firm Polimeks south of the city center, at a cost of $5 billion.

In October 2017 a Jack Nicklaus Designs Signature 18-hole golf course opened in Ashgabat. It features 82 sand traps and covers 70 hectares.

Ashgabat was the host of the 2018 IWF World Weightlifting Championships and 2023 World Kurash Championships.

The city&#x27;s professional football clubs Altyn Asyr FK, FC Aşgabat and FK Köpetdag Aşgabat play in the Ýokary Liga, the top league of Turkmenistan.

Ashgabat is home to several professional ice hockey teams. Galkan, Merdana, Nesil, Shir, Oguzkhan, Watanchy play in the Turkmenistan Hockey Championship. Ashgabat annually hosts the President of the Turkmeinistan Cup ice hockey tournament. There are three ice arenas in Ashgabat: Winter Sports Complex Ashgabat (10,300 seats capacity), Ashgabat Ice Palace (1000 seats) and Galkan Ice Palace (630 seats).

Inha Babakova, 1999 World High Jump champion, was born in Ashgabat.
Born in Ashgabat weightlifter Polina Guryeva captured Turkmenistan&#x27;s first Olympic medal at the 2020 Summer Olympics, taking silver in the women&#x27;s 59 kg.

== International relations ==
=== Diplomatic missions===
The city hosts 32 foreign embassies and serves as the headquarters for the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea and United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia (UNRCCA).

===Twin towns – sister cities===

Ashgabat is twinned with:

* Aktau, Kazakhstan
* Albuquerque, United States (1990)
* Ankara, Turkey (1994)
* Astana, Kazakhstan (2017)
* Athens, Greece
* Bamako, Mali (1974)
* Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan (2018)
* Dushanbe, Tajikistan (2017)
* Kyiv, Ukraine (2001)
* Lanzhou, China (1992)
* Tashkent, Uzbekistan (2017)

===Partner cities===
Ashgabat cooperates with:
* Moscow, Russia (1996) 
* Chelyabinsk Oblast, Russia (1997) 
* Yerevan, Armenia (2014)
* Tokyo, Japan (2014)

== See also ==
*Ashgabat Trauma Center
* Boroughs and landmarks of Ashgabat
**Bagtyýarlyk District
**Berkararlyk District
**Bitarap Turkmenistan Avenue 
**Büzmeýin (Abadan)
**Büzmeýin District
**Galkynysh Square, Ashgabat
**Gypjak
**Independence Square, Ashgabat
**Kopetdag District
**Magtymguly Avenue
**Saparmurat Turkmenbashy Avenue
* List of cities in Turkmenistan
* OpenStreetMap wiki article on geography of Ashgabat
* Russian Turkestan

==Notes==
== References ==
===Sources===
*Е. М. Поспелов (Ye. M. Pospelov). &quot;Имена городов: вчера и сегодня (1917–1992). Топонимический словарь.&quot; (&quot;City Names: Yesterday and Today (1917–1992). Toponymic Dictionary.&quot;) Москва, &quot;Русские словари&quot;, 1993.

==External links==
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23438" start="0" end="8" title="Ashgabat" label="Ashgabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9267" start="10" end="17" title="Turkmen language" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="47" end="54" title="capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="75" end="87" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q172702" start="109" end="123" title="Karakum Desert" label="Karakum Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q328072" start="132" end="140" title="Kopet Dag" label="Kopetdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="159" end="171" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088792" start="215" end="239" title="Iran-Turkmenistan border" label="Iran-Turkmenistan border"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047578" start="348" end="352" title="Teke (Turkmen tribe)" label="Teke"/>
<link wikidata="Q199707" start="397" end="430" title="Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23438" start="460" end="471" title="Ashgabat" label="Poltoratsk."/>
<link wikidata="Q2391429" start="510" end="534" title="1948 Ashgabat earthquake" label="1948 Ashgabat earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q82918" start="593" end="611" title="Saparmurat Niyazov" label="Saparmurat Niyazov"/>
<link wikidata="Q224919" start="746" end="759" title="Karakum Canal" label="Karakum Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8493" start="808" end="817" title="Amu Darya" label="Amu Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q9267" start="1086" end="1093" title="Turkmen language" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="1101" end="1108" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="1138" end="1145" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370884" start="1392" end="1410" title="Pavel Poltoratskiy" label="Pavel Poltoratskiy"/>
<link wikidata="Q109964" start="1558" end="1572" title="folk etymology" label="folk etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="1649" end="1657" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="1724" end="1739" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q315913" start="1741" end="1761" title="Arsaces I of Parthia" label="Arsaces I of Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="1766" end="1773" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q642492" start="1814" end="1821" title="Arsaces" label="Arsaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q328072" start="2019" end="2028" title="Kopet Dag" label="Kopet Dag"/>
<link wikidata="Q172702" start="2066" end="2080" title="Karakum Desert" label="Karakum Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q399899" start="2120" end="2133" title="Ahal Region" label="Ahal Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q224919" start="2280" end="2293" title="Karakum Canal" label="Karakum Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q288291" start="2430" end="2446" title="Paratethys Ocean" label="Paratethys Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="2502" end="2519" title="Cretaceous Period" label="Cretaceous Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q15680" start="2601" end="2605" title="yurt" label="yurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q183496" start="2629" end="2634" title="adobe" label="adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405472" start="3093" end="3103" title="Vasily Yan" label="Vasily Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183496" start="5525" end="5530" title="adobe" label="adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40089" start="5540" end="5545" title="brick" label="brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4500678" start="5657" end="5687" title="St. Alexander Nevsky Church, Ashgabat" label="Church of St. Alexander Nevsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5693" end="5702" title="Kärz Bank" label="Kärz Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q994776" start="6376" end="6395" title="Brutalist architecture" label="the Brutalist Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q18408663" start="6470" end="6480" title="Magtymguly Avenue" label="Magtymguly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7105" end="7138" title="Mollanepes Academic Drama Theater" label="Mollanepes Academic Drama Theater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7151" end="7166" title="Ashkhabad Hotel" label="Ashkhabad Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q485016" start="7954" end="7970" title="Kolkhoz" label="collective farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="8432" end="8441" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q328072" start="10503" end="10512" title="Kopet Dag" label="Kopet Dag"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="10649" end="10668" title="cold desert climate" label="cold desert climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="10670" end="10699" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="10753" end="10766" title="mediterranean climate" label="mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="11443" end="11452" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="11948" end="11955" title="Parthia" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q854672" start="12007" end="12011" title="Nisa, Turkmenistan" label="Nisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="12152" end="12159" title="Parthia" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15071616" start="12248" end="12273" title="Russian Bazaar, Ashgabat" label="Gülistan (Russian) Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q486195" start="12383" end="12388" title="Khiva" label="Khiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047578" start="12494" end="12504" title="Teke (Turkmen tribe)" label="Teke tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q484472" start="12512" end="12519" title="Turkmens" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015618" start="12663" end="12673" title="Gyzylarbat" label="Gyzylarbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700507" start="12689" end="12695" title="Gäwers, Turkmenistan" label="Gäwers"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="13030" end="13036" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636447" start="13154" end="13173" title="Battle of Geok Tepe" label="Battle of Geok Tepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="13220" end="13234" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536725" start="13276" end="13288" title="Akhal Treaty" label="Akhal Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q765793" start="14034" end="14040" title="Quchan" label="Quchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="14042" end="14046" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977526" start="14150" end="14171" title="Trans-Caspian railway" label="Trans-Caspian railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q57173" start="14796" end="14812" title="Mikhail Skobelev" label="Mikhail Skobelev"/>
<link wikidata="Q527156" start="15101" end="15119" title="Aleksey Kuropatkin" label="Aleksey Kuropatkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568313" start="15226" end="15254" title="Bahá&amp;#x27;í House of Worship" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;í House of Worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4843047" start="15375" end="15408" title="Bahá&amp;#x27;í Faith in Turkmenistan" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;í Faith in Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q270363" start="15553" end="15569" title="Société Générale" label="Société Générale"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="15626" end="15632" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q191515" start="15722" end="15731" title="Menshevik" label="Menshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279967" start="15734" end="15756" title="Social Revolutionaries" label="Social Revolutionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057121" start="15762" end="15769" title="Tsarism" label="Tsarist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="15793" end="15814" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="15836" end="15845" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184652" start="15895" end="15924" title="Transcaspian Government" label="Ashkhabad Executive Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4278035" start="15993" end="16001" title="Wilfrid Malleson" label="Malleson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4452984" start="16046" end="16061" title="Tashkent Soviet" label="Tashkent Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370884" start="16143" end="16161" title="Pavel Poltoratskiy" label="Pavel Poltoratskiy"/>
<link wikidata="Q75903" start="16217" end="16263" title="Turkestan Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Turkestan Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q199707" start="16274" end="16285" title="Turkmen SSR" label="Turkmen SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="16639" end="16648" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q171976" start="16680" end="16690" title="Alexander Ostrovsky" label="Ostrovskiy"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="16777" end="16790" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="16841" end="16855" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="16924" end="16936" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q997" start="17197" end="17212" title="Andrei Sakharov" label="Andrei Sakharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q380000" start="17224" end="17235" title="Yury Olesha" label="Yury Olesha"/>
<link wikidata="Q718780" start="17279" end="17291" title="Mark Donskoy" label="Mark Donskoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q751842" start="17305" end="17312" title="Rainbow (1944 film)" label="Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="17364" end="17377" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391429" start="17516" end="17532" title="1948 Ashgabat earthquake" label="major earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17577" end="17600" title="Surface magnitude scale" label="Surface magnitude scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q82918" start="17972" end="17990" title="Saparmurat Niyazov" label="Saparmurat Niyazov"/>
<link wikidata="Q57530" start="18625" end="18650" title="Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov" label="Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355095" start="18698" end="18708" title="Magtymguly" label="Magtymguly"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="18755" end="18779" title="Guinness Book of Records" label="Guinness Book of Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="18848" end="18854" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207799" start="19570" end="19605" title="Asian Indoor and Martial Arts Games" label="Asian Indoor and Martial Arts Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q38570" start="20573" end="20588" title="Central Asian Shepherd Dog" label="Alabay sheepdog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960533" start="21776" end="21795" title="Transcaspian Region" label="Transcaspian Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q75903" start="21861" end="21907" title="Turkestan Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Turkestan Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q199707" start="21947" end="21980" title="Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252807" start="22226" end="22244" title="Bagtyyarlyk District" label="Bagtyýarlyk etraby"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017409" start="22356" end="22374" title="Berkararlyk District" label="Berkararlyk etraby"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057906" start="22416" end="22431" title="Abadan District" label="Büzmeýin etraby"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071765" start="22520" end="22535" title="Kopetdag District" label="Köpetdag etraby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636447" start="24026" end="24045" title="Battle of Geok Tepe" label="Battle of Geok Tepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q821122" start="24806" end="24822" title="Collectivization in the Soviet Union" label="collectivization"/>
<link wikidata="Q484472" start="25243" end="25251" title="Turkmens" label="Turkmens"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="25294" end="25302" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="25343" end="25348" title="Turkish people" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="25357" end="25363" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q482942" start="25376" end="25382" title="Azeris" label="Azeris"/>
<link wikidata="Q82918" start="25466" end="25484" title="Saparmurat Niyazov" label="Saparmurat Niyazov"/>
<link wikidata="Q895325" start="25561" end="25569" title="Bouygues" label="Bouygues"/>
<link wikidata="Q14365850" start="25602" end="25610" title="Polimeks" label="Polimeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q272361" start="25654" end="25667" title="Çalık Holding" label="Çalık Holding"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="25933" end="25942" title="Modern architecture" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q238577" start="26292" end="26300" title="caduceus" label="caduceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189218" start="26339" end="26344" title="Molar (tooth)" label="molar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148527" start="26379" end="26409" title="Ashgabat International Airport" label="Ashgabat International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q43489" start="26427" end="26433" title="falcon" label="falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118293" start="26599" end="26607" title="Oghuz Khagan" label="Oguz Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200" start="27368" end="27385" title="Alexander Pushkin" label="Alexander Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q134958" start="27387" end="27403" title="Taras Shevchenko" label="Taras Shevchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355095" start="27409" end="27419" title="Magtymguly" label="Magtymguly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070322" start="27494" end="27510" title="Nury Halmammedov" label="Nury Halmammedov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="27801" end="27822" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q200193" start="27827" end="27837" title="Alp Arslan" label="Alp Arslan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82918" start="28336" end="28354" title="Saparmurat Niyazov" label="Saparmurat Niyazov"/>
<link wikidata="Q125469" start="28381" end="28388" title="Ruhnama" label="Ruhnama"/>
<link wikidata="Q131418145" start="29238" end="29246" title="Magtymguly Pyragy Cultural Park Complex" label="monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355095" start="29327" end="29344" title="Magtymguly Pyragy" label="Magtymguly Pyragy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463746" start="29376" end="29390" title="Walk of Health" label="Walk of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q328072" start="29410" end="29418" title="Kopetdag" label="Kopetdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q304890" start="29607" end="29623" title="Abai Qunanbaiuly" label="Abai Qunanbaiuly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4843034" start="30323" end="30335" title="Bahá&amp;#x27;í Faith in Russia" label="Russian rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499061" start="30547" end="30580" title="Local Spiritual Assembly" label="local administrative institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568313" start="30656" end="30684" title="Bahá&amp;#x27;í House of Worship" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;í House of Worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="30810" end="30813" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q216954" start="30899" end="30916" title="`Abdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá" label="`Abdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31255" end="31285" title="Religion in the Soviet Union#Policy toward religions in practice" label="Soviet policy towards religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q207694" start="31505" end="31516" title="art museum" label="art gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564552" start="31582" end="31600" title="Arch of Neutrality" label="Arch of Neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407337" start="31682" end="31700" title="Turkmenistan Tower" label="Turkmenistan Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381072" start="31925" end="31941" title="Archabil highway" label="Archabil highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="32184" end="32190" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977526" start="32245" end="32266" title="Trans-Caspian railway" label="Trans-Caspian railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q24089757" start="32610" end="32628" title="Ashgabat agreement" label="Ashgabat agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="32640" end="32645" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="32647" end="32651" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="32653" end="32657" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="32659" end="32671" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="32673" end="32683" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="32688" end="32698" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q476713" start="32922" end="32932" title="expatriate" label="expatriate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274043" start="32937" end="32954" title="ECA International" label="ECA International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391599" start="33071" end="33077" title="Mercer (consulting firm)" label="Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q304522" start="34528" end="34536" title="Büzmeýin, Turkmenistan" label="Buzmeyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q399899" start="35702" end="35715" title="Ahal Province" label="Ahal Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q4063034" start="35913" end="35930" title="Altyn Asyr Bazaar" label="Altyn Asyr Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q97574392" start="36187" end="36200" title="Berkarar" label="Berkarar Mall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36214" end="36256" title="Ashgabat Shopping and Entertainment Center" label="Ashgabat Shopping and Entertainment Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157068" start="36272" end="36279" title="Paýtagt Shopping Center" label="Paýtagt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15071616" start="36454" end="36479" title="Russian Bazaar, Ashgabat" label="Gülistan (Russian) Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148527" start="36668" end="36698" title="Ashgabat International Airport" label="Ashgabat International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q796158" start="36804" end="36825" title="Turkmenistan Airlines" label="Turkmenistan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4367093" start="37157" end="37175" title="Ashgabat Cable Car" label="Ashgabat Cable Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q328072" start="37230" end="37238" title="Kopetdag" label="Kopetdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q21658489" start="37241" end="37258" title="Ashgabat Monorail" label="Ashgabat Monorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="37321" end="37333" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57530" start="37560" end="37585" title="Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov" label="Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="37716" end="37737" title="Rapid transit" label="subway (metropolitan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983850" start="37877" end="37882" title="Tejen" label="Tejen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5713" start="37884" end="37888" title="Mary, Turkmenistan" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q487684" start="37890" end="37901" title="Türkmenabat" label="Türkmenabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q313301" start="37958" end="37966" title="autobahn" label="autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4073594" start="38075" end="38099" title="Ashgabat railway station" label="Ashgabat railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q488987" start="38242" end="38253" title="Türkmenbaşy, Turkmenistan" label="Türkmenbaşy"/>
<link wikidata="Q199762" start="38254" end="38264" title="Balkanabat" label="Balkanabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578541" start="38265" end="38272" title="Bereket" label="Bereket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5713" start="38282" end="38286" title="Mary, Turkmenistan" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q487684" start="38287" end="38298" title="Türkmenabat" label="Türkmenabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461997" start="38411" end="38432" title="Trans-Karakum Railway" label="Trans-Karakum Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q199762" start="38528" end="38538" title="Balkanabat" label="Balkanabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q488987" start="38549" end="38560" title="Türkmenbaşy, Turkmenistan" label="Türkmenbaşy"/>
<link wikidata="Q487672" start="38572" end="38580" title="Dashoguz" label="Dashoguz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588491" start="38592" end="38598" title="Sarahs" label="Sarahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q864655" start="38610" end="38620" title="Serhetabat" label="Serhetabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748910" start="38632" end="38640" title="Amu Dar&amp;#x27;ya (town)" label="Amyderýa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343045" start="38852" end="38863" title="Iran Khodro" label="Iran Khodro"/>
<link wikidata="Q626384" start="38889" end="38916" title="Hyundai Aero City" label="Hyundai New Super Aero City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711770" start="39350" end="39360" title="marshrutka" label="marshrutka"/>
<link wikidata="Q18085322" start="39905" end="39953" title="International Passenger Bus Terminal of Ashgabat" label="International Passenger Bus Terminal of Ashgabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980062" start="40023" end="40031" title="Bäherden" label="Bäherden"/>
<link wikidata="Q488987" start="40033" end="40044" title="Türkmenbaşy, Turkmenistan" label="Türkmenbaşy"/>
<link wikidata="Q487672" start="40046" end="40054" title="Dashoguz" label="Dashoguz"/>
<link wikidata="Q487684" start="40056" end="40067" title="Turkmenabat" label="Turkmenabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787326" start="40069" end="40076" title="Archman" label="Archman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48472" start="40078" end="40091" title="Konye-Urgench" label="Konye-Urgench"/>
<link wikidata="Q624131" start="40283" end="40299" title="Hyundai Universe" label="Hyundai Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343045" start="40308" end="40319" title="Iran Khodro" label="Iran Khodro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40329" end="40342" title="Sahab Renault" label="Sahab Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389456" start="40347" end="40353" title="Yutong" label="Yutong"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711633" start="40419" end="40425" title="Ýaşlyk" label="Ýaşlyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873660" start="40427" end="40436" title="Geok Tepe" label="Geok Tepe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40438" end="40444" title="Gorjaw" label="Gorjaw"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40446" end="40452" title="Yzgant" label="Yzgant"/>
<link wikidata="Q13367422" start="40454" end="40461" title="Babarap" label="Babarap"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40463" end="40471" title="Bugdaýly" label="Bugdaýly"/>
<link wikidata="Q844968" start="40473" end="40478" title="Anau, Turkmenistan" label="Annau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5625912" start="40480" end="40484" title="Gämi" label="Gämi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21655425" start="40486" end="40496" title="Owadandepe" label="Owadandepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700507" start="40550" end="40556" title="Gäwers, Turkmenistan" label="Gäwers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40603" end="40610" title="Parahat" label="Parahat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507663" start="40612" end="40615" title="Pavlovo Bus Factory" label="PAZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="40632" end="40642" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q945244" start="40855" end="40881" title="Trolleybuses in Ashgabat" label="Ashgabat trolleybus system"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057906" start="40992" end="40999" title="Archabil District" label="Firyuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q391875" start="41109" end="41119" title="Škoda 14Tr" label="Škoda 14Tr"/>
<link wikidata="Q243543" start="41439" end="41453" title="Toyota Corolla" label="Toyota Corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q16040510" start="41455" end="41461" title="JAC J7" label="JAC J7"/>
<link wikidata="Q482530" start="41466" end="41481" title="Hyundai Elantra" label="Hyundai Elantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4063036" start="41985" end="41995" title="Altyn Asyr (mobile operator)" label="Altyn Asyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q79697" start="42262" end="42264" title="4G" label="4G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79703" start="42302" end="42305" title="LTE (telecommunication)" label="LTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q85743295" start="42320" end="42351" title="Ashgabat City Telephone Network" label="Ashgabat City Telephone Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q233394" start="42361" end="42365" title="CDMA" label="CDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4466162" start="42557" end="42571" title="Turkmentelecom" label="Turkmentelecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="42581" end="42589" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4466135" start="42601" end="42614" title="Turkmenpochta" label="Turkmenpochta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975068" start="42870" end="42892" title="Neytralny Turkmenistan" label="Neytralny Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q177518" start="43314" end="43318" title="IPTV" label="IPTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q85743295" start="43351" end="43382" title="Ashgabat City Telephone Network" label="Ashgabat City Telephone Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="43582" end="43591" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351705" start="43953" end="43977" title="Turkmen State University" label="Turkmen State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146865" start="44079" end="44111" title="Turkmen State Medical University" label="Turkmen State Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q651139" start="44271" end="44322" title="Turkmen State Institute of Economics and Management" label="Turkmen State Institute of Economics and Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q650134" start="44379" end="44435" title="Turkmen State Institute of Architecture and Construction" label="Turkmen State Institute of Architecture and Construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4466158" start="44437" end="44468" title="Turkmen Agricultural University" label="Turkmen Agricultural University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315003" start="44474" end="44534" title="The National Institute of Sports and Tourism of Turkmenistan" label="The National Institute of Sports and Tourism of Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38251697" start="44578" end="44626" title="Oguz Khan University of Engineering Technologies" label="Oguz Khan University of Engineering Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q18402089" start="44683" end="44737" title="International University of Humanities and Development" label="International University of Humanities and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201589" start="44858" end="44894" title="Institute of International Relations (Turkmenistan)" label="Institute of International Relations"/>
<link wikidata="" start="44946" end="44964" title=":ru:Военный институт Министерства обороны Туркмении" label="Military Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4449055" start="45279" end="45312" title="Joint Turkmen-Russian Secondary School" label="A.S. Pushkin Russo-Turkmen School"/>
<link wikidata="Q895325" start="45346" end="45354" title="Bouygues" label="Bouygues"/>
<link wikidata="Q4059244" start="45886" end="45913" title="Turkmen Academy of Sciences" label="Turkmen Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q695416" start="48742" end="48759" title="Outpatient department" label="outpatient clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146865" start="48912" end="48944" title="Turkmen State Medical University" label="Turkmen State Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="48972" end="48985" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146865" start="49062" end="49094" title="Turkmen State Medical University" label="Turkmen State Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835360" start="51116" end="51177" title="The State Museum of the State Cultural Center of Turkmenistan" label="The State Museum of the State Cultural Center of Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605320" start="51335" end="51349" title="Turkmen carpet" label="Turkmen carpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="51422" end="51437" title="Ancient History" label="Ancient History"/>
<link wikidata="Q154974" start="51439" end="51446" title="Margiana" label="Margush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="51448" end="51455" title="Parthia" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="51492" end="51502" title="Middle Age" label="Middle Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855419" start="52164" end="52188" title="Turkmen Fine Arts Museum" label="Turkmen Fine Arts Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835821" start="52193" end="52214" title="Turkmen Carpet Museum" label="Turkmen Carpet Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q163446" start="52257" end="52269" title="woven carpet" label="woven carpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835360" start="52315" end="52350" title="Ashgabat National Museum of History" label="Ashgabat National Museum of History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="52396" end="52403" title="Parthia" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="52409" end="52416" title="Persian Empire" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007870" start="52895" end="52906" title="art gallery" label="art gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="53111" end="53119" title="ceramics" label="ceramics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="53121" end="53129" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q200193" start="53330" end="53340" title="Alp Arslan" label="Alp Arslan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15128660" start="53341" end="53363" title="Turkmen National Theatre of Youth" label="National Drama Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q85783172" start="53365" end="53410" title="Magtymguly Musical and Drama Theater" label="Magtymguly National Musical and Drama Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139196" start="53412" end="53463" title="Main Drama Theater (Ashgabat)" label="Main Drama Theatre named by Saparmurat Turkmenbashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18402019" start="53465" end="53492" title="Mollanepes Turkmen Drama Theater" label="Mollanepes Students Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53494" end="53507" title="Mukam Palace" label="Mukams Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200" start="53509" end="53516" title="Alexander Pushkin" label="Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146931" start="53517" end="53544" title="Ashgabat Russian Drama Theatre named after Pushkin" label="State Russian Drama Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4466146" start="53575" end="53604" title="Turkmen Puppet Theatre" label="Turkmen State Puppet Theatere"/>
<link wikidata="Q56805" start="53606" end="53626" title="Turkmen State Circus" label="Turkmen State Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4073590" start="53789" end="53803" title="Ashgabat cinema" label="Aşgabat Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="53815" end="53817" title="3D film" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q12016613" start="54026" end="54059" title="State Library of Turkmenistan" label="The State Library of Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315018" start="54269" end="54305" title="Turkmenistan Cultural Centre" label="State Culture Center of Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564552" start="55009" end="55027" title="Arch of Neutrality" label="Arch of Neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q82918" start="55102" end="55120" title="Saparmurat Niyazov" label="Saparmurat Niyazov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302176" start="55494" end="55522" title="Monument to the Constitution" label="Monument to the Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4246731" start="55625" end="55663" title="Alem Cultural and Entertainment Center" label="Alem Cultural and Entertainment Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="55688" end="55710" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139225" start="55784" end="55801" title="Ashgabat Flagpole" label="Ashgabat Flagpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971570" start="55837" end="55845" title="flagpole" label="flagpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491772" start="55878" end="55899" title="Fountain (Ashgabat)" label="The Ashgabat Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407337" start="55997" end="56015" title="Turkmenistan Tower" label="Turkmenistan Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q93863" start="56085" end="56101" title="Rub el Hizb" label="Star of Oguzkhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130724264" start="56247" end="56274" title="Oguzhan Presidential Palace" label="Oguzhan Presidential Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586914" start="56317" end="56331" title="Ruhyýet Palace" label="Ruhyýet Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4155911" start="56402" end="56416" title="Wedding Palace (Ashgabat)" label="Wedding Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q17024044" start="56746" end="56754" title="Ashgabat (park)" label="Ashgabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4062631" start="56850" end="56867" title="Inspiration Alley" label="Inspiration Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658620" start="56951" end="56978" title="World of Turkmenbashi Tales" label="World of Turkmenbashi Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q181185" start="57004" end="57014" title="Disneyland" label="Disneyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048420" start="57109" end="57121" title="Independence Square, Ashgabat" label="Garashsyzlyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q86755199" start="57230" end="57255" title="Ashgabat Botanical Garden" label="Ashgabat Botanical Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="57325" end="57337" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18404626" start="57550" end="57580" title="Halk Hakydasy Memorial Complex" label="Halk Hakydasy Memorial Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636447" start="57638" end="57657" title="Battle of Geok Tepe" label="Battle of Geok Tepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="57674" end="57686" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391429" start="57729" end="57753" title="1948 Ashgabat earthquake" label="1948 Ashgabat earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355095" start="57962" end="57979" title="Magtymguly Pyragy" label="Magtymguly Pyragy"/>
<link wikidata="Q366289" start="58064" end="58074" title="Sayat-Nova" label="Sayat-Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q377" start="58076" end="58088" title="Yanka Kupala" label="Yanka Kupala"/>
<link wikidata="Q33772" start="58090" end="58095" title="Du Fu" label="Du Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9711" start="58097" end="58113" title="Honoré de Balzac" label="Honoré de Balzac"/>
<link wikidata="Q132984" start="58115" end="58130" title="Shota Rustaveli" label="Shota Rustaveli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="58132" end="58158" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81219" start="58160" end="58173" title="Sándor Petőfi" label="Sándor Petőfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="58175" end="58194" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240" start="58196" end="58209" title="Hafez Shirazi" label="Hafez Shirazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="58211" end="58226" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q43736" start="58228" end="58245" title="Yasunari Kawabata" label="Yasunari Kawabata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046502" start="58247" end="58269" title="Kurmangazy Sagyrbayuly" label="Kurmangazy Sagyrbayuly"/>
<link wikidata="Q484292" start="58271" end="58287" title="Chingiz Aitmatov" label="Chingiz Aitmatov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285389" start="58289" end="58302" title="Raja Ali Haji" label="Raja Ali Haji"/>
<link wikidata="Q79822" start="58304" end="58319" title="Adam Mickiewicz" label="Adam Mickiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q184935" start="58321" end="58335" title="Mihai Eminescu" label="Mihai Eminescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="58337" end="58354" title="Fyodor Dostoevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q131318" start="58356" end="58368" title="Juan Ramón Jiménez" label="Juan Jiménez"/>
<link wikidata="Q378902" start="58372" end="58382" title="Yunus Emre" label="Yunus Emre"/>
<link wikidata="Q336803" start="58384" end="58402" title="Hryhorii Skovoroda" label="Hryhorii Skovoroda"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="58404" end="58423" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q188093" start="58425" end="58440" title="Langston Hughes" label="Langston Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q503340" start="58445" end="58458" title="Alisher Navoi" label="Alisher Navoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q558159" start="58594" end="58617" title="Türkmenbaşy Ruhy Mosque" label="Türkmenbaşy Ruhy Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q993863" start="58620" end="58640" title="Ertuğrul Gazi Mosque" label="Ärtogrul Gazy Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q80541" start="58704" end="58715" title="Sultan Ahmed Mosque" label="Blue Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="58719" end="58727" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q86753123" start="58779" end="58798" title="Hezreti Omar Mosque" label="Hezreti Omar Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="59149" end="59165" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q174044" start="59185" end="59201" title="Alexander Nevsky" label="Alexander Nevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="59593" end="59607" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24207798" start="59608" end="59637" title="Chapel of the Transfiguration, Ashgabat" label="Chapel of the Transfiguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q620045" start="59669" end="59689" title="Apostolic nunciature" label="Apostolic nunciature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343636" start="60068" end="60083" title="Saparmurat Turkmenbashi Olympic Stadium" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q725281" start="60085" end="60101" title="Ashgabat Stadium" label="Ashgabat Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4333871" start="60175" end="60203" title="Ashgabat Watersports Complex" label="Ashgabat Watersports Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051208" start="60250" end="60290" title="2017 Asian Indoor and Martial Arts Games" label="2017 Asian Indoor and Martial Arts Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q25406023" start="60594" end="60636" title="2018 World Weightlifting Championships" label="2018 IWF World Weightlifting Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q936515" start="60652" end="60658" title="Kurash" label="Kurash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603717" start="60719" end="60732" title="Altyn Asyr FK" label="Altyn Asyr FK"/>
<link wikidata="Q606103" start="60734" end="60744" title="FC Aşgabat" label="FC Aşgabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302085" start="60749" end="60768" title="FK Köpetdag Aşgabat" label="FK Köpetdag Aşgabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090867" start="60781" end="60792" title="Ýokary Liga" label="Ýokary Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="60868" end="60878" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196794" start="60886" end="60892" title="Galkan HC" label="Galkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15098486" start="60947" end="60979" title="Turkmenistan Championship" label="Turkmenistan Hockey Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591766" start="61107" end="61137" title="Winter Sports Complex Ashgabat" label="Winter Sports Complex Ashgabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q176131" start="61232" end="61245" title="Inha Babakova" label="Inha Babakova"/>
<link wikidata="Q107658289" start="61330" end="61344" title="Polina Guryeva" label="Polina Guryeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q181278" start="61401" end="61421" title="2020 Summer Olympics" label="2020 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4433573" start="61537" end="61557" title="List of diplomatic missions in Turkmenistan" label="32 foreign embassies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61597" end="61639" title="Aral Sea#Institutional bodies" label="International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="61774" end="61781" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q198989" start="61791" end="61796" title="Aktau" label="Aktau"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="61811" end="61822" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="61847" end="61853" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520" start="61871" end="61877" title="Astana" label="Astana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="61899" end="61905" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703" start="61916" end="61922" title="Bamako" label="Bamako"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="61938" end="61945" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9365" start="61967" end="61975" title="Dushanbe" label="Dushanbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="61997" end="62001" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q183584" start="62020" end="62027" title="Lanzhou" label="Lanzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q269" start="62044" end="62052" title="Tashkent" label="Tashkent"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="62122" end="62128" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714" start="62147" end="62165" title="Chelyabinsk Oblast" label="Chelyabinsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953" start="62184" end="62191" title="Yerevan" label="Yerevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="62210" end="62215" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4288622" start="62247" end="62269" title="Ashgabat Trauma Center" label="Ashgabat Trauma Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252807" start="62309" end="62329" title="Bagtyýarlyk District" label="Bagtyýarlyk District"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017409" start="62332" end="62352" title="Berkararlyk District" label="Berkararlyk District"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262160" start="62355" end="62382" title="Bitarap Turkmenistan Avenue" label="Bitarap Turkmenistan Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q304522" start="62386" end="62394" title="Büzmeýin, Turkmenistan" label="Büzmeýin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057906" start="62406" end="62423" title="Büzmeýin District" label="Büzmeýin District"/>
<link wikidata="Q39049666" start="62426" end="62452" title="Galkynysh Square, Ashgabat" label="Galkynysh Square, Ashgabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q60654" start="62455" end="62461" title="Gypjak" label="Gypjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048420" start="62464" end="62493" title="Independence Square, Ashgabat" label="Independence Square, Ashgabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071765" start="62496" end="62513" title="Kopetdag District" label="Kopetdag District"/>
<link wikidata="Q18408663" start="62516" end="62533" title="Magtymguly Avenue" label="Magtymguly Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q21538449" start="62536" end="62566" title="Saparmurat Turkmenbashi Avenue" label="Saparmurat Turkmenbashy Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q828658" start="62569" end="62599" title="List of cities in Turkmenistan" label="List of cities in Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501849" start="62656" end="62673" title="Russian Turkestan" label="Russian Turkestan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56571" wikidata="Q4179" url="?curid=56571" title="Guignol">
<text>Guignol () is the main character in a French puppet show which has come to bear his name. It represents the workers in the silk industry of France. Although often thought of as children&#x27;s entertainment, Guignol&#x27;s sharp wit and linguistic verve have always been appreciated by adults as well, as shown by the motto of a prominent Lyon troupe: &quot;Guignol amuses children… and witty adults.&quot;

==History==
Laurent Mourguet, Guignol&#x27;s creator, was born into a family of modest silk weavers on 3 March 1769. The certificate of his marriage to Jeanne Esterle in 1788 shows he was unable to read. When hard times fell on the silk trade during the French Revolution, he became a peddler and, in 1797, started to practice dentistry, which in those days was simply the pulling of teeth. The service was free; the money was made from the medicines sold afterward to ease the pain. To attract patients, he started setting up a puppet show in front of his dentist&#x27;s chair.

Mourguet&#x27;s first shows featured Polichinelle, a character borrowed from the Italian commedia dell&#x27;arte who, in Britain, would become Punch. By 1804, the success was such that he gave up dentistry altogether and became a professional puppeteer, creating his own scenarios drawing on the concerns of his working-class audience and improvising references to the news of the day. He developed characters closer to the daily lives of his Lyon audience, first Gnafron, a wine-loving cobbler, later Guignol, in 1808. Other characters, including Guignol&#x27;s wife Madelon and the gendarme Flageolet soon followed, but these are never much more than foils for the two heroes.
Although nominally a silkweaver like much of his original audience, Guignol&#x27;s profession changes, as does his marital status; he can be in turn valet, peddler, carpenter, shoemaker, or unemployed; at times he is Madelon&#x27;s husband, at times her smitten suitor, according to requirements of the scenario. What remain constant are his poverty, but more importantly his good humor and his sense of justice. The use in French of &quot;guignol&quot; as an insult meaning &quot;buffoon&quot; is a curious misnomer, as Guignol is clever, courageous, and generous; his inevitable victory is always the triumph of good over evil.

Sixteen of Mourguet&#x27;s children and grandchildren continued his tradition, and many of the companies performing today can trace their artistic heritage back to him, although Laurent Mourguet&#x27;s last descendant, Jean-Guy Mourguet, died on 8 October 2012, at the age of 82, after working all his life in the Theatre de Guignol at Lyon. Jean-Guy learned his job helping his grandmother Augustine and then his parents. He later became the director of the theatre until his death.

Guignol&#x27;s original caustic satire has often been watered down to simple children&#x27;s fare, and has even been used to parody grand opera, but his original spirit still survives in his hometown of Lyon, where both traditional and original contemporary performances are an integral part of local culture. In addition to his social satire, Guignol has become an important protector of the local dialect, the &quot;&quot; (&quot;Lyonnais dialect&quot;).

== See also ==
* &quot;Les Guignols de l&#x27;info&quot;
* Victor-Napoléon Vuillerme-Dunand
* Grand Guignol
* Punch and Judy

==References==
==External links==

* Société des Amis de Guignol
* Spectacle de Guignol Web site
* Site referencing different representations and uses the image of Guignol in Lyon (France)
* http://www.sagecraft.com/puppetry/performance/ltg/
* Museum-theatre Guignol in Brindas, France (near Lyon) 
* http://guignolsland.com/w-guignol.html
* A musical site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4179" start="0" end="7" title="Guignol" label="Guignol"/>
<link wikidata="Q588750" start="45" end="56" title="Puppetry" label="puppet show"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="339" end="343" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280" start="420" end="436" title="Laurent Mourguet" label="Laurent Mourguet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12128" start="735" end="744" title="dentistry" label="dentistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147934" start="1025" end="1037" title="Pulcinella" label="Polichinelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q191890" start="1077" end="1100" title="commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte" label="commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250832" start="1131" end="1136" title="Punch and Judy" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="1572" end="1580" title="Gendarmerie" label="gendarme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417739" start="3264" end="3291" title="Les Guignols de l&amp;#x27;info" label="Les Guignols de l&amp;#x27;info"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557095" start="3300" end="3332" title="Victor-Napoléon Vuillerme-Dunand" label="Victor-Napoléon Vuillerme-Dunand"/>
<link wikidata="Q751317" start="3335" end="3348" title="Grand Guignol" label="Grand Guignol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250832" start="3351" end="3365" title="Punch and Judy" label="Punch and Judy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56573" wikidata="Q645355" url="?curid=56573" title="Messier">
<text>Messier may refer to:

==People with the surname==
*Ashley Messier (born 2002), Canadian ice hockey player
*Charles Messier (1730–1817), French astronomer
*Doug Messier (born 1936), Canadian ice hockey player and coach
*Éric Messier (born 1973), Canadian ice hockey player
*George Messier (1896–1933), French inventor
*Jean-Marie Messier (born 1956), French businessman
*Joby Messier (born 1970), Canadian ice hockey player
*Marc Messier (born 1947), Canadian actor and film-maker
*Mark Messier (born 1961), Canadian ice hockey player
*Mary Messier (born 1952), American politician
*Mitch Messier (born 1965), Canadian ice hockey player
*Paul Messier (ice hockey) (born 1958), Canadian ice hockey player
*Paul Arthur Messier (born 1962), American art conservator

==Other uses==
*Messier Channel in western Patagonia, Chile
*Messier objects, set of 110 astronomical objects
*Messier (crater) on the Moon
*Messier (automobile), French car manufacturer 1925–1931
*Messier-Dowty (and succeeding companies), manufacturers of aircraft landing gear</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q645355" start="0" end="7" title="Messier" label="Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q104165218" start="52" end="66" title="Ashley Messier" label="Ashley Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524" start="108" end="123" title="Charles Messier" label="Charles Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737978" start="156" end="168" title="Doug Messier" label="Doug Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q288254" start="220" end="232" title="Éric Messier" label="Éric Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q908199" start="274" end="288" title="George Messier" label="George Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q331485" start="319" end="337" title="Jean-Marie Messier" label="Jean-Marie Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206894" start="371" end="383" title="Joby Messier" label="Joby Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288258" start="425" end="437" title="Marc Messier" label="Marc Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q319247" start="482" end="494" title="Mark Messier" label="Mark Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151859" start="536" end="548" title="Mary Messier" label="Mary Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380092" start="583" end="596" title="Mitch Messier" label="Mitch Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q832803" start="638" end="663" title="Paul Messier (ice hockey)" label="Paul Messier (ice hockey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152485" start="705" end="724" title="Paul Arthur Messier" label="Paul Arthur Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162722" start="780" end="795" title="Messier Channel" label="Messier Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="825" end="840" title="Messier objects" label="Messier objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q643935" start="875" end="891" title="Messier (crater)" label="Messier (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924281" start="905" end="925" title="Messier (automobile)" label="Messier (automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770349" start="962" end="975" title="Messier-Dowty" label="Messier-Dowty"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56574" wikidata="Q237575" url="?curid=56574" title="Maria Edgeworth">
<text>Maria Edgeworth (1 January 1768 – 22 May 1849) was a prolific Anglo-Irish novelist of adults&#x27; and children&#x27;s literature. She was one of the first realist writers in children&#x27;s literature and a significant figure in the evolution of the novel in Europe. She held critical views on estate management, politics, and education, and corresponded with some of the leading literary and economic writers, including Sir Walter Scott and David Ricardo. During the first decade of the 19th century she was one of the most widely read novelists in Britain and Ireland. Her name today is most commonly associated with &quot;Castle Rackrent&quot;, her first novel, in which she adopted an Irish Catholic voice to narrate the dissipation and decline of a family from her own landed Anglo-Irish class.

==Life==

===Early life===
Maria Edgeworth was born in Black Bourton, Oxfordshire. She was the second child of Richard Lovell Edgeworth (who eventually fathered twenty-two surviving children by four wives) and Anna Maria Edgeworth (&quot;née&quot; Elers); Maria was thus an aunt of Francis Ysidro Edgeworth. She spent her early years with her mother&#x27;s family in England, living at The Limes (now known as Edgeworth House) in Northchurch, by Berkhamsted in Hertfordshire. Her mother died when Maria was five, and when her father married his second wife Honora Sneyd in 1773, she went with him to his estate, Edgeworthstown, in County Longford, Ireland.
Maria was sent to Mrs. Lattafière&#x27;s school in Derby after Honora fell ill in 1775. After Honora died in 1780 Maria&#x27;s father married Honora&#x27;s sister Elizabeth (then socially disapproved and legally forbidden from 1833 until the Deceased Wife&#x27;s Sister&#x27;s Marriage Act 1907). Maria transferred to Mrs. Devis&#x27;s school in London. Her father&#x27;s attention became fully focused on her in 1781 when she nearly lost her sight to an eye infection. Returning home at the age of 14, she took charge of her many younger siblings and was home-tutored in law, Irish economics and politics, science, and literature by her father. She also started her lifelong correspondences with learned men, mainly members of the Lunar Society.

She became her father&#x27;s assistant in managing the Edgeworthstown estate, which had become run-down during the family&#x27;s 1777–1782 absence; she would live and write there for the rest of her life. With their bond strengthened, Maria and her father began a lifelong academic collaboration &quot;of which she was the more able and nimble mind&quot;. Present at Edgeworthstown was an extended family, servants and tenants. She observed and recorded the details of daily Irish life, later drawing on this experience for her novels about the Irish. She also mixed with the Anglo-Irish gentry, particularly Kitty Pakenham (later the wife of Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington), Lady Moira, and her aunt Margaret Ruxton of Blackcastle. Margaret supplied her with the novels of Ann Radcliffe and William Godwin and encouraged her in her writing.

===Travels===
In 1798 Richard married Frances Beaufort, daughter of Daniel Augustus Beaufort, who instigated the idea of travelling to England and the European continent. Frances, a year younger than Maria, became her lifelong confidante. The family travelled first to London in 1800.

In 1802 the Edgeworths toured The Midlands. They then travelled to Continental France, first to Brussels and then to France (during the Peace of Amiens, a brief lull in the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars). They met all the notables, and Maria received a marriage proposal from a Swedish courtier, Abraham Niclas Edelcrantz. Her letter on the subject seems very cool, but her stepmother assures us in the Augustus Hare &quot;Life and Letters&quot; that Maria loved him very much and did not get over the affair quickly. They came home to Ireland in 1803 on the eve of the resumption of the wars and Maria returned to writing. &quot;Tales of Fashionable Life&quot;, &quot;The Absentee&quot; and &quot;Ormond&quot; are novels of Irish life. Edgeworth was an extremely popular author who was compared with her contemporary writers Jane Austen and Sir Walter Scott. She initially earned more than them, and used her income to help her siblings.

On a visit to London in 1813, where she was received as a literary lion, Maria met Lord Byron (whom she disliked) and Humphry Davy. She entered into a long correspondence with the ultra-Tory Sir Walter Scott after the publication of &quot;Waverley&quot; in 1814, in which he gratefully acknowledged her influence, and they formed a lasting friendship. She visited him in Scotland at Abbotsford House in 1823, where he took her on a tour of the area. The next year, Sir Walter visited Edgeworthstown. When passing through the village, one of the party wrote, &quot;We found neither mud hovels nor naked peasantry, but snug cottages and smiles all about&quot;. A counter view was provided by another visitor who stated that the residents of Edgeworthstown treated Edgeworth with contempt, refusing even to feign politeness.

===Later life===

Richard Edgeworth was comparatively fair and forgiving in his dealings with his tenants and was actively involved in the estate&#x27;s management. After debating the issue with the economist David Ricardo, Maria came to believe that better management and the further application of science to agriculture would raise food production and lower prices. Both Richard and Maria were also in favour of Catholic Emancipation, enfranchisement for Catholics without property restrictions (although he admitted it was against his own interest), agricultural reform and increased educational opportunities for women. She particularly worked hard to improve the living standards of the poor in Edgeworthstown. In trying to improve conditions in the village she provided schools for the local children of all denominations.

After her father&#x27;s death in 1817 she edited his memoirs, and extended them with her biographical comments. She was an active writer to the last.

She worked for the relief of the famine-stricken Irish peasants during the Great Famine. She wrote &quot;Orlandino&quot; for the benefit of the Relieve Fund. Her letters to the Quaker Relief Committee provide a vivid account of the desperate plight facing the tenants in Edgeworthstown, the extreme conditions under which they lived, and the struggle to obtain whatever aid and assistance she could to alleviate their plight. Through her efforts she received gifts for the poor from America.

During the Irish Famine Edgeworth insisted that only those of her tenants who had paid their rent in full would receive relief. Edgeworth also punished those of her tenants who voted against her Tory preferences.

With the election of William Rowan Hamilton to president of the Royal Irish Academy, Maria became a dominant source of advice for Hamilton, particularly on the issue of literature in Ireland. She suggested that women should be allowed to participate in events held by the academy. For her guidance and help, Hamilton made Edgeworth an honorary member of the Royal Irish Academy in 1837, following in the footsteps of Louisa Beaufort, a former member of the academy and a relative of hers.

After a visit to see her relations in Trim, Maria, now in her eighties, began to feel heart pains and died suddenly of a heart attack in Edgeworthstown on 22 May 1849.

==Views==
Though Maria Edgeworth spent most of her childhood in England, her life in Ireland had a profound impact on both her thinking and views on Irish culture. Fauske and Kaufman conclude, &quot;[She] used her fiction to address the inherent problems of acts delineated by religious, national, racial, class based, sexual, and gendered identities&quot;. Edgeworth used works such &quot;Castle Rackrent&quot; and &quot;Harrington&quot; to express her feelings on controversial issues.

===Ireland===

In her works, Edgeworth created a nostalgic and imagined Irish past in an attempt to celebrate the culture of Ireland. Academic Suvendrini Perera argued Edgeworth&#x27;s novels traced &quot;the gradual anglicanization of feudal Irish society&quot;. Edgeworth&#x27;s goal in her works was to show the Irish as equal to the British, and therefore warranting an equal, though not separate, status. &quot;Essay on Irish Bulls&quot; rejects the Irish bulls stereotype and portrays the people of Ireland accurately in realistic, everyday settings. This is a common theme in her works on Ireland, combating stereotypes of Irish people with accurate representations. In her works, Edgeworth also placed a special focus on the linguistic differences between Irish and British culture, attempting to showcase the dynamism and intricacies of Irish society. Irish novelist Seamus Deane connected Edgeworth&#x27;s depiction of Ireland and its relationship to Britain as being in line with wider Enlightenment ideals, noting that Edgeworth &quot;was not the first novelist to have chosen Ireland as her ‘scene’; but she was the first to realize that there was, within it, a missionary opportunity to convert it to Enlightenment faith and rescue it from its ‘romantic’ conditions&quot;.

Edgeworth&#x27;s writing on Ireland, especially her early Irish stories, offer an important rearticulation of Burkean local attachment and philosophical cosmopolitanism to produce an understanding of the nation as neither tightly bordered (like nations based on historical premises such as blood or inheritance) or not borderless (like those based on rational notions of universal inclusion). Edgeworth used her writing to reconsider the meaning of the denomination &quot;Anglo-Irish&quot;, and through her interrogation she reinterpreted both cosmopolitan and national definitions of belonging so as to reconstitute &quot;Anglo-Irish&quot; less as a category than as an ongoing mediation between borders. In Edgeworth&#x27;s Irish novels, education is the key to both individual and national improvement, according to Edgeworth, &quot;it is the foundation of the well-governed estate and the foundation of the well-governed nation&quot;. More specifically, a slow process of education instils transnational understanding in the Irish people while retaining the bonds of local attachment by which the nation is secured. The centrality of education not only suggests Edgeworth&#x27;s wish for a rooted yet cosmopolitan or transnational judgment, but also distinguishes her writing from constructions of national identity as national character, linking her through to earlier cosmopolitan constructions of universal human subjects. By claiming national difference as anchored in education, culture rather than nature, Edgeworth gives to national identity a sociocultural foundation, and thereby opens a space in which change can happen.

===Social===

Maria agreed with the Acts of Union 1800, but thought that it should not be passed against the wishes of the Irish people. Concerning education, she thought boys and girls should be educated equally and together, drawing upon Rousseau&#x27;s ideas.
She believed a woman should only marry someone who suits her in &quot;character, temper, and understanding&quot;. Becoming an old maid was preferable to an incompatible union. &quot;Tales of Fashionable Life&quot; and &quot;Patronage&quot; attacked the Whigs&#x27; governance of Ireland as corrupt and unrepresentative.
Edgeworth strove for the self-realization of women and stressed the importance of the individual. She also wanted greater participation in politics by middle-class women. Her work &quot;Helen&quot; clearly demonstrates this point in the passage:
&quot;Women are now so highly cultivated, and political subjects are at present of so much importance, of such high interest, to all human creatures who live together in society, you can hardly expect, Helen, that you, as a rational being, can go through the world as it now is, without forming any opinion on points of public importance. You cannot, I conceive, satisfy yourself with the common namby-pamby little missy phrase, &#x27;ladies have nothing to do with politics&#x27;.&quot;
She sympathised with Catholics and supported gradual, though not immediate, Catholic Emancipation.

===Education===

In her 1798 book &quot;Practical Education&quot;, she advanced a scientific approach to education, acknowledging the difficulty of doing such research which was &quot;patiently reduced to an experimental science&quot;. She claimed no adherence to a school of thought, no new theory and purposefully avoided religion and politics. In the book&#x27;s 25 chapters, she presages modern improvements to age-related educational materials, for example: in geography, maps bordered with suitable illustrated biographies; in chronology, something &quot;besides merely committing names and dates to memory&quot;; in chemistry, safe chemical experiments that children might undertake. She maintained that unnecessarily causing fatigue should be a great concern of educators. To help illustrate the care that must be taken in teaching children and to emphasise the necessity of properly directing and managing their attentiveness, Maria Edgeworth drew several comparisons with non-European peoples. In making the point that any mode of instruction that tired the attention was hurtful to children, her reasoning was that people can pay attention only to one thing at a time, and because children can appear resistant to repetition, teachers naturally should vary things. However, educators should always be mindful of the fact that, &quot;while variety relieves the mind, the objects which are varied must not all be entirely new, for novelty and variety when joined, fatigue the mind&quot; as Edgeworth states. The teaching of children needed to follow carefully considered methods, needed to evidence concern for appropriateness and proper sequencing, and needed to be guided by consideration from forms of teaching that would be empowering and enabling, not fatiguing or disabling. In Edgeworth&#x27;s work, the attention of the child appears as a key site for pedagogical work and interventions.

==Work==

Edgeworth&#x27;s early literary efforts have often been considered melodramatic rather than realistic. Recent scholarship, however, has uncovered the importance of Edgeworth&#x27;s previously unpublished juvenilia manuscript, &quot;The Double Disguise&quot; (1786). In particular, &quot;The Double Disguise&quot; signals Edgeworth&#x27;s turn toward realism and is now considered a seminal regional narrative predating &quot;Castle Rackrent&quot; (1800). In addition, Edgeworth wrote many children&#x27;s novels that conveyed moral lessons to their audience (often in partnership with her friend Louise Swanton Belloc, a French writer, translator, and advocate for the education of women and children, whose many translations of Edgeworth&#x27;s works were largely responsible for her popularity in France). One of her schoolgirl novels features a villain who wore a mask made from the skin of a dead man&#x27;s face. Edgeworth&#x27;s first published work was &quot;Letters for Literary Ladies&quot; in 1795. This work was a response to Thomas Day&#x27;s, a member of the Lunar Society, belief that women should not be authors or taught to think. Her work, &quot;An Essay on the Noble Science of Self-Justification&quot; (1795) is written for a female audience in which she convinces women that the fair sex is endowed with an art of self-justification and women should use their gifts to continually challenge the force and power of men, especially their husbands, with wit and intelligence. It humorously and satirically explores the feminine argumentative method. This was followed in 1796 by her first children&#x27;s book, &quot;The Parent&#x27;s Assistant&quot;, which included Edgeworth&#x27;s celebrated short story &quot;The Purple Jar&quot;. &quot;The Parent&#x27;s Assistant&quot; was influenced by her father&#x27;s work and perspectives on children&#x27;s education.

Mr. Edgeworth, a well-known author and inventor, encouraged his daughter&#x27;s career. At the height of her creative endeavours, Maria wrote, &quot;Seriously it was to please my Father I first exerted myself to write, to please him I continued&quot;. Though the impetus for Maria&#x27;s works, Mr. Edgeworth has been criticised for his insistence on approving and editing her work. The tales in &quot;The Parent&#x27;s Assistant&quot; were approved by her father before he would allow them to be read to her younger siblings. It is speculated that her stepmother and siblings also helped in the editing process of Edgeworth&#x27;s work.

&quot;Practical Education&quot; (1798) is a progressive work on education that combines the ideas of Locke and Rousseau with scientific inquiry. Edgeworth asserts that &quot;learning should be a positive experience and that the discipline of education is more important during the formative years than the acquisition of knowledge&quot;. The system attempted to &quot;adapt both the curriculum and methods of teaching to the needs of the child; the endeavour to explain moral habits and the learning process through associationism; and most important, the effort to entrust the child with the responsibility for his own mental culture&quot;. The ultimate goal of Edgeworth&#x27;s system was to create an independent thinker who understands the consequences of his or her actions.

Her first novel, &quot;Castle Rackrent&quot; (1800) was written and submitted for anonymous publication in 1800 without her father&#x27;s knowledge. It was an immediate success and firmly established Edgeworth&#x27;s appeal. The book is a satire on Anglo-Irish landlords, before the year 1782, showing the need for more responsible management by the Irish landowning class. The story follows four generations of an Irish landholding family, the Rackrents. It is narrated by an Irish catholic worker on the estate, named Thady Quirk, and portrayed the rise of the catholic-Irish middle class.

&quot;Belinda&quot; (1801), a 3-volume work published in London, was Maria Edgeworth&#x27;s first full-length novel. It dealt with love, courtship, and marriage, dramatising the conflicts within her &quot;own personality and environment; conflicts between reason and feeling, restraint and individual freedom, and society and free spirit&quot;. &quot;Belinda&quot; was also notable for its controversial depiction of interracial marriage between a Black servant and an English farmgirl. Later editions of the novel, however, removed these sections.

&quot;Tales of Fashionable Life&quot; (1809 and 1812) is a 2-series collection of short stories which often focus on the life of a woman. The second series was particularly well received in England, making her the most commercially successful novelist of her age. After this, Edgeworth was regarded as the preeminent female writer in England alongside Jane Austen.

Following an anti-Semitic remark in &quot;The Absentee&quot;, Edgeworth received a letter from an American Jewish woman named Rachel Mordecai in 1815 complaining about Edgeworth&#x27;s depiction of Jews. In response, &quot;Harrington&quot; (1817) was written as an apology to the Jewish community. The novel was a fictitious autobiography about overcoming antisemitism and includes one of the first sympathetic Jewish characters in an English novel.

&quot;Helen&quot; (1834) is Maria Edgeworth&#x27;s final novel, the only one she wrote after her father&#x27;s death. She chose to write a novel focused on the characters and situation, rather than moral lessons. In a letter to her publisher, Maria wrote, &quot;I have been reproached for making &quot;my moral&quot; in some stories too prominent. I am sensible of the inconvenience of this both to reader and writer &amp; have taken much pains to avoid it in &quot;Helen&quot;&quot;. Her novel is also set in England, a conscious choice as Edgeworth found Ireland too troubling for a fictitious work in the political climate of the 1830s.

===Style and purpose===

Having come to her literary maturity at a time when the ubiquitous and unvarying stated defence of the novel was its educative power, Maria Edgeworth was among the few authors who truly espoused the educator&#x27;s role. Her novels are morally and socially didactic in the extreme. A close analysis of the alterations which Edgeworth&#x27;s style underwent when it was pressed into the service of overt didacticism should serve to illuminate the relationship between prose technique and didactic purpose in her work. The convention which Maria Edgeworth has adopted and worked to death is basic to the eighteenth-century novel, but its roots lie in the drama, tracing at least to the Renaissance separation of high and low characters by their forms of speech. Throughout the eighteenth-century drama, and most noticeably in the sentimental comedy, the separation becomes more and more a means of moral judgment as well as social identification. The only coherent reason for Edgeworth&#x27;s acceptance is the appeal of didactic moralism. In the first place, she is willing to suspend judgment wherever the service of the moral is the result. Everything else may go, so long as the lesson is enforced. the lesson might be a warning against moral impropriety, as in Miss Milner&#x27;s story, or against social injustice, as in &quot;The Absentee&quot;. Furthermore, the whole reliance on positive exemplars had been justified long before by Richard Steele, who argued that the stage must supply perfect heroes since its examples are imitated and since simple natures are incapable of making the necessary deductions from the negative exemplars of satire.

The characteristic of Edgeworth is to connect an identifiable strain of formal realism, both philosophical and rhetorical, and therefore display an objective interest in human nature and the way it manifests itself in social custom. One would expect this from Edgeworth, an author whose didacticism often has struck modern readers as either gendered liability, technical regression, or familial obligation. Critics have responded to Edgeworth&#x27;s eccentricities by attributing them to something more deep-seated, temperamental, and psychological. In their various, often insightful representation, Edgeworth&#x27;s fondness for the real, the strange, and the pedagogically useful verges on the relentless, the obsessive, and the instinctive. There is an alternative literary answer to explain Edgeworth&#x27;s cultural roots and ideological aims which shifts focus away from Edgeworth&#x27;s familial, psychological, and cultural predicaments to the formal paradigms by which her work has been judged. Rather than locating Edgeworth&#x27;s early romances of real life exclusively within the traditions of eighteenth-century children&#x27;s literature or domestic realism, they can be read primarily as responses to late eighteenth-century debates over the relation between history and romance, because the genre attempts to mediate between the two differentiating itself from other kinds of factual fiction. Edgeworth&#x27;s romances of real life operate in the same discursive field but do not attempt to traverse between self-denied antinomies. In fact, they usually make the opposite claim.

Edgeworth&#x27;s repeated self-effacement needs to be seen in the context of the times, where learning in women was often disapproved of and even ridiculed, such as the satirical poem of the Rev. Richard Polwhele, &quot;The Unsex&#x27;d Females&quot; (1798).

The Oxford English Dictionary credits Edgeworth with the earliest published usage of the word &quot;argh.&quot;

===List of published works===

A partial list of published works:
*&quot;Letters for Literary Ladies&quot; – 1795; Second Edition – 1798
**includes: &quot;An Essay on the Noble Science of Self-Justification&quot; – 1795
*&quot;The Parent&#x27;s Assistant&quot; – 1796
*&quot;Practical Education&quot; – 1798 (2 vols; collaborated with her father, Richard Lovell Edgeworth and step-mother, Honora Sneyd)
*&quot;Castle Rackrent&quot; – 1800 (novel)
*&quot;Moral Tales&quot; – 1801
*&quot;Belinda&quot; – 1801 (novel)
*&quot;The Mental Thermometer&quot; – 1801
*&quot;Essay on Irish Bulls&quot; – 1802 (political, collaborated with her father)
*&quot;Popular Tales&quot; – 1804
*&quot;The Modern Griselda&quot; – 1804
*&quot;Moral Tales for Young People&quot; – 1805 (6 vols)
*&quot;Leonora&quot; – 1806 (written during the French excursion)
*&quot;Essays in Professional Education&quot; – 1809
*&quot;Tales of Fashionable Life&quot; – 1809 and 1812 (2 collections of stories, the second of which includes &quot;The Absentee&quot;)
*&quot;Ennui&quot; – 1809 (novel)
*&quot;The Absentee&quot; – 1812 (novel)
*&quot;Patronage&quot; – 1814 (novel)
*&quot;Harrington&quot; – 1817 (novel)
*&quot;Ormond&quot; – 1817 (novel)
*&quot;Comic Dramas&quot; – 1817
*&quot;Memoirs of Richard Lovell Edgeworth&quot; – 1820 (edited her father&#x27;s memoirs)
*&quot;Rosamond: A Sequel to Early Lessons&quot; – 1821
*&quot;Frank: A Sequel to Frank in Early Lessons&quot; – 1822
*&quot;Tomorrow&quot; – 1823 (novel)
*&quot;Harry and Lucy concluded&quot; – 1825 (novel)
*&quot;Helen&quot; – 1834 (novel)
*&quot;Orlandino&quot; – 1848 (temperance novel)

Also:
* 


==Legacy==
During the period 1800–1814 (when Walter Scott&#x27;s &quot;Waverley&quot; was published) Edgeworth was the most celebrated and successful living English novelist. Her reputation equalled that of Fanny Burney (Madame d&#x27;Arblay) (1752–1840) earlier, in a time that saw a number of other female writers including Elizabeth Hamilton, Amelia Opie, Hannah More and Elizabeth Inchbald. Her only potential male competitor prior to Scott was William Godwin. She was certainly well received by the critics and literary figures of her time. Croker (1780–1857) compared her work to &quot;Don Quixote&quot; and &quot;Gil Blas&quot; and to the work of Henry Fielding, while Francis Jeffrey (1773–1850) called her work &#x27;perfect&#x27;.

The Ulster Gaelic Society, established in 1830, succeeded in a single publication in its history, namely the translation into Irish of two stories by Maria Edgeworth: Tomás Ó Fiannachtaigh translated &quot;Forgive and Forget&quot; and &quot;Rosanna&quot; into Irish in the 1830s.

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
*
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Moynahan, Julian (1995), &quot;Maria Edgeworth&quot; in &quot;Anglo-Irish: The Literary Imagination in a Hyphenated Culture&quot;, Princeton University Press, 
* 

=== Historical sources ===
* 
* 
** Edgeworthstown

==External links==

* . General Collection. Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University.

===Electronic editions===
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q237575" start="0" end="15" title="Maria Edgeworth" label="Maria Edgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="62" end="73" title="Anglo-Irish" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="422" end="438" title="Sir Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q160270" start="443" end="456" title="David Ricardo" label="David Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050238" start="626" end="641" title="Castle Rackrent" label="Castle Rackrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="690" end="704" title="Irish Catholics" label="Irish Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="782" end="793" title="Anglo-Irish people" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454164" start="857" end="870" title="Black Bourton" label="Black Bourton"/>
<link wikidata="Q979865" start="913" end="937" title="Richard Lovell Edgeworth" label="Richard Lovell Edgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q355607" start="1084" end="1108" title="Francis Ysidro Edgeworth" label="Francis Ysidro Edgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057738" start="1232" end="1243" title="Northchurch" label="Northchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q19784" start="1248" end="1259" title="Berkhamsted" label="Berkhamsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="1263" end="1276" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19974228" start="1359" end="1371" title="Honora Sneyd" label="Honora Sneyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668583" start="1414" end="1428" title="Edgeworthstown" label="Edgeworthstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q186220" start="1433" end="1448" title="County Longford" label="County Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248870" start="1701" end="1753" title="Deceased Wife&amp;#x27;s Sister&amp;#x27;s Marriage Act 1907" label="Deceased Wife&amp;#x27;s Sister&amp;#x27;s Marriage Act 1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q187127" start="2191" end="2204" title="Lunar Society of Birmingham" label="Lunar Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q540048" start="2816" end="2830" title="Catherine Wellesley, Duchess of Wellington" label="Kitty Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="2850" end="2890" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363409" start="2893" end="2903" title="Elizabeth Rawdon, Countess of Moira" label="Lady Moira"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2937" end="2948" title="Blackcastle House" label="Blackcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q231944" start="2991" end="3004" title="Ann Radcliffe" label="Ann Radcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q188569" start="3009" end="3023" title="William Godwin" label="William Godwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20653758" start="3098" end="3114" title="Frances Anne Edgeworth" label="Frances Beaufort"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216446" start="3128" end="3152" title="Daniel Augustus Beaufort" label="Daniel Augustus Beaufort"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="3376" end="3388" title="The Midlands" label="The Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q212429" start="3413" end="3431" title="Continental France" label="Continental France"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="3442" end="3450" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183" start="3482" end="3497" title="Peace of Amiens" label="Peace of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q15053704" start="3519" end="3559" title="French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars" label="French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q330454" start="3653" end="3678" title="Abraham Niclas Edelcrantz" label="Abraham Niclas Edelcrantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821445" start="3760" end="3773" title="Augustus Hare" label="Augustus Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712149" start="4026" end="4038" title="The Absentee" label="The Absentee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103428" start="4055" end="4061" title="Ormond (novel)" label="Ormond"/>
<link wikidata="Q36322" start="4183" end="4194" title="Jane Austen" label="Jane Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="4199" end="4215" title="Sir Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="4380" end="4390" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q131761" start="4415" end="4427" title="Humphry Davy" label="Humphry Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="4488" end="4504" title="Sir Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q678251" start="4536" end="4544" title="Waverley (novel)" label="Waverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q246076" start="4680" end="4696" title="Abbotsford House" label="Abbotsford House"/>
<link wikidata="Q160270" start="5329" end="5342" title="David Ricardo" label="David Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q428286" start="5535" end="5556" title="Catholic Emancipation" label="Catholic Emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="6177" end="6189" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11887" start="6830" end="6852" title="William Rowan Hamilton" label="William Rowan Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050238" start="7858" end="7873" title="Castle Rackrent" label="Castle Rackrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385930" start="7890" end="7900" title="Harrington (novel)" label="Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q25543948" start="8071" end="8089" title="culture of Ireland" label="culture of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071418" start="8412" end="8422" title="Irish bull" label="Irish bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937782" start="8833" end="8845" title="Seamus Deane" label="Seamus Deane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="8954" end="8967" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="9355" end="9362" title="Edmund Burke" label="Burkean"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="10917" end="10935" title="Acts of Union 1800" label="Acts of Union 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="11121" end="11129" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="11397" end="11402" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310838" start="11409" end="11430" title="Dublin Castle administration" label="governance of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237318" start="12338" end="12357" title="Practical Education" label="Practical Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1832895" start="14418" end="14427" title="juvenilia" label="juvenilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050238" start="14639" end="14654" title="Castle Rackrent" label="Castle Rackrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q18117918" start="14810" end="14831" title="Louise Swanton Belloc" label="Louise Swanton Belloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q290691" start="15062" end="15069" title="villain" label="villain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15180" end="15207" title="Letters for Literary Ladies" label="Letters for Literary Ladies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522169" start="15848" end="15875" title="The Parent&amp;#x27;s Assistant" label="The Parent&amp;#x27;s Assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758804" start="15944" end="15958" title="The Purple Jar" label="The Purple Jar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237318" start="16740" end="16759" title="Practical Education" label="Practical Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="16835" end="16840" title="John Locke" label="Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="16845" end="16853" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050238" start="17538" end="17553" title="Castle Rackrent" label="Castle Rackrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894491" start="18114" end="18121" title="Belinda (Edgeworth novel)" label="Belinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="18556" end="18561" title="Black people" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q24288433" start="19150" end="19165" title="Rachel Mordecai Lazarus" label="Rachel Mordecai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385930" start="19241" end="19263" title="Harrington (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Harrington&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385982" start="19481" end="19486" title="Helen (novel)" label="Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712149" start="21472" end="21484" title="The Absentee" label="The Absentee"/>
<link wikidata="Q333148" start="21580" end="21594" title="Richard Steele" label="Richard Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328472" start="23589" end="23605" title="Richard Polwhele" label="Richard Polwhele"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523178" start="23613" end="23637" title="The Unsex&amp;#x27;d Females" label="The Unsex&amp;#x27;d Females"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23921" end="23972" title="An Essay on the Noble Science of Self-Justification" label="An Essay on the Noble Science of Self-Justification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522169" start="23993" end="24020" title="The Parent&amp;#x27;s Assistant" label="The Parent&amp;#x27;s Assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237318" start="24041" end="24060" title="Practical Education" label="Practical Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q979865" start="24113" end="24137" title="Richard Lovell Edgeworth" label="Richard Lovell Edgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19974228" start="24155" end="24167" title="Honora Sneyd" label="Honora Sneyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050238" start="24176" end="24191" title="Castle Rackrent" label="Castle Rackrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894491" start="24252" end="24259" title="Belinda (Edgeworth novel)" label="Belinda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24448" end="24467" title="The Modern Griselda" label="The Modern Griselda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526682" start="24546" end="24553" title="Leonora (novel)" label="Leonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q117149111" start="24802" end="24807" title="Ennui (novel)" label="Ennui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712149" start="24836" end="24848" title="The Absentee" label="The Absentee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148133" start="24877" end="24886" title="Patronage (novel)" label="Patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385930" start="24915" end="24925" title="Harrington (novel)" label="Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103428" start="24954" end="24960" title="Ormond (novel)" label="Ormond"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385982" start="25321" end="25326" title="Helen (novel)" label="Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q333247" start="25379" end="25389" title="Temperance movement" label="temperance"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="25454" end="25466" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q259530" start="25616" end="25628" title="Fanny Burney" label="Fanny Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331219" start="25735" end="25753" title="Elizabeth Hamilton (writer)" label="Elizabeth Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076511" start="25755" end="25766" title="Amelia Opie" label="Amelia Opie"/>
<link wikidata="Q25880" start="25768" end="25779" title="Hannah More" label="Hannah More"/>
<link wikidata="Q469974" start="25784" end="25802" title="Elizabeth Inchbald" label="Elizabeth Inchbald"/>
<link wikidata="Q188569" start="25858" end="25872" title="William Godwin" label="William Godwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q320849" start="25955" end="25961" title="John Wilson Croker" label="Croker"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="26001" end="26012" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635218" start="26029" end="26037" title="Gil Blas" label="Gil Blas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34190" start="26063" end="26077" title="Henry Fielding" label="Henry Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881202" start="26085" end="26100" title="Francis Jeffrey" label="Francis Jeffrey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26155" end="26176" title="Ulster Gaelic Society" label="Ulster Gaelic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q104782828" start="26518" end="26534" title="Julian Moynahan" label="Moynahan, Julian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56575" wikidata="Q5050238" url="?curid=56575" title="Castle Rackrent">
<text>Castle Rackrent is a short novel by Maria Edgeworth published in 1800. Unlike many of her other novels, which were heavily &quot;edited&quot; by her father, Richard Lovell Edgeworth, before their publication, the published version is close to her original intention.

Shortly before its publication, an introduction, glossary and footnotes, written in the voice of an English narrator, were added to the original text to blunt the negative impact the Edgeworths feared the book might have on English enthusiasm for the Act of Union 1800. One of the main sources of inspiration for the novel was a chronicle of her own family history called &quot;The Black Book of Edgeworthstown,&quot; which contain legal struggles of the Edgeworth&#x27;s similar to those portrayed in the novel.

==Plot summary==
The novel is set prior to the Constitution of 1782. It tells the story of four generations of Rackrent heirs through their steward, Thady Quirk. The heirs are: the dissipated spendthrift Sir Patrick O&#x27;Shaughlin, the litigious Sir Murtagh Rackrent, the cruel husband and gambling absentee Sir Kit Rackrent, and the generous but improvident Sir Condy Rackrent. Their sequential mismanagement of the estate is resolved through the machinations—and to the benefit—of the narrator&#x27;s astute son, Jason Quirk.

==Characters==
* Thady Quirk is the family steward of the Rackrent family. He serves as the narrator to the novel.
* Sir Patrick O&#x27;Shaughlin, a gentlemen who agrees to change his surname and bear the Rackrent arms in order to inherit the Castle.
* Sir Murtagh Rackrent, the heir to Sir Patrick, who is prone to suing his tenants over property ownership.
* Sir Kit Rackrent, the younger brother of Sir Murtagh. He is a repeat philanderer, and eventually dies in a duel.
* Jessica Rackrent, the wife of Sir Kit. She is locked in her room by her husband for seven years, until his death.
* Sir Conolly &#x27;Condy&#x27; Rackrent, the successor to Sir Kit. A well-loved landlord, he loses the castle due to debts and eventually dies of fever.
* Isabella Moneygawl Rackrent, the wife of Sir Conolly. She is disinherited upon her marriage and becomes a spendthrift.
* Jason Quirk is an estate clerk who ultimately becomes an attorney. He is the son of Thady Quirk.
* Judy Quirk is the grandniece of Thady Quirk. She ultimately marries a huntsman.

==Themes and style==
Kathryn Kirkpatrick suggests that the novel &quot;both borrows from and originates a variety of literary genres and subgenres without neatly fitting into any one of them&quot;. It satirises Anglo-Irish landlords and their overall mismanagement of the estates they owned at a time when the British and Irish parliaments were working towards formalising their union through the Acts of Union. Through this and other works, Edgeworth is credited with serving the political, national interests of Ireland and the United Kingdom the way Sir Walter Scott did for Scotland.

&quot;Castle Rackrent&quot; is a dialogic novel, comprising a preface and conclusion by an editor bookending a first person narrative proper. It is widely regarded as the first Irish novel to use the device of a narrator who is both unreliable and an observer of, rather than a player in, the actions he chronicles. It also has a glossary (which was a last-minute addition).

== Importance ==
&quot;Castle Rackrent&quot; is sometimes regarded as the first historical novel, the first regional novel in English, the first Anglo-Irish novel, the first Big House novel, and the first saga novel. William Butler Yeats pronounced &quot;Castle Rackrent&quot; &quot;one of the most inspired chronicles written in English&quot;. Sir Walter Scott, who met and carried on a correspondence with Edgeworth, credited her novel for inspiring him to write his Waverley series of novels:Without being so presumptuous as to hope to emulate the rich humour, pathetic tenderness, and admirable tact, which pervade the works of my accomplished friend, I felt that something might be attempted for my own country, of the same kind with that which Miss Edgeworth so fortunately achieved for Ireland—something which might introduce her natives to those of the sister kingdom in a more favourable light than they have been placed hitherto.The novel is alluded to in &quot;The Great Gatsby&quot; by F. Scott Fitzgerald, &quot;A Mother in History&quot; by Jean Stafford and &quot;Milkman&quot; by Anna Burns.

==See also==
* &quot;Knocknagow&quot;, a popular 1873 novel by Charles Kickham about the life of the Irish peasantry and workings of the Irish land system.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q237575" start="36" end="51" title="Maria Edgeworth" label="Maria Edgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345385" start="65" end="69" title="1800 in literature" label="1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q979865" start="157" end="181" title="Richard Lovell Edgeworth" label="Richard Lovell Edgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="519" end="536" title="Act of Union 1800" label="Act of Union 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995076" start="829" end="849" title="Constitution of 1782" label="Constitution of 1782"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="2913" end="2929" title="Sir Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025969" start="2982" end="2990" title="dialogic" label="dialogic"/>
<link wikidata="Q650118" start="3182" end="3192" title="Unreliable narrator" label="unreliable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="3405" end="3421" title="historical novel" label="historical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="3470" end="3481" title="Anglo-Irish" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="3542" end="3562" title="W. B. Yeats" label="William Butler Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="3670" end="3686" title="Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975429" start="3794" end="3802" title="Waverley Novels" label="Waverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q214371" start="4297" end="4313" title="The Great Gatsby" label="The Great Gatsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="4323" end="4342" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4350" end="4369" title="A Mother in History" label="A Mother in History"/>
<link wikidata="Q290633" start="4379" end="4392" title="Jean Stafford" label="Jean Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q57417096" start="4403" end="4410" title="Milkman (novel)" label="Milkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766889" start="4420" end="4430" title="Anna Burns" label="Anna Burns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4448" end="4470" title="Charles Kickham#Knocknagow" label="&amp;quot;Knocknagow&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079785" start="4496" end="4511" title="Charles Kickham" label="Charles Kickham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56576" wikidata="Q5941282" url="?curid=56576" title="Humphrey B. Bear">
<text>Humphrey B. Bear is a fictional character first created in an Australian children&#x27;s television series called &quot;Here&#x27;s Humphrey&quot;, which first went to air in 1965. Its fictional character namesake is an icon of Australian children&#x27;s television. &quot;Humphrey B. Bear&quot; first aired on Adelaide&#x27;s NWS-9 on Monday, 24 May 1965. The show became one of the most successful programs for pre-schoolers in Australia. Edwin &quot;Ted&quot; Duryea (c.1930-2009), an actor, singer and dancer, first played the part of Humphrey.

The character of Humphrey is a tall, shaggy honey-loving brown bear with a large, round, shining, glossy black nose, straw boater hat, tartan waist-coat and oversized yellow bow-tie. His television show always features a companion who assists and narrates Humphrey&#x27;s various adventures in the &quot;magic forest&quot; including his brightly coloured treehouse. In the early days, the character was known as Bear Bear, and was named Humphrey B. Bear as the result of an on-air competition.

==Television show==

The show has won Logies for Best Children&#x27;s Series and the Humphrey character has received national awards and commendations, including the &quot;Citizen of the Year&quot; Award at the 1994 Australia Day celebrations. &quot;Humphrey B. Bear&quot; has viewers all over the world thanks to the United States version of his show shown on PBS in America and the Spanish version shown on Galavision. It has been translated or produced in 55 different languages.

The writers of &quot;Humphrey B. Bear&quot;, including Anthony O&#x27;Donohue (also long-time host of the show), attempt to set up each show as a new adventure for Humphrey. Each episode parallels the needs, encounters and interests of the average young child. The character of Humphrey explores life as they do, trying to reinforce their self-esteem and showing them it&#x27;s all right to embrace challenges. The series attempts to show it&#x27;s important to be the best that you can be, and to give things your best shot. The series also encourages the viewer to simply take part in your life, family, community and the world.

On 14 February 2007, it was reported that the Nine Network would record a new &quot;Here&#x27;s Humphrey&quot; series for the first time since 2003.

In February 2012, Imagination Ventures, the philanthropic enterprise of media company Imagination Entertainment, purchased the assets of Banksia Productions that included all the rights to the &quot;Humphrey B. Bear&quot;.

In May 2012 Humphrey was announced as the official &quot;Ambassabear&quot; for the Women &amp; Children&#x27;s Hospital Foundation. His first major fundraising effort saw the release of a limited edition gift set featuring a Humphrey plush doll and DVD. All proceeds from that product went to the hospitals&#x27; Kids FUNd program. Humphrey then started reappearing across Australia, taking part in live shows such as school performances, community events, and birthday parties.

In July 2013 Humphrey returned to national TV screens on television stations in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide, and Perth. Humphrey celebrated his 50th anniversary in 2015.

==Ownership==
In September 2016, OZPIX Entertainment facilitated the acquisition of all the assets and rights to Humphrey B. Bear from Imagination Ventures. Imagination Ventures continues to partner with the Humphrey B. Bear brand.

Village Roadshow Studios now play host to Humphrey B. Bear&#x27;s new headquarters at their studios on the Gold Coast, Australia.

==Highlights &amp; Awards==

Other Highlights

Humphrey has been recognised as an icon of Australian television and is featured in the Australian National Museum.

He became the only bear in the world to become a cub when he was initiated into the Scouting Movement.

===APRA Music Awards===
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5941282" start="0" end="16" title="Humphrey B. Bear" label="Humphrey B. Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273568" start="73" end="106" title="children&amp;#x27;s television series" label="children&amp;#x27;s television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736703" start="120" end="140" title="Here&amp;#x27;s Humphrey" label="Here&amp;#x27;s Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="311" end="319" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955983" start="327" end="332" title="NWS-9" label="NWS-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529487" start="1083" end="1088" title="Logie Award" label="Logie"/>
<link wikidata="Q502375" start="1261" end="1274" title="Australia Day" label="Australia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="1406" end="1409" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q964628" start="1454" end="1464" title="Galavisión (USA)" label="Galavision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="2207" end="2219" title="Nine Network" label="Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002593" start="3331" end="3351" title="Imagination Games" label="Imagination Ventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930680" start="3429" end="3453" title="Village Roadshow Studios" label="Village Roadshow Studios"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56577" wikidata="Q7712149" url="?curid=56577" title="The Absentee">
<text>The Absentee is a novel by Maria Edgeworth, published in 1812 in &quot;Tales of Fashionable Life&quot;, that expresses the systemic evils of the absentee landlord class of Anglo-Irish and the desperate condition of the Irish peasantry. There are many turns of plot and much information about Ireland as well as Irish dialect and details of shallow London fashionable life, and the egregious results of the propertied classes treating their Irish lands as a resource to be exploited rather than as a relationship among classes and with the land. In this respect, it addresses similar themes to her first novel, Castle Rackrent.

== Plot summary ==
Just before coming of age, Lord Colambre, the sensitive hero of the novel, finds that his mother Lady Clonbrony&#x27;s attempts to buy her way into the high society of London are only ridiculed, while his father, Lord Clonbrony, is in serious debt as a result of his wife&#x27;s lifestyle and his own lack of responsibility. The moneylender Mordecai who threatens foreclose on him is represented with a Jew-hatred typical of the period. Colambre&#x27;s mother wishes him to marry an heiress, Miss Broadhurst, who is a friend of Grace Nugent. However, Colambre has already fallen in love with his cousin, Grace Nugent, who lives with the family as a companion to Lady Clonbrony. Worried that his mother will pressure him into a marriage with someone he does not love, Colambre decides to leave the London social scene and visit his ancestral home in County Wicklow in Ireland.

Upon arriving in Dublin, Colambre becomes good friends with Sir James Brooke, who is a good influence on Colambre and warns him against the schemes of some new arrivals on the Dublin social scene: Lady Dashfort and her widowed daughter, Lady Isobel. It is generally known that Lady Dashfort is looking to ensnare a new, rich Irish peer for her equally unscrupulous daughter, and by any means necessary. Despite a pointed warning from Sir James, Colambre falls under the influence of the persuasive Lady Dashfort, who wishes to secure him as the next husband for Lady Isobel. Chance intelligence from a former maid in the Clonbrony household reveals to Lady Dashfort that Lord Colambre is, in fact, in love with his cousin, Grace Nugent. To discourage the match, Lady Dashfort slyly lets slip that Grace was born out of wedlock, and is therefore illegitimate. This is confirmed by letter by his mother, who while a social climber and generally frivolous, is very loving to Grace and has never told her about her parentage. Colambre is heartbroken and feels he can never love a woman with such a heritage.

He visits his family estate and discovers that his father&#x27;s agents are oppressing the local peasantry and probably cheating his father as well. He reveals himself to the agents, and there is a race back to London, Colambre trying to stop his father from signing documents that would ruin some of the good peasants, (and would swindle Clonbrony and Colambre), the agents trying to get the papers signed.

Colambre makes it back just in time to stop his father from ruin, and he then assists his father in paying off his debts, on condition that the Clonbrony family returns to live in Ireland.

The final section concerns Colambre&#x27;s love for Grace and how it is discovered that she is both legitimate and an heiress.

== References ==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="18" end="23" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q237575" start="27" end="42" title="Maria Edgeworth" label="Maria Edgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037166" start="145" end="162" title="absentee landlord" label="absentee landlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="172" end="183" title="Anglo-Irish" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="311" end="324" title="Irish language" label="Irish dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050238" start="610" end="625" title="Castle Rackrent" label="Castle Rackrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="1050" end="1060" title="antisemitism" label="Jew-hatred"/>
<link wikidata="Q182591" start="1496" end="1510" title="County Wicklow" label="County Wicklow"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56578" wikidata="Q259530" url="?curid=56578" title="Frances Burney">
<text>Frances Burney (13 June 1752 – 6 January 1840), also known as Fanny Burney and later Madame d&#x27;Arblay, was an English satirical novelist, diarist and playwright. In 1786–1790 she held the post of &quot;Keeper of the Robes&quot; to Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, George III&#x27;s queen. In 1793, aged 41, she married a French exile, General Alexandre d&#x27;Arblay. After a long writing career that gained her a reputation as one of England&#x27;s foremost literary authors, and after wartime travels that stranded her in France for over a decade, she settled in Bath, England, where she died on 6 January 1840. The first of her four novels, &quot;Evelina&quot; (1778), was the most successful and remains her most highly regarded, followed by &quot;Cecilia&quot; (1782). She also wrote a number of plays. She wrote a memoir of her father (1832), and is perhaps best remembered as the author of letters and journals that have been gradually published since 1842, whose influence has overshadowed the reputation of her fiction, establishing her posthumously as a diarist more than as a novelist or playwright.

==Overview of career==

Frances Burney was a novelist, diarist and playwright. In all, she wrote four novels, eight plays, one biography and twenty-five volumes of journals and letters. She has gained critical respect in her own right, but she foreshadowed such novelists of manners with a satirical bent as Jane Austen and William Makepeace Thackeray.

She published her first novel, &quot;Evelina&quot;, anonymously in 1778. Burney feared that her father would find what she called her &quot;scribblings&quot;, so she only told her siblings and two trusted aunts about the work. Her closest sister, Susanna, helped with the cover-up. Eventually, her father read the novel and guessed that she was its author. News of her identity spread. The novel brought Burney almost immediate fame with its unique narrative and comic strengths. She followed it with &quot;Cecilia&quot; in 1782, &quot;Camilla&quot; in 1796 and &quot;The Wanderer&quot; in 1814.

All Burney&#x27;s novels explore the lives of English aristocrats and satirises their social pretensions and personal foibles, with an eye to larger questions such as the politics of female identity. With one exception, Burney never succeeded in having her plays performed, largely due to objections from her father, who thought that publicity from such an effort would be damaging to her reputation. The exception was &quot;Edwy and Elgiva&quot;, which was not well received by the public and closed after the first night&#x27;s performance despite having Sarah Siddons in the cast.

Although her novels were hugely popular during her lifetime, Burney&#x27;s reputation as a writer of fiction suffered after her death at the hands of biographers and critics, who felt that the extensive diaries, published posthumously in 1842–1846, offer a more interesting and accurate portrait of 18th-century life. Today, critics are returning to her novels and plays with renewed interest in her outlook on the social lives and struggles of women in a predominantly male-oriented culture. Scholars continue to value Burney&#x27;s diaries as well, for their candid depictions of English society.

Throughout her writing career, Burney&#x27;s talent for satirical caricature was widely acknowledged: figures such as Dr Samuel Johnson, Edmund Burke, Hester Lynch Thrale, David Garrick and other members of the Blue Stockings Society to which she aligned herself were among her admirers. Her early novels were read and enjoyed by Jane Austen, whose own title &quot;Pride and Prejudice&quot; derives from the final pages of &quot;Cecilia&quot;. Thackeray is said to have drawn on the first-person account of the Battle of Waterloo recorded in her diaries while writing his &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;.

Burney&#x27;s early career was strongly affected by her relations with her father and the critical attentions of a family friend, Samuel Crisp. Both encouraged her writing, but used their influence to dissuade her from publishing or performing her dramatic comedies, as they saw the genre as inappropriate for a lady. Many feminist critics see her as an author whose natural talent for satire was stifled by the social pressures on female authors. Burney persisted despite the setbacks. When her comedies were poorly received, she returned to novel writing, and later tried her hand at tragedy. She supported both herself and her family on the proceeds of her later novels, &quot;Camilla&quot; and &quot;The Wanderer&quot;.

==Family life==
Burney was born in Lynn Regis, now King&#x27;s Lynn, England, on 13 June 1752, to the musician Dr Charles Burney (1726–1814) and his first wife, Esther Sleepe Burney (1725–1762), as the third of her mother&#x27;s six children. Her elder siblings were Esther (Hetty, 1749–1832) and James (1750–1821); those younger were Susanna Elizabeth (1755–1800), Charles (1757–1817) and Charlotte Ann (1761–1838). Of her brothers, James became an admiral and sailed with Captain James Cook on his second and third voyages. The younger Charles Burney became a well-known classical scholar, after whom &quot;The Burney Collection of Newspapers&quot; is named.

Her younger sister Susanna married, in 1781, Molesworth Phillips, an officer in the Royal Marines who had sailed in Captain Cook&#x27;s last expedition; she left a journal that gives a principal eye-witness account of the Gordon Riots. Her younger half-sister Sarah Harriet Burney (1772–1844) also became a novelist, publishing seven works of fiction. Esther Sleepe Burney also bore two other boys, both named Charles, who died in infancy in 1752 and 1754.

Frances Burney began composing small letters and stories almost as soon as she learnt the alphabet. She often joined with her brothers and sisters in writing and acting in plays. The Burney family had many close friends. &quot;Daddy Crisp&quot; was almost like a second father to Frances and a strong influence on her early writing years. Burney scholar Margaret Anne Doody has investigated conflicts within the Burney family that affected Burney&#x27;s writing and her personal life. She alleged that one strain was an incestuous relationship between Burney&#x27;s brother James and their half-sister Sarah in 1798–1803, but there is no direct evidence for this, and Burney was affectionate towards Sarah and provided her with financial assistance in later life.

Frances Burney&#x27;s mother, Esther Sleepe, described by historians as a woman of &quot;warmth and intelligence&quot;, was the daughter of a French refugee named Dubois and had been brought up a Catholic. This French heritage influenced Frances Burney&#x27;s self-perception in later life, possibly contributing to her attraction and subsequent marriage to Alexandre d&#x27;Arblay. Esther Burney died in 1762 when Frances was ten years old.

Frances&#x27;s father, Charles Burney, was noted for his personal charm, and for his talents as a musician, a musicologist, a composer and a man of letters. In 1760 he moved his family to London, a decision that improved their access to English high society and social standing. They lived amidst an artist social circle that gathered round Charles at their home in Poland Street, Soho.

In 1767, Charles Burney eloped to marry for a second time, to Elizabeth Allen, the wealthy widow of a King&#x27;s Lynn wine merchant. Allen had three children of her own, and several years after the marriage the two families merged. This new domestic situation was fraught with tension. The Burney children found their new stepmother overbearing and quick to anger, and they made fun of her behind her back. However, their collective unhappiness may have also brought them closer to one another. In 1774 the family moved again, to what had been the house of Isaac Newton in St Martin&#x27;s Street, Westminster.

==Education==
Burney&#x27;s sisters Esther and Susanna were favoured by their father, for what he perceived as their superior attractiveness and intelligence. At the age of eight, Burney had yet to learn the alphabet; some scholars suggest she had a form of dyslexia. By the age of ten, however, she had begun to write for her own amusement. Esther and Susanna were sent by their father to be educated in Paris, while at home Burney educated herself by reading from the family collection, including Plutarch&#x27;s &quot;Lives&quot;, works by Shakespeare, histories, sermons, poetry, plays, novels and courtesy books. She drew on this material, along with her journals, when writing her first novels. Scholars who have looked into the extent of Burney&#x27;s reading and self-education find a child who was unusually precocious and ambitious, working hard to overcome an early disability.

From the age of fifteen, Burney lived in the midst of a brilliant social circle, gathered round her father in Poland Street, and later in St Martin&#x27;s Street. David Garrick was a frequent visitor, often arriving before eight o&#x27;clock in the morning. Burney left detailed accounts of people they entertained, notably of Omai, a young man from Raiatea, and of Alexis Orlov, a favourite of Catherine the Great. She first met Dr Samuel Johnson at her father&#x27;s home in March 1777.

A critical aspect of Burney&#x27;s literary education was her relationship with a family friend, the dramatist Samuel Crisp, who had met her father in about 1745 at the house of Charles Cavendish Fulke Greville. He encouraged Burney&#x27;s writing by soliciting frequent journal-letters from her that recounted to him the goings-on in her family and social circle in London. Burney paid her first formal visit to Crisp at Chessington Hall in Surrey in 1766.

==Journal-diaries and &quot;Caroline Evelyn&quot;==
The first entry in Frances Burney&#x27;s journal was dated 27 March 1768 and addressed to &quot;Nobody&quot;. The journal itself was to extend over 72 years. Burney kept the journal-diary as a form of correspondence with family and friends, recounting life events and her observations of them. The diary contains a record of her extensive reading in her father&#x27;s library, as well as the visits and behaviour of notable people who visited their home. Burney and her sister Susanna were particularly close, and Burney continued to send journal-letters to Susanna throughout her adult life.

Burney was 15 when her father married Elizabeth Allen in 1767. Her diary entries suggest that she had begun to feel pressure to abandon her writing as something &quot;unladylike&quot; that &quot;might vex Mrs. Allen.&quot; Feeling that she had transgressed, the same year she burnt her first manuscript, &quot;The History of Caroline Evelyn&quot;, which she had written in secret. Despite this repudiation, Frances recorded in her diary an account of the emotions that led up to that dramatic act. She eventually used it as a foundation for her first novel, &quot;Evelina&quot;, which follows the life of the fictional Caroline Evelyn&#x27;s daughter.

In keeping with Burney&#x27;s sense of propriety, she heavily edited earlier parts of her diaries in later life, destroying much of the material. Editors Lars Troide and Joyce Hemlow recovered some of this obscured material while researching their editions of Burney&#x27;s journals and letters in the late twentieth century.

==&quot;Evelina&quot;==

Burney&#x27;s &quot;Evelina or the History of a Young Lady&#x27;s Entrance into the World&quot; was published anonymously in 1778 without her father&#x27;s knowledge or permission, by Thomas Lowndes, who voiced an interest after reading its first volume and agreed to publish it upon receipt of the finished work. The novel had been rejected by a previous publisher, Robert Dodsley, who declined to print an anonymous work. Burney, who worked as her father&#x27;s amanuensis, had copied the manuscript in a &quot;disguised hand&quot; to prevent any identification of the book with her family, thinking that her own handwriting might be recognised by a publisher. Burney&#x27;s second attempt to publish &quot;Evelina&quot; involved the help of her eldest brother James, who posed as its author to Lowndes. Inexperienced at negotiating with a publisher, he only extracted twenty guineas (£21) as payment for the manuscript.

The novel was a critical success, with praise from respected persons, including the statesman Edmund Burke and the literary critic Samuel Johnson. It was admired for its comic view of wealthy English society and realistic portrayal of working-class London dialects. It is known today as a satire. It was even discussed by characters in another epistolary novel of the time: Elizabeth Blower&#x27;s &quot;George Bateman&quot; (1782). Burney&#x27;s father read public reviews of &quot;Evelina&quot; before learning that the author was his daughter. Although the act of publication was radical for its time, he was impressed by the favourable reactions and largely supported her. He certainly saw social advantages in having a successful writer in the family.

=== Critical reception ===
Written in epistolary form just as this was reaching its height of popularity, &quot;Evelina&quot; portrays the English upper middle class through a 17-year-old woman who has reached marriageable age. It was a Bildungsroman ahead of its time. &quot;Evelina&quot; pushed boundaries, for female protagonists were still &quot;relatively rare&quot; in that genre. Comic and witty, it is ultimately a satire of the oppressive masculine values that shaped a young woman&#x27;s life in the 18th century, and of other forms of social hypocrisy. &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; calls it a &quot;landmark in the development of the novel of manners&quot;.

In choosing to narrate the novel through letters written by the protagonist, Burney made use of her own writing experience. This course has won praise from critics past and present, for the direct access it provides to events and characters, and the narrative sophistication it demonstrates in linking the roles of narrator and heroine. The authors of &quot;Women in World History&quot; argue that she identifies difficulties faced by women in the 18th century, especially those on questions of romance and marriage. She is seen as a &quot;shrewd observer of her times and a clever recorder of its charms and its follies&quot;. What critics have consistently found interesting in her writing is the introduction and careful treatment of a female protagonist, complete with character flaws, &quot;who must make her way in a hostile world.&quot; These are recognisable also as features of Jane Austen&#x27;s writing, and show Burney&#x27;s influence on her work. Furthermore, she sought to put to use the epistolary form espoused periodically by Burney, as seen in &quot;Lady Susan&quot; and to a lesser extent &quot;Pride and Prejudice&quot;.

As a testament to its popularity, the novel went through four immediate editions. In 1971, &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; stated of &quot;Evelina&quot;: &quot;Addressed to the young, the novel has a quality perennially young.&quot;

==Hester Thrale and Streatham==
&quot;Evelina&quot; brought Burney to the attention of a patron of the arts, Hester Thrale, who invited Burney to visit her home in Streatham. The house was a centre for literary and political conversation. Though shy by nature, Burney reportedly impressed those she met, including Dr Johnson, who would remain a friend and correspondent throughout the period of her visits, from 1779 to 1783. Thrale wrote to Dr Burney on 22 July: &quot;Mr. Johnson returned home full of the Prayes of the Book I had lent him, and protesting that there were passages in it which might do honour to Richardson: we talk of it for ever, and he feels ardent after the dénouement; he could not get rid of the Rogue, he said.&quot; Many of Johnson&#x27;s compliments were transcribed into Burney&#x27;s diary. Visits to Streatham occupied months at a time, and on several occasions the guests, including Frances Burney, made trips to Brighton and to Bath. Like other notable events, these were recorded in letters to her family.

==&quot;The Witlings&quot;==
In 1779, encouraged by the public&#x27;s warm reception of comic material in &quot;Evelina&quot;, and with offers of help from Arthur Murphy and Richard Brinsley Sheridan, Burney began to write a dramatic comedy called &quot;The Witlings&quot;. The play satirised a wide segment of London society, including the literary world and its pretensions. It was not published at the time because Burney&#x27;s father and the family friend Samuel Crisp thought it would offend some of the public by seeming to mock the Bluestockings, and because they had reservations about the propriety of a woman writing comedy. The play tells the story of Celia and Beaufort, lovers kept apart by their families due to &quot;economic insufficiency&quot;.

Burney&#x27;s plays were rediscovered in 1945 when her papers were acquired by the Berg Collection of the New York Public Library. A complete edition was published in Montreal in 1995, edited by Peter Sabor, Geoffrey Sill, and Stewart Cooke.

==&quot;Cecilia&quot;==

In 1782 Burney published &quot;Cecilia, or Memoirs of an Heiress&quot;, written partly at Chessington Hall and after much discussion with Crisp. The publishers, Thomas Payne and Thomas Cadell, paid Frances £250 for her novel, printed 2000 copies of the first edition, and reprinted it at least twice within a year.

The plot revolves around a heroine, Cecilia Beverley, whose inheritance from an uncle comes with the stipulation that she find a husband who will accept her name. Beset on all sides by suitors, the beautiful and intelligent Cecilia&#x27;s heart is captivated by a man whose family&#x27;s pride in its birth and ancestry would forbid such a change of name. He finally persuades Cecilia, against all her judgement, to marry him secretly, so that their union – and consequent change of name – can be presented to the family as an accomplished fact. The work received praise for the maturity of its ironic third-person narration, but was viewed as less spontaneous than her first work, and weighed by the author&#x27;s self-conscious awareness of her audience. Some critics claim to have found the narration intrusive, while friends found the writing too closely modelled on Johnson&#x27;s. Edmund Burke admired the novel, but moderated his praise with criticism of the array of characters and tangled, convoluted plots.

Jane Austen may have been inspired by a sentence in &quot;Cecilia&quot; to name her famous novel &quot;Pride and Prejudice&quot;: &quot;&#x27;The whole of this unfortunate business,&#x27; said Dr Lyster, &#x27;has been the result of pride and prejudice.&#x27;&quot;

Her fellow Bluestocking, Anna Laetitia Barbauld wrote to Burney in 1813 encouraging her to publish her novel &quot;The Wanderer&quot; in the United States where her work, including &quot;Cecilia&quot;, was popular.

==The royal court==
In 1775 Burney turned down a marriage proposal from one Thomas Barlow, a man whom she had met only once. Her side of the Barlow courtship is amusingly told in her journal. During 1782–1785 she enjoyed the rewards of her successes as a novelist; she was received at fashionable literary gatherings throughout London. In 1781 Samuel Crisp died. In 1784 Dr Johnson died, and that year also brought her failure in a romance with a clergyman, George Owen Cambridge. She was 33 years old.

In 1785, an association with Mary Granville Delany, a woman known in both literary and royal circles, allowed Burney to travel to the court of King George III and Queen Charlotte, where the Queen offered her the post of &quot;Keeper of the Robes&quot;, with a salary of £200 per annum. Burney hesitated to accept, not wishing to be separated from her family, and especially resistant to employment that would restrict free use of her time in writing. However, unmarried at 34, she felt pressure to accept and thought that improved social status and income might allow her greater freedom to write. Having accepted the post in 1786, she developed a warm relationship with the queen and princesses that lasted into her later years, yet her doubts proved accurate: the position exhausted her and left her little time for writing. Her sorrow was intensified by poor relations with her colleague Juliane Elisabeth von Schwellenburg, co-Keeper of the Robes, who has been described as &quot;a peevish old person of uncertain temper and impaired health, swaddled in the buckram of backstairs etiquette.&quot;

Burney&#x27;s continued to write journals during her years in the court. To her friends and to her sister Susanna, she recounted her life in court, along with major political events, including the public trial of Warren Hastings for &quot;official misconduct in India&quot;. She recorded the speeches of Edmund Burke at the trial.

Burney was courted by an official of the royal household, Colonel Stephen Digby, but he eventually married another woman of greater wealth. The disappointment, combined with the other frustrations of office, may have contributed to her health failing at this time. In 1790 she prevailed on her father (whose own career had taken a new turn when he was appointed organist at Chelsea Hospital in 1783) to request that she be released from the post, which she was. She returned to her father&#x27;s house in Chelsea, but continued to receive a yearly pension of £100. She kept up a friendship with the royal family and received letters from the princesses from 1818 until 1840.

=== The court plays ===
From 1788, Burney&#x27;s diaries record the composition of a small number of playtexts which were neither performed nor published in the author&#x27;s lifetime, remaining in manuscript until 1995. These are the dramatic fragment conventionally known as &quot;Elberta&quot; and three completed plays copied out in handwriting in ordered booklets, suitable for private circulation, if not publication. These are &quot;Edwy and Elgiva&quot;, &quot;Hubert de Vere&quot;, and &quot;The Siege of Pevensey&quot;. &quot;Edwy and Elgiva&quot; was the only one to be staged, although for one night only, on 21 March 1795, garnering unanimous negative reviews from the public and critics. The long-delayed publication of these plays has largely kept critics. Even for the handful of scholars who have dealt with them, these texts remain devoid of particular dramatic qualities, indeed &#x27;wretched&#x27;, as they are often called: in the form in which they have come to us they seem too long to be staged; characterizations are stereotyped; the endings are weak, and the plots convoluted and inconsistent. The style, rhetorical and emphatic, makes them sound clumsy and heavy to the modern ear. However, when properly contextualized and studied as theatrical texts, rather than as unfortunate second-order productions within the works of a successful novelist as Burney, the four Court plays suggest a distinct thematic-stylistic-discursive alignment, more in line with the dramatic production of the late 18th century than has been recognized thus far.

==Marriage==
In 1790–1791 Burney wrote four blank-verse tragedies: &quot;Hubert de Vere&quot;, &quot;The Siege of Pevensey&quot;, &quot;Elberta&quot; and &quot;Edwy and Elgiva&quot;, only the last of which was performed. One of a profusion of paintings and literary works about the early English king Eadwig (&quot;Edwy&quot;) and his wife Ælfgifu (&quot;Elgiva&quot;) to appear in the later 18th century, it met with public failure, opening in London in March for only one night.

When the French Revolution began in 1789, Burney was among many literary figures in England who sympathized with its early ideals of equality and social justice. During this period Burney became acquainted with some French exiles known as &quot;Constitutionalists&quot;, who had fled to England in August 1791 and were living at Juniper Hall, near Mickleham, Surrey, where Burney&#x27;s sister Susanna lived. She quickly became close to General Alexandre d&#x27;Arblay (1754-1818), an artillery officer who had been adjutant-general to Lafayette. D&#x27;Arblay taught her French and introduced her to the writer Germaine de Staël.

Burney&#x27;s father disapproved of d&#x27;Arblay&#x27;s poverty, Catholicism, and ambiguous social status as an émigré. Nonetheless, she and d&#x27;Arblay were married on 28 July 1793 at St Michaels and All Angels Church in Mickleham. The same year she produced her pamphlet &quot;Brief Reflections relative to the Emigrant French Clergy&quot;. This short work resembled other pamphlets produced by French sympathisers in England, calling for financial support for the revolutionary cause. It is noteworthy for the way that Burney employed her rhetorical skills in the name of tolerance and human compassion. On 18 December 1794, Burney gave birth to a son, Alexander Charles Louis (died 19 January 1837), who took holy orders and became minister of Ely Chapel, London, and perpetual curate of Camden Town Chapel. Her sister Charlotte&#x27;s remarriage in 1798 to the pamphleteer Ralph Broome caused her and her father further consternation, as did the move by her sister Susanna and penurious brother-in-law Molesworth Phillips and their family to Ireland in 1796.

==&quot;Camilla&quot;==

Burney and her new husband, General Alexandre d&#x27;Arblay, were saved from poverty in 1796 by the publication of Burney&#x27;s &quot;courtesy novel&quot; &quot;Camilla, or a Picture of Youth&quot;, a story of frustrated love and impoverishment. The first edition sold out; she made £1000 on the novel and sold the copyright for another £1000. This enabled them to build a house in Westhumble near Dorking in Surrey, which they called Camilla Cottage. Their life at this time was by all accounts happy, but the illness and death in 1800 of Burney&#x27;s sister and close friend Susanna cast a shadow and ended a lifelong correspondence that had been the motive and basis for most of Burney&#x27;s journal writing. However, she resumed her journal at the request of her husband, for the benefit of her son.

==Comedies==
In the period 1797–1801 Burney wrote three comedies that remained unpublished in her lifetime: &quot;Love and Fashion&quot;, &quot;A Busy Day&quot; and &quot;The Woman Hater&quot;. The last is partly a reworking of subject-matter from &quot;The Witlings&quot;, but with fewer satirical elements and more emphasis on reforming her characters&#x27; faults. First performed in December 2007 at the Orange Tree Theatre in Richmond, it retains one of the central characters, Lady Smatter – an absent-minded but inveterate quoter of poetry, perhaps meant as a comic rendering of a Bluestocking. All other characters in &quot;The Woman Hater&quot; differ from those in &quot;The Witlings&quot;.

==Life in France: revolution and mastectomy==
In 1801 d&#x27;Arblay was offered service with the government of Napoleon Bonaparte in France, and in 1802 Burney and her son followed him to Paris, where they expected to remain for a year. The outbreak of war between France and England overtook their visit and they remained there in exile for ten years. Although isolated from her family while in France, Burney was supportive of her husband&#x27;s decision to move to Passy, outside Paris.

In August 1810 Burney developed pains in her breast, which her husband suspected could be due to breast cancer. Through her royal network, she was eventually treated by several leading physicians, and a year later, on 30 September 1811, underwent a mastectomy performed by &quot;7 men in black, Dr. Larrey, M. Dubois, Dr. Moreau, Dr. Aumont, Dr. Ribe, &amp; a pupil of Dr. Larrey, &amp; another of M. Dubois&quot;. The operation was performed like a battlefield operation under the command of M. Dubois, then &quot;accoucheur&quot; (midwife or obstetrician) to the Empress Marie Louise and considered the best doctor in France. Burney later described the operation in detail, since she was conscious through most of it, as it took place before the development of anaesthetics.

Burney sent her account of this experience months later to her sister Esther without rereading it. It is impossible to know today whether the breast removed was indeed cancerous. She survived, and returned to England with her son in 1812 to visit her ailing father and to avoid her son&#x27;s conscription into the French army. Charles Burney died in 1814, and she returned to France later that year after the Treaty of Paris had been concluded, to be with her husband.

In 1815 Napoleon escaped from Elba, and returned to power in France. D&#x27;Arblay, who was serving with the King&#x27;s Guard, remained loyal to King Louis XVIII and became involved in the military actions that followed. Burney fled to Belgium. When her husband was wounded she joined him at Trèves (Trier) and together they returned to Bath in England, to live at 23 Great Stanhope Street. Burney wrote an account of this experience and of her Paris years in her Waterloo Journal of 1818–1832. D&#x27;Arblay was promoted to lieutenant-general, but died shortly afterwards of cancer, in 1818.

==&quot;The Wanderer&quot; and &quot;Memoirs of Dr Burney&quot;==
Burney published her fourth novel, &quot;The Wanderer: Or, Female Difficulties&quot;, a few days before her father&#x27;s death. &quot;A story of love and misalliance set in the French Revolution&quot;, it criticises the English treatment of foreigners in the war years. It also criticizes the hypocritical social restriction put on women in general – as the heroine tries one means after another to earn an honest living – and the elaborate class criteria for social inclusion or exclusion. That strong social message sits uneasily within an unusual structure that might be called a melodramatic proto-mystery novel with elements of the picaresque. The heroine is no scallywag, but she is wilful and for obscure reasons refuses to reveal her name or origin. So as she darts about the South of England as a fugitive, she arouses suspicions.

Some parallels of plot and attitude have been drawn between &quot;The Wanderer&quot; and the early novels of Helen Craik, which she could have read in the 1790s.

Burney made £1500 from the first run, but the work disappointed her followers and did not go into a second English printing, although it met her immediate financial needs. Critics felt it lacked the insight of her earlier novels. It was reprinted in 1988 with an introduction by the novelist Margaret Drabble in the &quot;Mothers of the Novel&quot; series.

After her husband&#x27;s death at 23 Great Stanhope Street, Bath, Burney moved to London to be nearer to her son, then a fellow at Christ&#x27;s College. In homage to her father she gathered and in 1832 published in three volumes the &quot;Memoirs of Doctor Burney&quot;. These were written in a panegyric style, praising her father&#x27;s accomplishments and character, and she drew on many of her own personal writings from years before to produce them. Protective of her father and the family reputation, she destroyed evidence of facts that were painful or unflattering and was soundly criticised by contemporaries and later by historians for doing so.

==Later life==
Burney outlived her son, who died in 1837, and her sister Charlotte Broome, who died in 1838. While in Bath, Burney received visits from younger members of the Burney family, who found her a fascinating storyteller with a talent for imitating the personalities that she described. She continued to write often to members of her family.

Frances Burney died on 6 January 1840. She was buried with her son and her husband in Walcot cemetery in Bath. A gravestone was later erected in the churchyard of St Swithin&#x27;s across the road, adjacent to that of Jane Austen&#x27;s father, George Austen.

==Plaques and other memorials==
In addition to the gravestone erected in the churchyard of St Swithin, Bath, other memorials and plaques record Burney&#x27;s life.

A plaque on the wall at 84 High Street, King&#x27;s Lynn, shows where she and her father lived in the 1750s.

In 1780, two years after the publication of Evelina, she stayed at 14 South Parade, Bath, with Mr and Mrs Thrale, who were great friends of Dr Johnson. A plaque on the wall of the house records her visit.

At 78 West Street, Brighton, Sussex a blue plaque records her visits to the Thrales&#x27; home there.

At Windsor Castle Wall, St Alban&#x27;s Street, Windsor, a plaque records the residence of Mary Delaney between 1785 and 1788, where she was frequently visited by Burney.

A blue plaque on a wall in Chapel Lane, Westhumble, Surrey records the d&#x27;Arblays&#x27; life there in their cottage, &#x27;Camilla&#x27;, which they built and in which they lived between 1797 and 1801.

At St Margaret&#x27;s Vicarage, St Margaret&#x27;s Place, King&#x27;s Lynn a blue plaque records Burney&#x27;s regular visits there, where she observed the social life of Lynn.

Elizabeth Goudge&#x27;s four-act play, &quot;Fanny Burney&quot; (in &quot;Three Plays: Suomi, The Brontës of Haworth, Fanny Burney&quot;: Gerald Duckworth, London, 1939) has scenes from the life of Frances Burney from 1768 to 1840. Under the title &quot;Joy Will Come Back&quot;, the play was performed in London, in the Arts Theatre in 1937. Under the published title, &quot;Fanny Burney&quot;, it was performed at Oldham, Lancashire, in 1949.

A Royal Society of Arts brown plaque records her period of residence at 11 Bolton Street, Mayfair.

On 13 June 2002 the Burney Society of North America and the Burney Society UK unveiled a memorial panel in the new Poets&#x27; Corner window in Westminster Abbey in memory of Frances Burney.

In 2013, a marble plaque was unveiled in the gallery of St Swithin&#x27;s Church, Bath, to record Burney&#x27;s life. This replaces two original plaques – one to her and one to her half-sister Sarah Harriet – that were lost. In 1958, the St Swithin&#x27;s church authorities had sought to protect the plaques by removing them during renovations to the church organ, but they later disappeared.

==List of works==
===Fiction===
*&quot;The History of Caroline Evelyn&quot;, (ms. destroyed by author, 1767)
*&quot;Evelina: Or The History of A Young Lady&#x27;s Entrance into the World&quot;, London, 1778
*&quot;Cecilia: Or, Memoirs of an Heiress&quot;, London, 1782
*&quot;Camilla: Or, A Picture of Youth&quot;, London, 1796, revised (shortened) 1802
*&quot;The Wanderer: Or, Female Difficulties&quot;, London: Longmans, 1814

===Non-fiction===
*&quot;Brief Reflections Relative to the French Emigrant Clergy&quot;. London, 1793
*&quot;Memoirs of Doctor Burney&quot;. London: Moxon, 1832

===Posthumously published journals and letters===
*&quot;The Early Diary of Frances Burney 1768–1778&quot;. 2 vols. Ed. Annie Raine Ellis. London: 1889
*&quot;Diary and Letters of Madame d&#x27;Arblay&quot;, &quot;1778-1840&quot;. Edited by her niece [Charlotte Barrett]. In 7 vols. London: H. Colburn (1842–1846).
*&quot;The Diary and Letters of Madame d&#x27;Arblay&quot;. Ed. Austin Dobson. London: Macmillan, 1904
*&quot;Dr. Johnson &amp; Fanny Burney&quot; [HTML at Virginia], by Fanny Burney. Ed. Chauncy Brewster Tinker. London: Jonathan Cape, 1912
*&quot;The Diary of Fanny Burney&quot;. Ed. Lewis Gibbs. London: Everyman, 1971

====McGill University&#x27;s Burney Centre Editions====
*&quot;The Early Journals and Letters of Fanny Burney, 1768–1783&quot;. 5 vols. Vols. 1–2, ed. Lars Troide; Vol. 3, ed. Lars Troide and Stewart Cooke; Vol. 4, ed. Betty Rizzo; Vol. 5, ed. Lars Troide and Stewart Cooke.
*&quot;The Additional Journals and Letters of Frances Burney&quot; vol. 1 (1784–1786). Edited by Peter Sabor and Stewart Cooke, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015.
*&quot;The Court Journals and Letters of Frances Burney (1786-July 1791)&quot;. In 6 vols. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011–2019.
*&quot;The Journals and Letters of Fanny Burney (Madame d&#x27;Arblay) 1791–1840&quot;, (12 vols.) Vols. I–VI, ed. Joyce Hemlow, with Patricia Boutilier and Althea Douglas; Vol. VII, ed. Edward A. and Lillian D. Bloom; Vol. VIII, ed. Peter Hughes; Vols. IX–X, ed. Warren Derry; Vols. XI–XII, ed. Joyce Hemlow with Althea Douglas and Patricia Hawkins. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1972–1984.
*&quot;The Additional Journals and Letters of Frances Burney&quot; vol. 2 (1791-1840). Edited by Peter Sabor, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018.

===Plays===
*&quot;The Witlings&quot;, 1779 (satirical comedy)
*&quot;Edwy and Elgiva&quot;, 1790 (verse tragedy). Produced at Drury Lane, 21 March 1795
*&quot;Hubert de Vere&quot;, c. 1788–1791 (verse tragedy)
*&quot;The Siege of Pevensey&quot;, c. 1788–1791 (verse tragedy)
*&quot;Elberta&quot;, (fragment) 1788–1791? (verse tragedy)
*&quot;Love and Fashion&quot;, 1799 (satirical comedy)
*&quot;The Woman Hater&quot;, 1800–1801 (satirical comedy)
*&quot;A Busy Day&quot;, 1800–1801 (satirical comedy)

== Citations ==
== General and cited references==
*Michael E. Adelstein, &quot;Fanny Burney&quot;. New York: Twayne, 1968
*H H Asquith, &quot;Fanny Burney&quot;, published privately by Sir Charles Russell, 1923
*Fanny Burney, &quot;The Complete Plays of Frances Burney&quot; (Vol. 1: Comedies; Vol. 2: Tragedies), ed. Peter Sabor, Stewart Cooke, and Geoffrey Sill, Montreal: McGill-Queen&#x27;s University Press, 1995 
*Fanny Burney, &quot;Journals and Letters&quot;. Ed. Peter Sabor and Lars E. Troide: Penguin Classics, 2001
*Fanny Burney, &quot;The Witlings and The Woman-Hater&quot;. Ed. Peter Sabor and Geoffrey Sill, Peterborough: Broadview Press, 2002
*&quot;Burney, Fanny, 1752–1840.&quot; &quot;Literature Online Biography.&quot; Fredericton: University of New Brunswick. 3 December 2006
*&quot;Burney, Fanny.&quot; &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica.&quot; Vol. 4, 1971
*&quot;Burney, Fanny.&quot; &quot;The Bloomsbury Guide to Women&#x27;s Literature.&quot; Ed. Claire Buck. London, New York: Prentice-Hall, 1992.
*Sophie Marie Coulombeau, &quot;&#x27;New Perspectives on the Burney Family&#x27;,&quot; Special issue of &quot;Eighteenth-Century Life&quot; 42, 2 (2018) ISSN 0098-2601
*Commire, Anne, and Deborah Klezmer. &quot;Women in World History: A biographical encyclopaedia.&quot; Waterford: Yorkin, 1999–2002
*D.D. Devlin, &quot;The Novels and Journals of Frances Burney.&quot; Hampshire: Macmillan, 1987
*Marianna D&#x27;Ezio, &quot;Transcending National Identity: Paris and London in Frances Burney&#x27;s Novels&quot;. &quot;Synergies Royaume-Uni et Irlande&quot; 3 (2010), pp. 59–74
*Margaret Anne Doody, &quot;Frances Burney: The Life in The Works.&quot; New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1988
*Julia Epstein, &quot;The Iron Pen: Frances Burney and the Politics of Women&#x27;s Writing.&quot; Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1989
*Mascha Gemmeke, &quot;Frances Burney and the Female&quot; Bildungsroman: &quot;An Interpretation of&quot; The Wanderer; or, Female Difficulties. Frankfurt/M: Peter Lang, 2004
*Claire Harman, &quot;Fanny Burney: A Biography&quot;. New York: Knopf, 2001
*Joyce Hemlow, &quot;The History of Fanny Burney.&quot; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1958
*Francesca Saggini, &quot;Backstage in the Novel. Frances Burney and the Theater Arts&quot;. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2012
*Francesca Saggini, &quot;The wolf, the lamb, and the big &quot;Oh!”: voids, (w)holes, and epitaphic emptiness in Frances Burney&#x27;s &quot;Hubert de Vere.&quot; Open Res Europe 2023, 3:138 (https://doi.org/10.12688/openreseurope.16439.1)&quot;
*Judy Simons, &quot;Diaries and Journals of Literary Women from Fanny Burney to Virginia Woolf.&quot; Hampshire: Macmillan, 1990
*Paula Stepankowsky, &quot;Frances Burney d&#x27;Arblay&quot;. Dawson College.

==External links==

* Works by Fanny Burney at A Celebration of Women Writers
** &quot;Camilla: Or, A Picture of Youth&quot; (1796)
** &quot;Evelina: Or The History of A Young Lady&#x27;s Entrance into the World&quot; (1778)
* A Resource for Fanny Burney at FannyBurney.org 
* 
* 
* Essays by Fanny Burney at Quotidiana.org
* Fanny Burney&#x27;s own account of the mastectomy she underwent in 1811
* Burney Centre at McGill University
* The Burney Society
* Archival material relating to Frances Burney listed at the UK National Register of Archives
* Frances d&#x27;Arblay (&#x27;Fanny Burney&#x27;) at the National Portrait Gallery, London
* On Frances Burney&#x27;s houses, March 2023, as part of the OpeRaNew project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q259530" start="0" end="14" title="Frances Burney" label="Frances Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q259530" start="62" end="74" title="Frances Burney" label="Fanny Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q259530" start="85" end="105" title="Frances Burney" label="Madame d&amp;#x27;Arblay"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="122" end="131" title="Satire" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q161159" start="235" end="268" title="Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618583" start="327" end="339" title="French emigration (1789–1815)" label="French exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="571" end="584" title="Bath, England" label="Bath, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635110" start="656" end="663" title="Evelina" label="Evelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233990" start="758" end="765" title="Cecilia (Burney novel)" label="Cecilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q538812" start="1380" end="1400" title="novel of manners" label="novelists of manners"/>
<link wikidata="Q36322" start="1426" end="1437" title="Jane Austen" label="Jane Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q167768" start="1442" end="1469" title="William Makepeace Thackeray" label="William Makepeace Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635110" start="1509" end="1516" title="Evelina" label="Evelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q27478559" start="1719" end="1726" title="Susan Burney" label="Susanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233990" start="1979" end="1986" title="Cecilia (Burney novel)" label="Cecilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934813" start="2008" end="2015" title="Camilla (Burney novel)" label="Camilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523279" start="2040" end="2052" title="The Wanderer (Burney novel)" label="The Wanderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769470" start="2115" end="2134" title="British nobility" label="English aristocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q127599624" start="2494" end="2509" title="Edwy and Elgiva" label="Edwy and Elgiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q234746" start="2626" end="2639" title="Sarah Siddons" label="Sarah Siddons"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="3372" end="3389" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Dr Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="3391" end="3403" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q291322" start="3405" end="3424" title="Hester Thrale" label="Hester Lynch Thrale"/>
<link wikidata="Q222390" start="3426" end="3439" title="David Garrick" label="David Garrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q260034" start="3465" end="3487" title="Blue Stockings Society" label="Blue Stockings Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q170583" start="3619" end="3638" title="Pride and Prejudice" label="Pride and Prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="3765" end="3783" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Battle of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q612836" start="3832" end="3843" title="Vanity Fair (novel)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q18546858" start="3982" end="3994" title="Samuel Crisp" label="Samuel Crisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q157341" start="4628" end="4644" title="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn" label="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q547002" start="4691" end="4705" title="Charles Burney" label="Charles Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q76204046" start="4738" end="4751" title="Esther Sleepe" label="Esther Sleepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27478559" start="4912" end="4929" title="Susan Burney" label="Susanna Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q615435" start="5011" end="5016" title="James Burney" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="5059" end="5069" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075910" start="5115" end="5129" title="Charles Burney (schoolmaster)" label="Charles Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999703" start="5186" end="5221" title="Burney Collection of Newspapers" label="The Burney Collection of Newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538124" start="5461" end="5473" title="Gordon Riots" label="Gordon Riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422151" start="5499" end="5519" title="Sarah Burney" label="Sarah Harriet Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3846858" start="6051" end="6070" title="Margaret Doody" label="Margaret Anne Doody"/>
<link wikidata="Q127683" start="6217" end="6240" title="Incest" label="incestuous relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6658" end="6666" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="7015" end="7027" title="Musicology" label="musicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910239" start="7150" end="7162" title="high society" label="high society"/>
<link wikidata="Q23647169" start="7271" end="7284" title="Poland Street" label="Poland Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812388" start="7317" end="7323" title="Elopement" label="eloped"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="7851" end="7863" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590025" start="7867" end="7890" title="St Martin&amp;#x27;s Lane" label="St Martin&amp;#x27;s Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q132971" start="8164" end="8172" title="dyslexia" label="dyslexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="8405" end="8413" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q842337" start="8427" end="8432" title="Parallel Lives" label="Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="8449" end="8460" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178486" start="8508" end="8521" title="courtesy book" label="courtesy book"/>
<link wikidata="Q860740" start="8783" end="8793" title="Learning disability" label="disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q457143" start="9123" end="9127" title="Omai" label="Omai"/>
<link wikidata="Q847008" start="9146" end="9153" title="Raiatea" label="Raiatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q454884" start="9162" end="9174" title="Alexei Grigoryevich Orlov" label="Alexis Orlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996375" start="9178" end="9187" title="favourite" label="favourite"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="9191" end="9210" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q18546858" start="9397" end="9409" title="Samuel Crisp" label="Samuel Crisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266409" start="9464" end="9496" title="Francis Greville, 1st Earl of Warwick" label="Charles Cavendish Fulke Greville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093364" start="9708" end="9724" title="Chessington Hall" label="Chessington Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q188907" start="11083" end="11092" title="Etiquette" label="propriety"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297513" start="11214" end="11226" title="Joyce Hemlow" label="Joyce Hemlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635110" start="11416" end="11423" title="Evelina" label="Evelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434980" start="11763" end="11777" title="Robert Dodsley" label="Robert Dodsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q499134" start="11860" end="11870" title="amanuensis" label="amanuensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="12414" end="12426" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="12451" end="12465" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062099" start="12694" end="12710" title="Elizabeth Blower" label="Elizabeth Blower"/>
<link wikidata="Q465821" start="13116" end="13126" title="Epistolary novel" label="epistolary"/>
<link wikidata="Q223945" start="13315" end="13328" title="Bildungsroman" label="Bildungsroman"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="13648" end="13671" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q581180" start="14824" end="14834" title="Lady Susan" label="Lady Susan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170583" start="14870" end="14889" title="Pride and Prejudice" label="Pride and Prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q291322" start="15245" end="15258" title="Hester Thrale" label="Hester Thrale"/>
<link wikidata="Q146667" start="15300" end="15309" title="Streatham" label="Streatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q295941" start="15750" end="15760" title="Samuel Richardson" label="Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="16080" end="16088" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="16096" end="16100" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865268" start="16332" end="16345" title="Arthur Murphy (writer)" label="Arthur Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q352725" start="16350" end="16375" title="Richard Brinsley Sheridan" label="Richard Brinsley Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="16401" end="16416" title="Comedy drama" label="dramatic comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406888" start="16430" end="16442" title="The Witlings" label="The Witlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q260034" start="16716" end="16729" title="Blue Stockings Society" label="Bluestockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013887" start="17023" end="17038" title="Berg Collection" label="Berg Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="17046" end="17069" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233990" start="17239" end="17272" title="Cecilia (Burney novel)" label="Cecilia, or Memoirs of an Heiress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093364" start="17298" end="17314" title="Chessington Hall" label="Chessington Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793066" start="17369" end="17381" title="Thomas Payne" label="Thomas Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788182" start="17386" end="17399" title="Thomas Cadell (publisher)" label="Thomas Cadell"/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="17551" end="17555" title="hero" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q33005760" start="18126" end="18148" title="Third-person narrative" label="third-person narration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11729628" start="18820" end="18832" title="Bluestocking" label="Bluestocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q268305" start="18834" end="18856" title="Anna Laetitia Barbauld" label="Anna Laetitia Barbauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523279" start="18924" end="18936" title="The Wanderer (Burney novel)" label="The Wanderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543074" start="19483" end="19504" title="George Owen Cambridge" label="George Owen Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q510352" start="19558" end="19579" title="Mary Delany" label="Mary Granville Delany"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="19677" end="19687" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q161159" start="19692" end="19707" title="Queen Charlotte" label="Queen Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q930374" start="19755" end="19774" title="Mistress of the Robes" label="Keeper of the Robes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19883118" start="20420" end="20455" title="Juliane von Schwellenberg" label="Juliane Elisabeth von Schwellenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592638" start="20591" end="20598" title="buckram" label="buckram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006190" start="20828" end="20840" title="Impeachment of Warren Hastings" label="public trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q333994" start="20844" end="20859" title="Warren Hastings" label="Warren Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="20935" end="20947" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21029" end="21042" title="Stephen Digby" label="Stephen Digby"/>
<link wikidata="Q127599624" start="22079" end="22094" title="Edwy and Elgiva" label="Edwy and Elgiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q739672" start="23253" end="23264" title="Blank verse" label="blank-verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q191203" start="23510" end="23516" title="Eadwig" label="Eadwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4368350" start="23549" end="23556" title="Ælfgifu, wife of Eadwig" label="Ælfgifu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="23700" end="23717" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618583" start="23970" end="23985" title="French emigration (1789–1815)" label="fled to England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313597" start="24020" end="24032" title="Juniper Hall" label="Juniper Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994591" start="24039" end="24048" title="Mickleham, Surrey" label="Mickleham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429942" start="24207" end="24223" title="Adjutant general" label="adjutant-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="24227" end="24236" title="Gilbert du Motier, marquis de Lafayette" label="Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q123041" start="24303" end="24320" title="Germaine de Staël" label="Germaine de Staël"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774132" start="24389" end="24400" title="Anti-Catholicism in the United Kingdom" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989857" start="24436" end="24442" title="émigré" label="émigré"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994591" start="24548" end="24557" title="Mickleham, Surrey" label="Mickleham"/>
<link wikidata="Q190399" start="24590" end="24598" title="pamphlet" label="pamphlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="25039" end="25050" title="holy orders" label="holy orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505176" start="25074" end="25084" title="Ely Chapel, Holborn" label="Ely Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169547" start="25098" end="25114" title="perpetual curate" label="perpetual curate"/>
<link wikidata="Q149836" start="25118" end="25129" title="Camden Town" label="Camden Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205527" start="25204" end="25216" title="Ralph Broome (pamphleteer)" label="Ralph Broome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934813" start="25578" end="25585" title="Camilla (Burney novel)" label="Camilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988910" start="25799" end="25809" title="Westhumble" label="Westhumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q540333" start="25815" end="25822" title="Dorking" label="Dorking"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406888" start="26478" end="26490" title="The Witlings" label="The Witlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099747" start="26632" end="26651" title="Orange Tree Theatre" label="Orange Tree Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500974" start="26655" end="26663" title="Richmond, London" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="27037" end="27045" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241308" start="27394" end="27399" title="Passy" label="Passy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="27514" end="27527" title="breast cancer" label="breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q848318" start="27666" end="27676" title="mastectomy" label="mastectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q468413" start="27712" end="27722" title="Dominique Jean Larrey" label="Dr. Larrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q185196" start="27932" end="27942" title="Midwife" label="accoucheur"/>
<link wikidata="Q157491" start="27990" end="28002" title="Marie Louise, Duchess of Parma" label="Marie Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q4990531" start="28180" end="28192" title="Anesthetic" label="anaesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="28488" end="28500" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q740724" start="28605" end="28620" title="Treaty of Paris (1814)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="28674" end="28682" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45328" start="28696" end="28700" title="Elba" label="Elba"/>
<link wikidata="Q199955" start="28706" end="28733" title="Hundred Days" label="returned to power in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750" start="28817" end="28828" title="Louis XVIII" label="Louis XVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138" start="28959" end="28973" title="Trier" label="Trèves (Trier)"/>
<link wikidata="Q179034" start="29131" end="29139" title="Waterloo, Belgium" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29368" end="29405" title="The Wanderer: Or, Female Difficulties" label="The Wanderer: Or, Female Difficulties"/>
<link wikidata="Q191489" start="29911" end="29920" title="melodrama" label="melodrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585139" start="29930" end="29937" title="mystery fiction" label="mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q44563" start="29965" end="29975" title="picaresque" label="picaresque"/>
<link wikidata="Q19325903" start="30278" end="30289" title="Helen Craik" label="Helen Craik"/>
<link wikidata="Q239307" start="30624" end="30640" title="Margaret Drabble" label="Margaret Drabble"/>
<link wikidata="Q714717" start="30821" end="30842" title="Christ&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q591055" start="30986" end="30995" title="panegyric" label="panegyric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961332" start="31786" end="31792" title="Walcot, Bath" label="Walcot"/>
<link wikidata="Q17531984" start="31863" end="31880" title="Church of St Swithin, Bath" label="St Swithin&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101397" start="31945" end="31958" title="George Austen (clergyman)" label="George Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q157341" start="32166" end="32182" title="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn" label="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="32461" end="32469" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="32480" end="32491" title="blue plaque" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q464955" start="32593" end="32600" title="Windsor, Berkshire" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q510352" start="32636" end="32648" title="Mary Delaney" label="Mary Delaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988910" start="32757" end="32767" title="Westhumble" label="Westhumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q157341" start="32982" end="32998" title="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn" label="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q242571" start="33102" end="33118" title="Elizabeth Goudge" label="Elizabeth Goudge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="33550" end="33571" title="Royal Society of Arts" label="Royal Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q124184" start="33638" end="33645" title="Mayfair" label="Mayfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275898" start="33763" end="33781" title="Poets&amp;#x27; Corner" label="Poets&amp;#x27; Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="33792" end="33809" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17531984" start="33896" end="33926" title="Church of St Swithin, Bath" label="St Swithin&amp;#x27;s Church, Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635110" start="34351" end="34421" title="Evelina" label="Evelina: Or The History of A Young Lady&amp;#x27;s Entrance into the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233990" start="34449" end="34483" title="Cecilia (Burney novel)" label="Cecilia: Or, Memoirs of an Heiress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934813" start="34511" end="34542" title="Camilla (Burney novel)" label="Camilla: Or, A Picture of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34596" end="34633" title="The Wanderer: Or, Female Difficulties" label="The Wanderer: Or, Female Difficulties"/>
<link wikidata="Q62061200" start="36355" end="36369" title="Althea Douglas" label="Althea Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406888" start="36605" end="36617" title="The Witlings" label="The Witlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q127599624" start="36656" end="36671" title="Edwy and Elgiva" label="Edwy and Elgiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768240" start="38282" end="38295" title="Anne Commire" label="Commire, Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031506" start="38324" end="38376" title="Women in World History" label="Women in World History: A biographical encyclopaedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983587" start="39885" end="39899" title="Dawson College" label="Dawson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="40510" end="40543" title="National Portrait Gallery, London" label="National Portrait Gallery, London"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56579" wikidata="Q340594" url="?curid=56579" title="Achondroplasia">
<text>Achondroplasia is a genetic disorder with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance whose primary feature is dwarfism. It is the most common cause of dwarfism and affects about 1 in 27,500 people. In those with the condition, the arms and legs are short, while the torso is typically of normal length. Those affected have an average adult height of for males and for females. Other features can include an enlarged head with prominent forehead (frontal bossing) and underdevelopment of the midface (midface hypoplasia). Complications can include sleep apnea or recurrent ear infections. Achondroplasia includes the extremely rare short-limb skeletal dysplasia with severe combined immunodeficiency.

Achondroplasia is caused by a mutation in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (&quot;FGFR3&quot;) gene that results in its protein being overactive. Achondroplasia results in impaired endochondral bone growth (bone growth within cartilage). The disorder has an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance, meaning only one mutated copy of the gene is required for the condition to occur. About 80% of cases occur in children of parents without the disease, and result from a new (&quot;de novo&quot;, or sporadic) mutation, which most commonly originates as a spontaneous change during spermatogenesis. The rest are inherited from a parent with the condition. The risk of a new mutation increases with the age of the father. In families with two affected parents, children who inherit both affected genes typically die before birth or in early infancy from breathing difficulties. The condition is generally diagnosed based on the clinical features but may be confirmed by genetic testing. Mutations in FGFR3 also cause achondroplasia related conditions including hypochondroplasia and SADDAN (severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans), a rare disorder of bone growth characterized by skeletal, brain, and skin abnormalities resulting in severe short-limb skeletal dysplasia with severe combined immunodeficiency.

Treatments include small molecule therapy with a C-natriuretic peptide analog (vosoritide), approved to improve growth velocity in children with achondroplasia based on results in Phase 3 human trials, although its long-term effects are unknown. Growth hormone therapy may also be used. Efforts to treat or prevent complications such as obesity, hydrocephalus, obstructive sleep apnea, middle ear infections or spinal stenosis may be required. Support groups support people with achondroplasia, including the Little People of America (LPA) and Growing Stronger. Nonprofit physician organizations also exist to disseminate information about treatment and management options, including development of patient resources.

== Signs and symptoms ==
* Disproportionate dwarfism
* Shortening of the proximal limbs (called rhizomelic shortening)
* Short fingers and toes, with &quot;trident hands&quot; (short hands with stubby fingers, and a separation between the middle and ring fingers – reminiscent of a trident on fetal ultrasound )
* Large head with prominent forehead frontal bossing
* Small midface with a flattened nasal bridge
* Spinal kyphosis (convex curvature) or lordosis (concave curvature)
* Varus (bowleg) or valgus (knock knee) deformities
* Frequent ear infections (due to Eustachian tube blockages), sleep apnea (which can be central or obstructive), and hydrocephalus

=== Complications ===
==== Children ====

Children with achondroplasia often have less muscle tone; because of this it is common for them to have delayed walking and motor skills. It is also common for children to have bowed legs, scoliosis, lordosis, arthritis, issues with joint flexibility, breathing problems, ear infections, and crowded teeth. These issues can be treated with surgery, braces, or physical therapy.

Hydrocephalus is a severe effect associated with achondroplasia in children. This condition occurs when cerebrospinal fluid is not able to flow in and out of the skull because of how the spine narrows. This fluid build up is associated with an enlarged head, vomiting, lethargy, headaches, and irritability. A shunt surgery is commonly performed to treat this condition, but an endoscopic third ventriculostomy can also be done.

==== Adults ====
Adults with achondroplasia often face issues with obesity and sleep apnea. It is also typical for adults to experience numbness or tingling in their legs because of nerve compression.

Some research has found that adults with achondroplasia may also experience psychosocial complications, usually associated with short stature.

Pregnancy in women with achondroplasia is considered higher risk. Women with achondroplasia generally have their babies delivered through C-sections to prevent complications that could occur with a natural birth. Intelligence and life span are usually near normal, although craniocervical junction compression increases the risk of death in infancy.

== Causes ==
Achondroplasia is caused by a mutation in fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (&quot;FGFR3&quot;) gene. This gene encodes a protein called fibroblast growth factor receptor 3, which contributes to the production of collagen and other structural components in tissues and bones. When the FGFR3 gene is mutated it interferes with how this protein interacts with growth factors leading to complications with bone production. Cartilage is not able to fully develop into bone, causing the individual to be disproportionately shorter in height.

In normal development, &quot;FGFR3&quot; has a negative regulatory effect on bone growth. In achondroplasia, the mutated form of the receptor is constitutively active, and this leads to severely shortened bones. This is an example of a gain of function mutation. The effect is genetically dominant, with one variant of the &quot;FGFR3&quot; gene being sufficient to cause achondroplasia, while two copies of the mutant gene are invariably fatal (recessive lethal) before or shortly after birth. This occurs due to respiratory failure from an underdeveloped ribcage. People with achondroplasia are often born to parents that do not have the condition due to spontaneous mutation.

Where achondroplasia is inherited, its pattern is autosomal dominant. In couples where one partner has achondroplasia there is a 50% chance of passing the disorder on to their child every pregnancy. In situations where both parents have achondroplasia there is a 50% chance the child will have achondroplasia, 25% chance the child will not, and a 25% chance that the child will inherit the gene from both parents resulting in &quot;double dominance&quot; and leading to lethal bone dysplasia.

Studies have demonstrated that new gene mutations for achondroplasia are exclusively inherited from the father and occur during spermatogenesis; it has been theorized that sperm carrying the mutation in FGFR3 have a selective advantage over sperm with normal FGFR3. The frequency of mutations in sperm leading to achondroplasia increases in proportion to paternal age, as well as in proportion to exposure to ionizing radiation. The occurrence rate of achondroplasia in the children of fathers over 50 years of age is 1 in 1,875, compared to 1 in 15,000 in the general population. Research by urologist Harry Fisch of the Male Reproductive Center at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in 2013 indicated that in humans this defect may be exclusively inherited from the father and becomes increasingly probable with paternal age, specifically males reproducing after 35.

There are two other syndromes with a genetic basis similar to achondroplasia: hypochondroplasia and thanatophoric dysplasia.

== Diagnosis ==
Achondroplasia can be detected before birth by prenatal ultrasound, although signs are often subtle and not apparent before the 24th week of pregnancy. A DNA test can be performed before birth to detect homozygosity, wherein two copies of the mutant gene are inherited, a lethal condition leading to stillbirths. Postnatal diagnosis of achondroplasia is typically uncomplicated, involving an assessment of physical and radiographic features. Clinical features include megalocephaly, short limbs, prominent forehead, thoracolumbar kyphosis and mid-face hypoplasia. Complications like dental malocclusion, hydrocephalus and repeated otitis media can be observed. The risk of death in infancy is increased due to the likelihood of compression of the spinal cord with or without upper airway obstruction.

=== Radiologic findings ===
A skeletal survey is useful to confirm the diagnosis of achondroplasia. The skull is large, with a narrow foramen magnum, and relatively small skull base. The vertebral bodies are short and flattened with relatively large intervertebral disk height, and there is congenitally narrowed spinal canal. The iliac wings are small and squared, with a narrow sciatic notch and horizontal acetabular roof. The tubular bones are short and thick with metaphyseal cupping and flaring and irregular growth plates. Fibular overgrowth is present. The hand is broad with short metacarpals and phalanges, and a trident configuration. The ribs are short with cupped anterior ends. If the radiographic features are not classic, a search for a different diagnosis should be entertained. Because of the extremely deformed bone structure, people with achondroplasia are often &quot;double jointed&quot;. The diagnosis can be made by fetal ultrasound by progressive discordance between the short femur length and biparietal diameter by age. The trident hand configuration can be seen if the fingers are fully extended.

Another common characteristic of the syndrome is thoracolumbar gibbus in infancy.

== Treatment ==
There is no known cure for achondroplasia even though the cause of the mutation in the growth factor receptor has been found. Although used by those without achondroplasia to aid in growth, human growth hormone does not help people with achondroplasia, which involves a different hormonal pathway. Usually, the best results appear within the first and second year of therapy. After the second year of growth hormone therapy, beneficial bone growth decreases, so the therapy is not a satisfactory long-term treatment. As of December 2020, the treatment of achondroplasia with human growth hormone was approved only in Japan.

A small-molecule drug vosoritide is used to improve growth velocity in children with achondroplasia, although its long-term effects are unknown. Vosoritide inhibits the activity of &quot;FGFR3&quot;. It has been gradually made available in different countries starting from 2021.

Limb-lengthening will increase the length of the legs and arms of someone with achondroplasia, but little medical consensus exists regarding this practice. The age of surgery can vary from early childhood to adulthood.

Research has also shown that introducing parents of children with achondroplasia to support and advocacy groups at the time of diagnosis can improve outcomes. Several patient advocacy groups exist to support people with achondroplasia and their families. Resources are available to support patients and their caregivers with information that they can distribute to their physicians, who may not be familiar with the unique medical requirements of managing achondroplasia. Physician-oriented best practice guidelines are also available to guide physicians managing the spinal disorders, foramen magnum stenosis, craniofacial implications, pregnancy, and peri-operative needs of people with achondroplasia.

Homozygous achondroplasia is invariably considered terminal even with aggressive treatment.

== Epidemiology ==
Achondroplasia is one of several congenital conditions with similar presentations, such as osteogenesis imperfecta, multiple epiphyseal dysplasia tarda, achondrogenesis, osteopetrosis, and thanatophoric dysplasia. This makes estimates of prevalence difficult, with changing and subjective diagnostic criteria over time. One detailed and long-running study in the Netherlands found that the prevalence determined at birth was only 1.3 per 100,000 live births. Another study at the same time found a rate of 1 per 10,000. A 2020 review and meta-analysis estimated a worldwide prevalence of 4.6 per 100,000.

==Psychological and social aspects==
In addition to physical challenges, individuals with achondroplasia may also experience psychological challenges such as fear or negative perception of individuals with achondroplasia. Gollust et al. have indicated that adults with achondroplasia tend to have lower self-esteem, annual income, educational attainment, and overall quality of life (QOL) when compared to their unaffected siblings. Interestingly, the Golust study revealed that the subjects were as likely to cite disadvantages relating to social barriers as those relating to health issues and functioning.

On the other hand, other investigators, such as Ancona, state that for many individuals in immediate environments that have natural acceptance of the condition from the beginning, their main challenge lies in adapting to a world designed for those without the condition. However, when society rejects the condition from the start and associates it with destructive anxiety, it significantly damages the individual&#x27;s self-image and leads to their social exclusion. Thus, the author hypothesizes, an accepting environment is crucial to prevent significant suffering for individuals with achondroplasia and to ensure the best outcomes for corrective interventions, rather than perpetuating rejection.

Similarly, a study conducted in Japan by Nishimura and Hanaki found that children with achondroplasia faced challenges related to their short stature, but there was no indication of psychosocial maladjustment. They hypothesized that focusing on coping strategies and self-efficacy may play a crucial role in promoting psychological well-being among children with achondroplasia.

Social support and peer connections can be important for individuals with achondroplasia. Support groups, online communities, and advocacy organizations can provide a sense of belonging and can help individuals with achondroplasia connect with others who understand their experiences. Additionally, these communities can serve as a resource for information and support for both individuals with achondroplasia and their families. In the United States, The Little People of America (LPA) is a national organization that provides support, resources, and advocacy for individuals with dwarfism, including achondroplasia.

== Animals ==

Based on their disproportionate dwarfism, some dog breeds traditionally have been classified as &quot;achondroplastic&quot;. This is the case for the dachshund, basset hound, corgi and bulldog breeds. Data from whole genome association studies in short-limbed dogs reveal a strong association of this trait with a retro-gene coding for fibroblast growth factor 4 (FGF4). Therefore, it seems unlikely that dogs and humans are achondroplastic for the same reasons. However, histological studies in some achondroplastic dog breeds have shown altered cell patterns in cartilage that are very similar to those observed in humans exhibiting achondroplasia.

A similar form of achondroplasia was found in a litter of piglets from a phenotypically normal Danish sow. The dwarfism was inherited dominant in the offspring from this litter. The piglets were born phenotypically normal but became more and more symptomatic as they reached maturity. This involved a mutation of the protein collagen, type X, alpha 1, encoded by the COL10A1 gene. In humans a similar mutation (G595E) has been associated with Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia (SMCD), a relatively mild skeletal disorder that is also associated with dwarfism.

The now extinct Ancon sheep was created by humans through the selective breeding of common domestic sheep with achondroplasia. The average-sized torso combined with the relatively smaller legs produced by achondroplasia was valued for making affected sheep less likely to escape without affecting the amount of wool or meat each sheep produced.

== See also ==
* List of radiographic findings associated with cutaneous conditions

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q340594" start="0" end="14" title="Achondroplasia" label="Achondroplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="20" end="36" title="genetic disorder" label="genetic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q194101" start="112" end="120" title="dwarfism" label="dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320759" start="233" end="256" title="Rhizomelia" label="arms and legs are short"/>
<link wikidata="Q160695" start="268" end="273" title="torso" label="torso"/>
<link wikidata="Q635339" start="409" end="422" title="Macrocephaly" label="enlarged head"/>
<link wikidata="Q7536963" start="428" end="464" title="Skull bossing" label="prominent forehead (frontal bossing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q213600" start="549" end="560" title="sleep apnea" label="sleep apnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q480700" start="574" end="588" title="ear infections" label="ear infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781626" start="633" end="700" title="short-limb skeletal dysplasia with severe combined immunodeficiency" label="short-limb skeletal dysplasia with severe combined immunodeficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914358" start="749" end="784" title="fibroblast growth factor receptor 3" label="fibroblast growth factor receptor 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="805" end="809" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="830" end="837" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q105590653" start="844" end="854" title="Gain-of-function" label="overactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="968" end="986" title="autosomal dominant" label="autosomal dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36961" start="1288" end="1303" title="spermatogenesis" label="spermatogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1408" end="1425" title="Paternal age effect#Single-gene disorders" label="age of the father"/>
<link wikidata="Q927843" start="1517" end="1553" title="Recessive lethal" label="die before birth or in early infancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q285223" start="1675" end="1690" title="genetic testing" label="genetic testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781626" start="1978" end="2045" title="short-limb skeletal dysplasia with severe combined immunodeficiency" label="short-limb skeletal dysplasia with severe combined immunodeficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q21098976" start="2127" end="2137" title="vosoritide" label="vosoritide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611754" start="2294" end="2316" title="Growth hormone therapy" label="Growth hormone therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="2385" end="2392" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193003" start="2394" end="2407" title="hydrocephalus" label="hydrocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16606552" start="2409" end="2432" title="obstructive sleep apnea" label="obstructive sleep apnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q223254" start="2434" end="2455" title="middle ear infections" label="middle ear infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478321" start="2459" end="2474" title="spinal stenosis" label="spinal stenosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117735" start="2492" end="2506" title="Support groups" label="Support groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320759" start="2863" end="2873" title="rhizomelic" label="rhizomelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7536963" start="3116" end="3131" title="frontal bossing" label="frontal bossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q478389" start="3187" end="3195" title="kyphosis" label="kyphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q744305" start="3218" end="3226" title="lordosis" label="lordosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443822" start="3249" end="3254" title="Varus deformity" label="Varus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14541638" start="3267" end="3273" title="Valgus deformity" label="valgus"/>
<link wikidata="Q480700" start="3310" end="3324" title="Otitis" label="ear infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q320561" start="3333" end="3348" title="Eustachian tube" label="Eustachian tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q754424" start="3367" end="3372" title="apnea" label="apnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620651" start="3387" end="3394" title="Central sleep apnea" label="central"/>
<link wikidata="Q16606552" start="3398" end="3409" title="Obstructive sleep apnea" label="obstructive"/>
<link wikidata="Q193003" start="3416" end="3429" title="hydrocephalus" label="hydrocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q821852" start="4162" end="4175" title="Cerebral shunt" label="shunt surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410145" start="4560" end="4572" title="psychosocial" label="psychosocial"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914358" start="5034" end="5069" title="fibroblast growth factor receptor 3" label="fibroblast growth factor receptor 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="5768" end="5784" title="Gain-of-function mutation" label="gain of function"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="5809" end="5829" title="Dominance (genetics)" label="genetically dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q927843" start="5978" end="5994" title="Lethal allele" label="recessive lethal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6189" end="6209" title="Mutation#Spontaneous mutation" label="spontaneous mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="6651" end="6660" title="Dominance (genetics)" label="dominance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128996" start="6694" end="6703" title="dysplasia" label="dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36961" start="6834" end="6849" title="spermatogenesis" label="spermatogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186161" start="7115" end="7133" title="ionizing radiation" label="ionizing radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105650" start="7299" end="7308" title="urologist" label="urologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q975653" start="7356" end="7386" title="Columbia Presbyterian Hospital" label="Columbia Presbyterian Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283054" start="7650" end="7667" title="hypochondroplasia" label="hypochondroplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787020" start="7672" end="7695" title="thanatophoric dysplasia" label="thanatophoric dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136569" start="7761" end="7769" title="Prenatal testing" label="prenatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="7770" end="7780" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7917" end="7929" title="Zygosity#Homozygous" label="homozygosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q745832" start="8014" end="8025" title="stillbirths" label="stillbirths"/>
<link wikidata="Q482853" start="8230" end="8243" title="vertebral column" label="thoracolumbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q426139" start="8650" end="8664" title="foramen magnum" label="foramen magnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q781983" start="8829" end="8841" title="spinal canal" label="spinal canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q427157" start="8985" end="8996" title="metaphyseal" label="metaphyseal"/>
<link wikidata="Q302896" start="9046" end="9053" title="Fibular" label="Fibular"/>
<link wikidata="Q237229" start="9106" end="9117" title="metacarpals" label="metacarpals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057892" start="9122" end="9131" title="phalanges" label="phalanges"/>
<link wikidata="Q245341" start="9215" end="9227" title="radiographic" label="radiographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641042" start="9405" end="9419" title="Hypermobility (joints)" label="double jointed"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="9462" end="9472" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q176503" start="9518" end="9523" title="femur" label="femur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559065" start="9705" end="9711" title="Gibbus deformity" label="gibbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="9931" end="9951" title="human growth hormone" label="human growth hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q21098976" start="10388" end="10398" title="vosoritide" label="vosoritide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722542" start="10647" end="10663" title="Limb-lengthening" label="Limb-lengthening"/>
<link wikidata="Q749409" start="11776" end="11799" title="osteogenesis imperfecta" label="osteogenesis imperfecta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452604" start="11801" end="11830" title="multiple epiphyseal dysplasia" label="multiple epiphyseal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823145" start="11838" end="11853" title="achondrogenesis" label="achondrogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755568" start="11855" end="11868" title="osteopetrosis" label="osteopetrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787020" start="11874" end="11897" title="thanatophoric dysplasia" label="thanatophoric dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="14422" end="14435" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q29099" start="14769" end="14778" title="dachshund" label="dachshund"/>
<link wikidata="Q37716" start="14780" end="14792" title="basset hound" label="basset hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q858459" start="14794" end="14799" title="Welsh Corgi" label="corgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38383" start="14804" end="14811" title="bulldog" label="bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q17927869" start="14983" end="14987" title="FGF4" label="FGF4"/>
<link wikidata="Q21132758" start="15596" end="15621" title="collagen, type X, alpha 1" label="collagen, type X, alpha 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964434" start="15714" end="15749" title="Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia" label="Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753095" start="15850" end="15861" title="Ancon sheep" label="Ancon sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635943" start="16197" end="16263" title="List of radiographic findings associated with cutaneous conditions" label="List of radiographic findings associated with cutaneous conditions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56582" wikidata="Q4454" url="?curid=56582" title="Khabarovsk">
<text>Khabarovsk ( ) is the largest city and the administrative centre of Khabarovsk Krai, Russia, located from the China–Russia border, at the confluence of the Amur and Ussuri Rivers, about north of Vladivostok. As of the 2021 Russian census, it had a population of 617,441. It was known as &quot;Khabarovka&quot; until 1893.

The city was the administrative center of the Far Eastern Federal District of Russia from 2002 until December 2018, when the status was given to Vladivostok. As is typical of the interior of the Russian Far East, Khabarovsk has an extreme climate with strong seasonal swings resulting in strong, cold winters and relatively hot and humid summers.

==History==
===Earliest record===
Historical records indicate that a city was founded on the site in the eighth century. The Tungusic peoples are indigenous to the city&#x27;s vicinity. The city was named () in Chinese when it was part of the Chinese empire. During the Tang dynasty, Boli was the capital of Heishui Protectorate, called Heishui Duhufu.
 In AD 722, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang (唐玄宗) established Heishui Protectorate and gave self-rule to Heishui Mohe tribes. The seat of this administrative region was then established near today&#x27;s Khabarovsk.

===17th-century Russian exploration===
In the mid-17th century, the Amur Valley became the scene of hostilities between the Russian Cossacks, who tried to expand into the region and collect tribute from the natives, and the rising Manchu Qing dynasty, who were intent on securing the region for themselves. The coastal areas had historically been the native home of the Manchu people. 

====Khabarov&#x27;s Achansk====
The Russian explorers and raiders of the 1650s set up a number of more or less fortified camps (&quot;ostrogs&quot;) on the Amur. Most of them were in use for only a few months and later destroyed. It is usually thought that the first such camp in the general area of today&#x27;s Khabarovsk was the fortified winter camp named Achansk () or Achansky gorodok (), built by the Cossacks of Yerofey Khabarov in September 1651 after they had sailed to the area from the upper Amur. The fort was named after the local tribe whom Khabarov&#x27;s people called &quot;Achans&quot;. On October 8 the fort was unsuccessfully attacked by joint forces of Achans and Duchers (who had good reasons to hate the Cossacks, due to their rather heavy-handed tribute-extraction tactics), while many Russians were away fishing. In late November, Khabarov&#x27;s people undertook a three-day campaign against the local chief Zhakshur (Жакшур) (whose name is also known in a more Russian version, Zaksor (Заксор)), collecting a large amount of tribute and announcing that the locals were now subjects of the Russian Czar. A similar campaign was waged later in winter against the Ducher chief Nechiga (Нечига), farther away from Achansk.

On 24 or 26 March 1652, Fort Achansk was attacked by Manchu cavalry, led by Ninguta&#x27;s commander Haise, reinforced by Ducher auxiliaries, but the Cossacks stood their ground in a day-long battle and even managed to seize the attackers&#x27; supply train. Once the ice on the Amur broke in the spring of 1652, Khabarov&#x27;s people destroyed their fort and sailed away.

The exact location of Khabarov&#x27;s Achansk has long been a subject for debate among Russian historians and geographers. A number of locations, both upstream and downstream of today&#x27;s Khabarovsk, have been proposed since Richard Maack, one of the first Russian scholars to visit the region, identified Achansk in 1859 with the ruins on Cape Kyrma, which is located on the southern (Chinese) shore of the Amur, upstream of Khabarovsk. The most widely accepted point of view is probably that of Boris Polevoy, who believed that Khabarov&#x27;s Achansk was located in the Nanai village later known as Odzhal-Bolon (), located on the left bank of the Amur, closer to Amursk than to Khabarovsk. One of his arguments was that both Khabarov&#x27;s Achan (sometimes also spelt by the explorer as Otshchan, Отщан), and Wuzhala (乌扎拉) of the Chinese records of the 1652 engagement are based on the name of the Nanai clan &quot;Odzhal&quot; (Оджал), corresponding to the 20th-century name of the village as well. (The name of the clan was also written as &quot;Uzala&quot;, as in the name of its best-known member, Dersu Uzala).

Polevoy&#x27;s view appeared to gain wide support among the Russian geographer community; petitioned by the Amur Branch of the Russian Geographical Society, the Russian Government renamed the village of Odzhal to Achan in 1977, to celebrate its connection with Khabarov&#x27;s raid.

As to the Cape Kyrma ruins, thought by Maack to be the remains of Achansk, B.P. Polevoy identified them as the remains of another &quot;ostrog&quot; – namely, Kosogorsky Ostrog, where Onufriy Stepanov stayed a few years later.

===Qing Empire===
After the Treaty of Nerchinsk (1689) between the Tsardom of Russia and the Qing Empire, the area became an uncontested part of China for the next century and a half. Modern historical maps of the Qing period published in China mark the site of future Khabarovsk as Bólì (). All of the middle and lower Amur region was nominally part of the Jilin Province, run first out of Ninguta and later out of Jilin City.

French Jesuits who sailed along the Ussuri and the Amur Rivers in 1709 prepared the first more or less precise map of the region. According to them, the indigenous Nanai people were living on the Ussuri and on the Amur down to the mouth of the Dondon River (i.e., in the region including the site of the future Khabarovsk). These people were known to the Chinese as &quot;Yupi Dazi&quot; (&quot;Fish skin Tartars&quot;).

===From Khabarovka to Khabarovsk===
In 1858, the area was ceded to Russia under the Treaty of Aigun. The Russians founded the military outpost of Khabarovka (), named after Yerofey Khabarov. The post later became an important industrial center for the region. Town status was granted in 1880. In 1893, it was given its present name: Khabarovsk.

In 1894, a department of the Russian Geographical Society was formed in Khabarovsk and to found libraries, theatres and museums in the city. Since then, Khabarovsk&#x27;s cultural life has flourished. Much of the local indigenous history has been well preserved in the Regional Lore Museum and Natural History Museum and in places like near the Nanai settlement of Sikachi-Alyan, where cliff drawings from more than 13,000 years ago can be found. The Khabarovsk Art Museum exhibits a rare collection of old Russian icons.

In 1916, the Khabarovsk Bridge across the Amur was completed, allowing Trans-Siberian trains to cross the river without using ferries (or temporary rail tracks over the frozen river in winter). During the Russian Civil War, Khabarovsk was occupied by Japan in September 1918.

===Soviet era===

After the defeat of Japan in World War II, Khabarovsk was the site of the Khabarovsk War Crime Trials, in which twelve former members of the Japanese Kwantung Army and Unit 731 were put on trial for the manufacture and use of biological weapons during World War II.

Chinese Emperor Puyi, captured by Soviet troops in Manchuria, was relocated to Khabarovsk and lived there from 1945 up to 1950, when he was returned to China.

When Japan fell in September 1945 the United States reached an agreement with Stalin to build two U.S. Naval Advance Bases (Fleet Weather Centrals) in the USSR. The U.S. built one outside Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky on the Kamchatka Peninsula with the code name TAMA. The other was outside Khabarovsk in buildings provided by the Soviets, code-named MOKO. For mail Khabarovsk was assigned U.S.Navy number 1168, FPO San Francisco. The American use of these two bases was short-lived.

On 5 November 1956, the first phase of the city tram was commissioned. The Khabarovsk television studio began broadcasting in 1960. On 1 September 1967, the Khabarovsk Institute of Physical Education, now the Far Eastern State Academy of Physical Culture, opened. On 14 January 1971, Khabarovsk was awarded the Order of October Revolution. In 1975 the first stage of the urban trolley opened. In 1976 the city hosted an international ice hockey tournament with the ball for the prize of the newspaper &quot;Sovietskaya Rossia&quot;. In 1981 the Bandy World Championship was played in the city.

===Russian Federation===
In 1996, Khabarovsk held its first mayoral elections. Paul D. Filippov, whose candidacy was supported by Governor Viktor Ishayev, was defeated. In 1998, reconstruction of the central square of Khabarovsk was completed. In May 2000, President of Russia, Vladimir Putin, decreed that new federal districts be formed, and Khabarovsk became the center of the Far Eastern Federal District.

In 2006, the Center for Cardiovascular Surgery, a high-tech medical center, was constructed according to a Russian national health project. In 2008, the train station was completely renovated, and the adjacent square was reconstructed to include fountains and an underground passage. In 2009, Khabarovsk hosted the EU-Russia summit. In 2010, the city hosted a meeting of the Great Circle of Ussuri Cossacks. On 3 November 2012, Khabarovsk was awarded the honorary title of &quot;City of Military Glory&quot;.

On 9 July 2020, the governor of the region, Sergei Furgal, was arrested and flown to Moscow. The 2020 Khabarovsk Krai protests began on 11 July 2020 in support of Furgal.

====Flag====

The flag of Khabarovsk displays a bear on the right (Red side) and a Siberian tiger on the left (blue side), holding a yellow shield with a blue reversed pall and a red fish. The flag is a representation of the coat of arms of Khabarovsk. The flag was adopted on 30 October 2007 and is 2:3 in ratio.

==Geography==
The city is located 30 kilometers (19 mi) from the China–Russia border, at the confluence of the Amur and Ussuri Rivers, about 800 kilometers (500 mi) north of Vladivostok.

===Climate===
Khabarovsk experiences a monsoonal dry-winter humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;Dwb&quot; borders on &quot;Dwa&quot;, Trewartha climate classification &quot;Dcbc&quot; bordering on &quot;Dcac&quot;). Its climate is strongly continental, featuring very warm summers and bitterly cold winters.

The average annual precipitation is , mainly concentrated in the summer. In a few years, November to March hardly receive any precipitation. The driest year was 2001 with only of precipitation and the wettest was 1981 when of precipitation fell. The wettest month was August 1981 with a total precipitation of . Due to high summer humidity, overnight lows remain mild to warm during several months. Snowfall is common, though light, with an average maximum snow height of . During peak winter, highs above freezing are very rare.

The city&#x27;s extreme climate sees daily average high and low temperatures vary by around over the course of the year. The average temperature in January is and the average for July is . Extremes have ranged from in June 2010 to in January 2011.

==Administrative and municipal status==
Khabarovsk is the administrative center of the krai and, within the framework of administrative divisions, it also serves as the administrative center of Khabarovsky District, even though it is not a part of it. As an administrative division, it is incorporated separately as the city of krai significance of Khabarovsk—an administrative unit with the status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, the city of krai significance of Khabarovsk is incorporated as Khabarovsk Urban Okrug.

==Demographics==

Ethnic composition (2010):
* Russians – 92.6%
* Ukrainians – 1.8%
* Koreans – 1.1%
* Chinese – 0.6%
* Tatars – 0.5%
* Uzbeks – 0.5%
* Others – 2.9%

==Economy and infrastructure==
Primary industries include iron processing, steel milling, Khabarovsk shipyard, Daldizel, machinery, petroleum refining, flour milling, pharmaceutical industry, meatpacking and manufacturing of various types of heavy and light machinery.

A high-speed international fiber-optic cable connects the city of Khabarovsk with the city of Fuyuan in China.

==Transportation==
The city is a principal railway center and is located along the Trans-Siberian Railway; the rail distance of Khabarovsk railway station from Moscow is .

Khabarovsk is served by the Khabarovsk Novy Airport with international flights to East Asia, Southeast Asia, European Russia, and Central Asia.

Road links include the Trans-Siberian Highway (M58 and M60 Highways), and water transport links are provided by the Amur River and Ussuri River.

Public transport includes: tram (8 routes); trolleybus (4 routes); bus and fixed-route taxi (marshrutka, approximately 100 routes).

Transborder travel to China in winter ice road in summer boat on Amur river to Fuyuan (and train to Harbin)

In 2021, the construction of a paid high-speed bypass of the city was completed.

==Education==
There are the following institutions of higher education in Khabarovsk:
*Pacific National University (former Khabarovsk State University of Technology or Polytechnic Institute)
*Far Eastern State University of Humanities (former Khabarovsk State Teachers Training University)
*Far Eastern State Medical University
*Khabarovsk State Academy of Economics and Law
*Far Eastern State Transport University
*Far Eastern Academy of Public Service
*Far Eastern State Physical Education University
*Khabarovsk State Institute of Arts and Culture

==Tourism==
A key street in Khabarovsk is the broad Amursky Boulevard with its many shops and a local market. The city&#x27;s five districts stretch for along the Amur River. The similar boulevard – Ussuryisky is located between the two main streets Muravyov-Amursky and Lenin street and runs to the city&#x27;s artificial lakes (Gorodskie Prudi) with the sport complex Platinum Arena. The lakes are famous for their fountains with the light show. The Military History Museum of the Far Eastern Military District is located in the city, the only such museum in the Russian Far East.

There is a walking tour from the Lenin Square to Utyos on Amur via Muravyov-Amursky Street, where visitors find traditional Russian cuisine restaurants and shops with souvenirs. There are a number of night clubs and pubs in this area.
In wintertime ice sculptures are on display on the cities squares and parks. Artists come from as far as Harbin in China.

Unlike Vladivostok, the city has never been closed to foreigners, despite it being the headquarters of the Far East Military District, and retains its historically international flavor. Once the capital of the Soviet Far East (from 1926 to 1938), since the demise of the Soviet Union, it has experienced an increased Asian presence. It is estimated that over one million Chinese travel to and through Khabarovsk yearly, and foreign investment by Japanese and Korean corporations have grown in recent years. The city has a multi-story shopping mall and about a dozen hotels.

Aleksandr Fedosov, the Khabarovsk Krai Minister of Culture, estimates that the city became more attractive to tourists following the 2015 Bandy World Championship.

Khabarovsk is the closest major city to Birobidzhan, which is the administrative center of the Jewish Autonomous Oblast, Russia, located on the Trans-Siberian Railway, close to the border with China. The Jewish Autonomous Oblast is a federal subject of Russia in the Russian Far East, bordering Khabarovsk Krai and Amur Oblast in Russia and Heilongjiang province in China. Its administrative center is the town of Birobidzhan, and it is the only region in the world in which Yiddish is the official language. Khabarovsk provides the closest major airport to Birobidzhan, which is Khabarovsk Novy Airport (KHV / UHHH), 198 km from the center of Birobidzhan.

==Military==

The headquarters of the Russian Ground Forces&#x27;s Eastern Military District is located at 15 Serysheva Street. The district was preceded by the Far Eastern Military District, which was located in the same location. The following component units of the district are stationed in the city:

* 104th Chuj Headquarters Brigade 
* Honour Guard Company of the Khabarovsk Garrison
* 17th Independent Electronic Warfare Brigade 
* 118th Independent Pontoon-Bridge Railway Battalion
* 392nd Pacific Training Center for Junior Specialists 
* 11th Air and Air Defence Forces Army
* Military Band of the Eastern Military District

All 5 of these units make up the Khabarovsk Garrison. The Russian Navy&#x27;s Pacific Fleet maintains a presence in the city as well. There is also an airbase located to the east of the city. The main public relations asset for the military in the city is the Military History Museum of the Far Eastern Military District and the district military band.

==Sports==

*Amur Khabarovsk, a professional ice hockey club of the international Kontinental Hockey League and plays its home games at the Platinum Arena. It used to be the furthest team from the European-based teams in the league until Admiral Vladivostok joined the KHL in 2013 as an expansion team.
*FC SKA-Khabarovsk, a professional association football team playing in the Russian First League, the second tier of Russian association football.
*SKA-Neftyanik, a professional bandy club which plays in the top-tier Russian Bandy Super League at its own indoor venue Arena Yerofey. It is both the easternmost and southernmost team in the top division. In the 2016–17 season the club became Russian champion for the first time. As of 2019 the team has won the title three years in a row.

===International events===
The city was a host to the 1981 Bandy World Championship. It also hosted the 2015 Bandy World Championship, which was visited by Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev. Khabarovsk organised the 2018 tournament as well, but not Division B that time around, which was held in Chinese Harbin. The event was named by the Federal Agency for Tourism as one of the best 200 events of the year.

A delegation from the 2022 Winter Olympics organising committee visited Khabarovsk to watch matches in the bandy league to study the plans if the sport was to be added to the Games program.

==Notable people==

==Twin towns – sister cities==
Khabarovsk is twinned with:
* Niigata, Japan (1965)
* Portland, United States (1988)
* Victoria, Canada (1990) As of March 4, 2022, Victoria City Council voted to suspend the city&#x27;s relationship with Khabarovsk as a result of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.
* Harbin, China (1993)
* Bucheon, South Korea (2002)
* Sanya, China (2011)

==Awards==
*Khabarovsk placed first in different categories of &quot;Most Developed and Comfortable City of Russia&quot; in 2006, 2008 and 2009.
*In 2010, Khabarovsk won the second place in the Forbes list of most suitable cities for private business in Russia. First place went to Krasnodar.

==See also==

*Bolshoy Ussuriysky Island
*2020 Khabarovsk Krai protests

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Sources===
*
*
*
*Nikolay P. Kradin. &quot;It Is Protected by the State: the Monuments of Architecture in Khabarovsk&quot;. Khabarovsk: Chastnaya kollektsiya, 1999. 192 p. 

==External links==


* Official website of Khabarovsk 
* Khabarovsk Business Directory 
* Manchu-Korean expedition against Russian expansion (나선정벌 (羅禪征伐)
* map of the Manchu-Korean expedition against Russian expansion (나선정벌 (羅禪征伐)
* Major problems of Russian-Korean relationship
* China and Russia relationship and history 
* Website of Khabarovsk</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4454" start="0" end="10" title="Khabarovsk" label="Khabarovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578772" start="30" end="34" title="types of inhabited localities in Russia" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="43" end="64" title="administrative centre" label="administrative centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788" start="68" end="83" title="Khabarovsk Krai" label="Khabarovsk Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="85" end="91" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629888" start="110" end="129" title="China–Russia border" label="China–Russia border"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="138" end="148" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="156" end="160" title="Amur River" label="Amur"/>
<link wikidata="Q207777" start="165" end="177" title="Ussuri River" label="Ussuri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="195" end="206" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q787182" start="218" end="237" title="Russian Census (2010)" label="2021 Russian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q41968" start="369" end="397" title="Far Eastern Federal District" label="Far Eastern Federal District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="554" end="569" title="#Climate" label="extreme climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q868179" start="796" end="812" title="Tungusic peoples" label="Tungusic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q9746" start="1036" end="1060" title="Emperor Xuanzong of Tang" label="Emperor Xuanzong of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036814" start="1122" end="1134" title="Heishui Mohe" label="Heishui Mohe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065867" start="1334" end="1345" title="Russian-Manchu border conflicts" label="hostilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="1358" end="1365" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="1366" end="1374" title="Cossacks" label="Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="1465" end="1471" title="Manchu people" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1472" end="1484" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q90668" start="1755" end="1761" title="ostrog (fortress)" label="ostrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q469684" start="2041" end="2057" title="Yerofey Khabarov" label="Yerofey Khabarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172386" start="2307" end="2314" title="Duchers" label="Duchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789899" start="2392" end="2399" title="yasak" label="tribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="2921" end="2927" title="Manchu people" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321612" start="2944" end="2951" title="Ninguta" label="Ninguta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3113" end="3125" title="Medieval warfare#Supply trains" label="supply train"/>
<link wikidata="Q699359" start="3471" end="3484" title="Richard Maack" label="Richard Maack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4369653" start="3743" end="3756" title="Boris Petrovich Polevoy" label="Boris Polevoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q504574" start="3819" end="3824" title="Nani people" label="Nanai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465188" start="3855" end="3860" title="Lake Bolon" label="Bolon"/>
<link wikidata="Q103493" start="3913" end="3919" title="Amursk" label="Amursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q504574" start="4149" end="4154" title="Nanais" label="Nanai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042760" start="4353" end="4364" title="Dersu Uzala" label="Dersu Uzala"/>
<link wikidata="Q726762" start="4495" end="4523" title="Russian Geographical Society" label="Russian Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="4529" end="4547" title="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="Russian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352842" start="4836" end="4852" title="Onufriy Stepanov" label="Onufriy Stepanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q696094" start="4908" end="4927" title="Treaty of Nerchinsk" label="Treaty of Nerchinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="4947" end="4964" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="Tsardom of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="4973" end="4984" title="Qing Empire" label="Qing Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q45208" start="5238" end="5243" title="Jilin" label="Jilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321612" start="5271" end="5278" title="Ninguta" label="Ninguta"/>
<link wikidata="Q92277" start="5296" end="5306" title="Jilin City" label="Jilin City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335343" start="5316" end="5322" title="Jesuit missions in China" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q207777" start="5345" end="5351" title="Ussuri" label="Ussuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="5360" end="5364" title="Amur River" label="Amur"/>
<link wikidata="Q504574" start="5473" end="5485" title="Nanai people" label="Nanai people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286960" start="5553" end="5565" title="Anyuy River (Khabarovsk Krai)" label="Dondon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q618292" start="5815" end="5830" title="Treaty of Aigun" label="Treaty of Aigun"/>
<link wikidata="Q469684" start="5904" end="5920" title="Yerofey Khabarov" label="Yerofey Khabarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q726762" start="6106" end="6134" title="Russian Geographical Society" label="Russian Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q504574" start="6422" end="6427" title="Nanai people" label="Nanai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419026" start="6442" end="6455" title="Sikachi-Alyan" label="Sikachi-Alyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q996167" start="6613" end="6630" title="Khabarovsk Bridge" label="Khabarovsk Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="6671" end="6685" title="Trans-Siberian Railway" label="Trans-Siberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262" start="6726" end="6733" title="train ferry" label="ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="6805" end="6822" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="6851" end="6856" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6924" end="6936" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q714688" start="6969" end="6996" title="Khabarovsk War Crime Trials" label="Khabarovsk War Crime Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q646394" start="7045" end="7058" title="Kwantung Army" label="Kwantung Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q378835" start="7063" end="7071" title="Unit 731" label="Unit 731"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016240" start="7084" end="7089" title="trial (law)" label="trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742406" start="7121" end="7139" title="biological weapons" label="biological weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q185152" start="7178" end="7182" title="Puyi" label="Puyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="7213" end="7222" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951" start="7510" end="7534" title="Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky" label="Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="7542" end="7561" title="Kamchatka Peninsula" label="Kamchatka Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="7851" end="7855" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8012" end="8057" title="Far Eastern State Academy of Physical Culture" label="Far Eastern State Academy of Physical Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q728960" start="8114" end="8141" title="Order of October Revolution" label="Order of October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="8180" end="8187" title="Tram" label="trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q951623" start="8310" end="8328" title="Sovietskaya Rossia" label="Sovietskaya Rossia"/>
<link wikidata="Q806398" start="8348" end="8372" title="Bandy World Championship 1981" label="Bandy World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128634" start="8458" end="8475" title="Elections in Russia" label="mayoral elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q43331" start="8537" end="8551" title="Viktor Ishayev" label="Viktor Ishayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4365643" start="8598" end="8612" title="Lenin Square, Khabarovsk" label="central square"/>
<link wikidata="Q218295" start="8655" end="8674" title="President of Russia" label="President of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="8676" end="8690" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41968" start="8778" end="8806" title="Far Eastern Federal District" label="Far Eastern Federal District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570292" start="8924" end="8947" title="National Priority Projects" label="national health project"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093166" start="9124" end="9140" title="Russia–European Union relations" label="EU-Russia summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="9207" end="9215" title="Cossacks" label="Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846106" start="9264" end="9278" title="Awards and decorations of the Russian Federation" label="honorary title"/>
<link wikidata="Q101735" start="9288" end="9310" title="City of Military Glory" label="City of Military Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q26776800" start="9363" end="9376" title="Sergei Furgal" label="Sergei Furgal"/>
<link wikidata="Q97160469" start="9416" end="9445" title="2020 Khabarovsk Krai protests" label="2020 Khabarovsk Krai protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q11788" start="9539" end="9543" title="bear" label="bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q69581" start="9574" end="9588" title="Siberian tiger" label="Siberian tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298133" start="9659" end="9663" title="Pall (heraldry)" label="pall"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="9674" end="9678" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="9980" end="9991" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="10054" end="10079" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="10081" end="10110" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q17174435" start="10155" end="10187" title="Trewartha climate classification" label="Trewartha climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="10349" end="10362" title="precipitation" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="10661" end="10669" title="humidity" label="humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="11168" end="11189" title="administrative center" label="administrative center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738486" start="11197" end="11201" title="krai" label="krai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11218" end="11255" title="subdivisions of Russia#Administrative divisions" label="framework of administrative divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q826690" start="11304" end="11324" title="Khabarovsky District" label="Khabarovsky District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123997" start="11430" end="11455" title="city of federal subject significance" label="city of krai significance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520659" start="11530" end="11539" title="administrative divisions of Khabarovsk Krai" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11546" end="11564" title="subdivisions of Russia#Municipal divisions" label="municipal division"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="11701" end="11709" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="11720" end="11730" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q484464" start="11740" end="11747" title="Koreans" label="Koreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501380" start="11757" end="11764" title="Chinese people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="11774" end="11780" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="11790" end="11796" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333360" start="12185" end="12191" title="Fuyuan, Heilongjiang" label="Fuyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="12286" end="12308" title="Trans-Siberian Railway" label="Trans-Siberian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q578796" start="12331" end="12357" title="Khabarovsk railway station" label="Khabarovsk railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="12363" end="12369" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q372280" start="12404" end="12427" title="Khabarovsk Novy Airport" label="Khabarovsk Novy Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="12458" end="12467" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="12469" end="12483" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q875134" start="12485" end="12500" title="European Russia" label="European Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="12506" end="12518" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110667" start="12544" end="12566" title="Trans-Siberian Highway" label="Trans-Siberian Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817307" start="12568" end="12571" title="M58 highway (Russia)" label="M58"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452203" start="12576" end="12579" title="M60 highway (Russia)" label="M60"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="12637" end="12647" title="Amur River" label="Amur River"/>
<link wikidata="Q207777" start="12652" end="12664" title="Ussuri River" label="Ussuri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q938789" start="12694" end="12698" title="Trams in Khabarovsk" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711770" start="12760" end="12770" title="marshrutka" label="marshrutka"/>
<link wikidata="Q42956" start="12900" end="12906" title="Harbin" label="Harbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051345" start="13078" end="13105" title="Pacific National University" label="Pacific National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152760" start="13159" end="13180" title="List of institutions using the term &amp;quot;institute of technology&amp;quot; or &amp;quot;polytechnic&amp;quot;" label="Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q31458" start="13183" end="13225" title="Far Eastern State University of Humanities" label="Far Eastern State University of Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13595" end="13612" title="Amursky Boulevard" label="Amursky Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16630931" start="13995" end="14055" title="Military History Museum of the Far Eastern Military District" label="Military History Museum of the Far Eastern Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="14160" end="14165" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q545912" start="14194" end="14210" title="Nikolay Muravyov-Amursky" label="Muravyov-Amursky"/>
<link wikidata="Q42956" start="14467" end="14473" title="Harbin" label="Harbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="14492" end="14503" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996817" start="14592" end="14618" title="Far East Military District" label="Far East Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q609176" start="14695" end="14710" title="Soviet Far East" label="Soviet Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="14756" end="14768" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="14931" end="14936" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="14944" end="14950" title="South Korea" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q15661741" start="15193" end="15222" title="2015 Bandy World Championship" label="2015 Bandy World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769" start="15265" end="15276" title="Birobidzhan" label="Birobidzhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="15291" end="15312" title="administrative center" label="administrative center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730" start="15320" end="15344" title="Jewish Autonomous Oblast" label="Jewish Autonomous Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="15346" end="15352" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="15369" end="15391" title="Trans-Siberian Railway" label="Trans-Siberian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629888" start="15406" end="15423" title="China–Russia border" label="border with China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730" start="15429" end="15453" title="Jewish Autonomous Oblast" label="Jewish Autonomous Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q43263" start="15459" end="15474" title="federal subjects of Russia" label="federal subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="15478" end="15484" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q609176" start="15492" end="15508" title="Russian Far East" label="Russian Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788" start="15520" end="15535" title="Khabarovsk Krai" label="Khabarovsk Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886" start="15540" end="15551" title="Amur Oblast" label="Amur Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q19206" start="15566" end="15578" title="Heilongjiang" label="Heilongjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="15591" end="15596" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="15602" end="15623" title="administrative center" label="administrative center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578772" start="15631" end="15635" title="types of inhabited localities in Russia" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769" start="15639" end="15650" title="Birobidzhan" label="Birobidzhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="15700" end="15707" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769" start="15783" end="15794" title="Birobidzhan" label="Birobidzhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q372280" start="15805" end="15828" title="Khabarovsk Novy Airport" label="Khabarovsk Novy Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769" start="15869" end="15880" title="Birobidzhan" label="Birobidzhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031386" start="15921" end="15942" title="Russian Ground Forces" label="Russian Ground Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126625" start="15950" end="15975" title="Eastern Military District" label="Eastern Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996817" start="16044" end="16073" title="Far Eastern Military District" label="Far Eastern Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026505" start="16376" end="16428" title="392nd District Training Centre" label="392nd Pacific Training Center for Junior Specialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028381" start="16432" end="16468" title="11th Air and Air Defence Forces Army" label="11th Air and Air Defence Forces Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q48840804" start="16471" end="16517" title="Military Band of the Eastern Military District" label="Military Band of the Eastern Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="16577" end="16589" title="Russian Navy" label="Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165355" start="16597" end="16610" title="Pacific Fleet (Russia)" label="Pacific Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16630931" start="16779" end="16839" title="Military History Museum of the Far Eastern Military District" label="Military History Museum of the Far Eastern Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q48840804" start="16848" end="16870" title="Military Band of the Eastern Military District" label="district military band"/>
<link wikidata="Q481725" start="16886" end="16901" title="Amur Khabarovsk" label="Amur Khabarovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q190001" start="16955" end="16980" title="Kontinental Hockey League" label="Kontinental Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349703" start="17013" end="17027" title="Platinum Arena" label="Platinum Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q12258529" start="17111" end="17130" title="Admiral Vladivostok" label="Admiral Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q927084" start="17177" end="17194" title="FC SKA-Khabarovsk" label="FC SKA-Khabarovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="17211" end="17231" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q162533" start="17252" end="17272" title="Russian First League" label="Russian First League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351407" start="17324" end="17337" title="SKA-Neftyanik" label="SKA-Neftyanik"/>
<link wikidata="Q183018" start="17354" end="17359" title="bandy" label="bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100676" start="17393" end="17419" title="Russian Bandy Super League" label="Russian Bandy Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q15713801" start="17444" end="17457" title="Arena Yerofey" label="Arena Yerofey"/>
<link wikidata="Q28666811" start="17536" end="17550" title="2016–17 Russian Bandy Super League" label="2016–17 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378288" start="17567" end="17583" title="List of Russian bandy champions" label="Russian champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q806398" start="17719" end="17748" title="1981 Bandy World Championship" label="1981 Bandy World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15661741" start="17769" end="17798" title="2015 Bandy World Championship" label="2015 Bandy World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q23530" start="17836" end="17851" title="Dmitry Medvedev" label="Dmitry Medvedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q28545324" start="17874" end="17893" title="2018 Bandy World Championship" label="the 2018 tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q42956" start="17966" end="17972" title="Harbin" label="Harbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4481726" start="18001" end="18027" title="Federal Agency for Tourism (Russia)" label="Federal Agency for Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193074" start="18094" end="18114" title="2022 Winter Olympics" label="2022 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="18328" end="18335" title="sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q179691" start="18344" end="18351" title="Niigata (city)" label="Niigata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="18368" end="18376" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="18401" end="18409" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926637" start="18446" end="18467" title="Victoria City Council" label="Victoria City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="18549" end="18581" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42956" start="18585" end="18591" title="Harbin" label="Harbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42099" start="18608" end="18615" title="Bucheon" label="Bucheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q319804" start="18638" end="18643" title="Sanya" label="Sanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="18853" end="18859" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646" start="18941" end="18950" title="Krasnodar" label="Krasnodar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195273" start="18968" end="18993" title="Bolshoy Ussuriysky Island" label="Bolshoy Ussuriysky Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q97160469" start="18995" end="19024" title="2020 Khabarovsk Krai protests" label="2020 Khabarovsk Krai protests"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56590" wikidata="Q14534" url="?curid=56590" title="New General Catalogue">
<text>The New General Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars (abbreviated NGC) is an astronomical catalogue of deep-sky objects compiled by John Louis Emil Dreyer in 1888. The NGC contains 7,840 objects, including galaxies, star clusters and emission nebulae. Dreyer published two supplements to the NGC in 1895 and 1908, known as the Index Catalogues (abbreviated IC), describing a further 5,386 astronomical objects. Thousands of these objects are best known by their NGC or IC numbers, which remain in widespread use.

The NGC expanded and consolidated the cataloguing work of William and Caroline Herschel, and John Herschel&#x27;s &quot;General Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars&quot;. Objects south of the celestial equator are catalogued somewhat less thoroughly, but many were included based on observation by John Herschel or James Dunlop.

The NGC contained multiple errors, but attempts to eliminate them were made by the &quot;Revised New General Catalogue&quot; (RNGC) by Jack W. Sulentic and William G. Tifft in 1973, &quot;NGC2000.0&quot; by Roger W. Sinnott in 1988, and the &quot;NGC/IC Project&quot; in 1993. A &quot;Revised New General Catalogue and Index Catalogue&quot; (abbreviated as RNGC/IC) was compiled in 2009 by Wolfgang Steinicke and updated in 2019 with 13,957 objects.

==Original catalogue==

The original &quot;New General Catalogue&quot; was compiled during the 1880s by John Louis Emil Dreyer using observations from William Herschel and his son John, among others. Dreyer had already published a supplement to Herschel&#x27;s &quot;General Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters&quot; (GC), containing about 1,000 new objects. In 1886, he suggested building a second supplement to the &quot;General Catalogue&quot;, but the Royal Astronomical Society asked Dreyer to compile a new version instead. This led to the publication of the &quot;New General Catalogue&quot; in the &quot;Memoirs of the Royal Astronomical Society&quot; in 1888.

Assembling the NGC was a challenge, as Dreyer had to deal with many contradictory and unclear reports made with a variety of telescopes with apertures ranging from 2 to 72 inches. While he did check some himself, the sheer number of objects meant Dreyer had to accept them as published by others for the purpose of his compilation. The catalogue contained several errors, mostly relating to position and descriptions, but Dreyer referenced the catalogue, which allowed later astronomers to review the original references and publish corrections to the original NGC.

==&quot;Index Catalogue&quot;==

The first major update to the NGC is the &quot;Index Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars&quot; (abbreviated as &quot;IC&quot;), published in two parts by Dreyer in 1895 (IC I, containing 1,520 objects) and 1908 (IC II, containing 3,866 objects). It serves as a supplement to the NGC, and contains an additional 5,386 objects, collectively known as the IC objects. It summarizes the discoveries of galaxies, clusters and nebulae between 1888 and 1907, most of them made possible by photography. A list of corrections to the IC was published in 1912.

==&quot;Revised New General Catalogue&quot;==

The &quot;Revised New Catalogue of Nonstellar Astronomical Objects&quot; (abbreviated as &quot;RNGC&quot;) was compiled by Sulentic and Tifft in the early 1970s, and was published in 1973, as an update to the NGC. The work did not incorporate several previously published corrections to the NGC data (including corrections published by Dreyer himself), and introduced some new errors. For example, the well-known compact galaxy group Copeland Septet in the Leo constellation appears as non-existent in the RNGC.

Nearly 800 objects are listed as &quot;non-existent&quot; in the RNGC. The designation is applied to objects which are duplicate catalogue entries, those which were not detected in subsequent observations, and a number of objects catalogued as star clusters which in subsequent studies were regarded as coincidental groupings. A 1993 monograph considered the 229 star clusters called non-existent in the RNGC. They had been &quot;misidentified or have not been located since their discovery in the 18th and 19th centuries&quot;. It found that one of the 229—NGC 1498—was not actually in the sky. Five others were duplicates of other entries, 99 existed &quot;in some form&quot;, and the other 124 required additional research to resolve.

As another example, reflection nebula NGC 2163 in Orion was classified &quot;non-existent&quot; due to a transcription error by Dreyer. Dreyer corrected his own mistake in the Index Catalogues, but the RNGC preserved the original error, and additionally reversed the sign of the declination, resulting in NGC 2163 being classified as non-existent.

=== &quot;Revised New General Catalogue and Index Catalogue&quot; ===
The &quot;Revised New General Catalogue and Index Catalogue&quot; (abbreviated as &quot;RNGC/IC&quot;) is a compilation made by Wolfgang Steinicke in 2009. It is a comprehensive and authoritative treatment of the NGC and IC catalogues. The number of objects with status of &quot;not found&quot; in this catalogue is 301 objects (2.3%). The brightest star in this catalogue is NGC 771 with magnitude of 4.0.

==&quot;NGC 2000.0&quot;==
&quot;NGC 2000.0&quot; (also known as the &quot;Complete New General Catalog and Index Catalog of Nebulae and Star Clusters&quot;) is a 1988 compilation of the NGC and IC made by Roger W. Sinnott, using the J2000.0 coordinates. It incorporates several corrections and errata made by astronomers over the years.

==NGC/IC Project==
The NGC/IC Project was a collaboration among professional and amateur astronomers formed 
by Steve Gottlieb in 1990, although Steve Gottlieb already started to observe and record NGC objects as early as 1979. Other primary team members were Harold G. Corwin Jr., Malcolm Thomson, Robert E. Erdmann and Jeffrey Corder. The project was completed by 2017. This project identified all NGC and IC objects, corrected mistakes, collected images and basic astronomical data and checked all historical data related to the objects.

==See also==
* Messier object
* &quot;Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars&quot;
* Astronomical catalog
* List of astronomical catalogues
* List of NGC objects

==References==
== External links ==
* The Interactive NGC Catalog Online
* Adventures in Deep Space: Challenging Observing Projects for Amateur Astronomers.
* Revised New General Catalogue</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14534" start="72" end="75" title="New General Catalogue" label="NGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q605175" start="83" end="103" title="astronomical catalog" label="astronomical catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q249389" start="109" end="124" title="deep-sky object" label="deep-sky object"/>
<link wikidata="Q265015" start="138" end="160" title="John Louis Emil Dreyer" label="John Louis Emil Dreyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="212" end="220" title="galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q168845" start="222" end="234" title="star cluster" label="star cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q202265" start="240" end="255" title="emission nebula" label="emission nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q14534" start="363" end="365" title="New General Catalogue" label="IC"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="578" end="585" title="William Herschel" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q76948" start="590" end="607" title="Caroline Herschel" label="Caroline Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14278" start="613" end="626" title="John Herschel" label="John Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362459" start="640" end="690" title="General Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars" label="General Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="719" end="736" title="Celestial sphere" label="celestial equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q14278" start="825" end="838" title="John Herschel" label="John Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q375158" start="842" end="854" title="James Dunlop" label="James Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568999" start="1013" end="1029" title="William G. Tifft" label="William G. Tifft"/>
<link wikidata="Q265015" start="1412" end="1434" title="John Louis Emil Dreyer" label="John Louis Emil Dreyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="1459" end="1475" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14278" start="1488" end="1492" title="John Herschel" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362459" start="1575" end="1616" title="General Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters" label="General Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q753299" start="1762" end="1788" title="Royal Astronomical Society" label="Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q753299" start="1918" end="1959" title="Memoirs of the Royal Astronomical Society" label="Memoirs of the Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915731" start="2844" end="2854" title="supplement (publishing)" label="supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="3064" end="3075" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q22712927" start="3614" end="3629" title="Copeland Septet" label="Copeland Septet"/>
<link wikidata="Q203958" start="4452" end="4469" title="reflection nebula" label="reflection nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q8860" start="4482" end="4487" title="Orion (constellation)" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q923728" start="5227" end="5234" title="NGC 771" label="NGC 771"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703" start="5493" end="5500" title="J2000.0" label="J2000.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q96354708" start="5710" end="5724" title="Steve Gottlieb (amateur astronomer)" label="Steve Gottlieb"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="6155" end="6169" title="Messier object" label="Messier object"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362459" start="6178" end="6220" title="Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars" label="Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q605175" start="6229" end="6249" title="Astronomical catalog" label="Astronomical catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536500" start="6252" end="6283" title="List of astronomical catalogues" label="List of astronomical catalogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q872177" start="6286" end="6305" title="List of NGC objects" label="List of NGC objects"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56597" wikidata="Q3915" url="?curid=56597" title="Antananarivo">
<text>Antananarivo (Malagasy: ; French: &quot;Tananarive&quot;, ), also known by its colonial shorthand form Tana (), is the capital and largest city of Madagascar. The administrative area of the city, known as Antananarivo-Renivohitra (&quot;Antananarivo-Mother Hill&quot; or &quot;Antananarivo-Capital&quot;), is the capital of Analamanga region. The city sits at above sea level in the center of the island, making it the highest national capital by elevation among the island countries. It has been the country&#x27;s largest population center since at least the 18th century. The Presidency, National Assembly, Senate, and Supreme Court are located there, as are 21 diplomatic missions and the headquarters of many national and international businesses and NGOs. It has more universities, nightclubs, art venues, and medical services than any city on the island. Several national and local sports teams, including the championship-winning national rugby team, the Makis, are based here.

Antananarivo was historically the capital of the Merina people, who continue to form the majority of the city&#x27;s 1,274,225 (2018 Census) inhabitants. The surrounding urban areas have a total metropolitan population approaching three million. All eighteen Malagasy ethnic groups, as well as residents of Chinese, Indian, European, and other origins, are represented in the city. It was founded circa 1610, when the Merina King Andrianjaka (1612–1630) expelled the Vazimba inhabitants of the village of Analamanga. Declaring it the site of his capital, Andrianjaka built a &quot;rova&quot; (fortified royal dwelling) that expanded to become the royal palaces of the Kingdom of Imerina. The city retained the name Analamanga until the reign of King Andriamasinavalona (1675–1710), who renamed it Antananarivo (&quot;City of the Thousand&quot;) in honor of Andrianjaka&#x27;s soldiers.

The city served as the capital of the Kingdom of Imerina until 1710 when Imerina split into four warring quadrants. Antananarivo became the capital of the southern quadrant until 1794, when King Andrianampoinimerina of Ambohimanga captured the province and restored it as the capital of a united Kingdom of Imerina, also bringing neighboring ethnic groups under Merina control. These conquests continued under his son, Radama I, who eventually controlled over two-thirds of the island, leading him to be considered the King of Madagascar by European diplomats. Antananarivo remained the island&#x27;s capital after Madagascar was colonized by the French in 1897, and after independence in 1960.

The city is now managed by the &quot;Commune Urbaine d&#x27;Antananarivo&quot; (CUA) under the direction of its President of the Special Delegation, Ny Havana Andriamanjato, appointed in March 2014. Limited funds and mismanagement have hampered consecutive CUA efforts to manage overcrowding and traffic, waste management, pollution, security, public water and electricity, and other challenges linked to explosive population growth. Major historic landmarks and attractions in the city include the reconstructed royal palaces and the Andafiavaratra Palace, the tomb of Rainiharo, Tsimbazaza Zoo, Mahamasina Stadium, Lake Anosy, four 19th-century martyr churches, and the Museum of Art and Archaeology.

==Pronunciation and etymology==
The English pronunciation of Antananarivo is or . The Malagasy pronunciation is , and the pronunciation of the old French name Tananarive is or in English and in French.

Antananarivo was originally the site of a town called &quot;Analamanga&quot;, meaning &quot;Blue Forest&quot; in the Central Highlands dialect of the Malagasy language. Analamanga was established by a community of Vazimba, the island&#x27;s first occupants. Merina King Andrianjaka, who migrated to the region from the southeast coast, seized the location as the site of his capital city. According to oral history, he deployed a garrison of 1,000 soldiers to successfully capture and guard the site. The hill and its city retained the name Analamanga until the reign of King Andriamasinavalona, who renamed it &quot;Antananarivo&quot; (&quot;City of the Thousand&quot;) in honor of Andrianjaka&#x27;s soldiers.

==History==
===Kingdom of Imerina===
Antananarivo was already a major city before the colonial era. After expelling the Vazimba who inhabited the town at the peak of Analamanga hill, Andrianjaka chose the site for his &quot;rova&quot; (fortified royal compound), which expanded over time to enclose the royal palaces and the tombs of Merina royalty. The city was established in around 1610 or 1625 according to varying accounts. Early Merina kings used &quot;fanampoana&quot; (statute labor) to construct a massive system of irrigated paddy fields and dikes around the city to provide adequate rice for the growing population. These paddy fields, of which the largest is called the Betsimitatatra, continue to produce rice.
Successive Merina sovereigns ruled over the Kingdom of Imerina from Analamanga through King Andriamasinavalona&#x27;s reign. This sovereign gave the growing city its current name; he established the Andohalo town square outside the town gate, where all successive sovereigns delivered their royal speeches and announcements to the public, and assigned the names of numerous locations within the city based on the names of similar sites in the nearby village of Antananarivokely. Andriamasinavalona designated specific territories for the &quot;hova&quot; (commoners) and each &quot;andriana&quot; (noble) subcaste, both within the neighborhoods of Antananarivo and in the countryside surrounding the capital. These territorial divisions were strictly enforced; members of subcastes were required to live within their designated territories and were not authorized to stay for extended periods in the territories reserved for others. Numerous &quot;fady&quot; (taboos), including injunctions against the construction of wooden houses by non-nobles and the presence of swine within the city limits, were imposed.

Upon Andriamasinavalona&#x27;s death in 1710, Imerina split into four warring quadrants, and Antananarivo was made the capital of the southern district. During the 77-year civil war that followed, the eastern district&#x27;s capital at Ambohimanga rose in prominence. The last king of Ambohimanga, Andrianampoinimerina, successfully conquered Antananarivo in 1793; he reunited the provinces of Imerina, ending the civil war. He moved the kingdom&#x27;s political capital back to Antananarivo in 1794, and declared Ambohimanga the kingdom&#x27;s spiritual capital, a role it still maintains. Andrianampoinimerina created a large marketplace in Analakely, establishing the city&#x27;s economic center.

===Kingdom of Madagascar===
By the time Andrianampoinimerina&#x27;s son Radama I had ascended the throne upon his father&#x27;s death in 1810, Antananarivo was the largest and most economically important city on the island, with a population of over 80,000 inhabitants. Radama opened the city to the first European settlers, artisan missionaries of the London Missionary Society (LMS) who arrived in 1820 and opened the city&#x27;s first public schools. James Cameron introduced brickmaking to the island and created Lake Anosy to generate hydraulic power for industrial manufacturing. Radama established a military training ground on a flat plain called Mahamasina at the base of Analamanga near the lake. Radama&#x27;s subjugation of other Malagasy ethnic groups brought nearly two-thirds of the island under his control. The British diplomats who concluded trade treaties with Radama recognized him as the &quot;ruler of Madagascar&quot;, a position he and his successors claimed despite never managing to impose their authority over the larger portion of the island&#x27;s south. Thereafter, Merina sovereigns declared Antananarivo the capital of the entire island.
Radama&#x27;s successor Ranavalona I invited a shipwrecked craftsman named Jean Laborde to construct the tomb of Prime Minister Rainiharo, and Manjakamiadana (built 1839–1841), the largest palace at the Rova. Laborde also produced a wide range of industrial products at factories in the highland village Mantasoa and a foundry in the Antananarivo neighborhood of Isoraka. Ranavalona oversaw improvements to the city&#x27;s infrastructure, including the construction of the city&#x27;s two largest staircases at Antaninarenina and Ambondrona, which connect &quot;la ville moyenne&quot; (&quot;the middle town&quot;) to the central marketplace at Analakely. In 1867, following a series of fires in the capital, Queen Ranavalona II issued a royal decree that permitted the use of stone and brick construction in buildings other than tombs. LMS missionaries&#x27; first brick house was built in 1869; it bore a blend of English, Creole, and Malagasy design and served as a model for a new style of house that rapidly spread throughout the capital and across the highlands. Termed the &quot;trano gasy&quot; (&quot;Malagasy house&quot;), it is typically a two-story, brick building with four columns on the front that support a wooden veranda. In the latter third of the 19th century, these houses quickly replaced most of the traditional wooden houses of the city&#x27;s aristocratic class. The growing number of Christians in Imerina prompted the construction of stone churches throughout the highlands, as well as four memorial churches on key sites of martyrdom among early Malagasy Christians under the reign of Ranavalona I.
Until the mid-19th century, the city remained largely concentrated around the Rova of Antananarivo on the highest peak, an area today referred to as &quot;la haute ville&quot; or &quot;la haute&quot; (&quot;upper town&quot;). As the population grew, the city expanded to the west; by the late 19th century it extended to the northern hilltop neighborhood of Andohalo, an area of low prestige until British missionaries made it their preferred residential district and built one of the city&#x27;s memorial churches here from 1863 to 1872. From 1864 to 1894, Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony governed Madagascar alongside three successive queens, Rasoherina, Ranavalona II and Ranavalona III, effecting policies that further transformed the city. In 1881, he reinstated mandatory universal education first introduced in 1820 under Radama I, requiring the construction of numerous schools and colleges, including teacher training colleges staffed by missionaries and the nation&#x27;s first pharmacy, medical college, and modern hospital. Rainilaiarivony built the Andafiavaratra Palace in 1873 as his residence and office at a site near the royal palace.

===French Madagascar===
The French military invaded Antananarivo in September 1894, prompting the queen&#x27;s surrender after a cannon shell blasted a hole through a building at the Rova, causing major casualties. The damage was never repaired. Andohalo square was remodeled to feature a gazebo, walkways, and planted landscaping. Claiming the island as a colony, the French administration retained Antananarivo as its capital and transcribed its name as Tananarive. They chose Antaninarenina as the site for the French Governor General&#x27;s Residency; upon independence, it was renamed Ambohitsorohitra Palace and converted into presidential offices. Under the French, tunnels were constructed through two of the city&#x27;s largest hills, connecting disparate districts and facilitating the town&#x27;s expansion. Streets were laid with cobblestones and later paved; sewer systems and electricity infrastructure was introduced. Water, previously obtained from springs at the foot of the hill, was brought from the Ikopa River.

This period saw a major expansion of &quot;la ville moyenne&quot;, which spread along the lower hilltops and slopes of the city centered around the French residency. Modern urban planning was applied in &quot;la ville basse&quot; (&quot;lower town&quot;), which expanded from the base of the city&#x27;s central hills into the surrounding rice fields. Major boulevards like &quot;Avenue de l&#x27;Indépendance&quot;, planned commercial areas like the arcades lining either side of the avenue, large parks, city squares, and other landmark features were built. A railway system connecting Soarano station at one end of the &quot;Avenue de l&#x27;Indépendance&quot; in Antananarive with Toamasina and Fianarantsoa was established in 1897. Beyond these planned spaces, neighborhoods densely populated by working-class Malagasy expanded without state oversight or control.
The city expanded rapidly after World War II; by 1950 its population had grown to 175,000. Roads connecting Antananarivo to surrounding towns were expanded and paved. The first international airport was constructed at Arivonimamo, outside the city; this was replaced in 1967 with Ivato International Airport approximately from the city center. The University of Antananarivo was constructed in the Ankatso neighborhood and the Museum of Ethnology and Paleontology was also built. A city plan written in 1956 created suburban zones where large houses and gardens were established for the wealthy. In 1959, severe floods in &quot;la ville basse&quot; prompted the building of large-scale embankments along the edges of the Betsimitatatra rice fields and the establishment of new ministerial complexes on newly drained land in the Anosy neighborhood.

===Post-independence===
After independence in 1960, the pace of growth increased further. The city&#x27;s population reached 1.4 million by the end of the 20th century; in 2013, it was estimated at nearly 2.1 million. Uncontrolled urban sprawl has challenged the city&#x27;s infrastructure, producing shortages of clean water and electricity, sanitation and public health problems, and heavy traffic congestion. There are more than 5,000 church buildings in the city and its suburbs, including an Anglican and a Roman Catholic cathedral. Antananarivo is the see city of Madagascar&#x27;s Roman Catholic Archdiocese. The city has repeatedly been the site of large demonstrations and violent political clashes, including the 1972 &quot;rotaka&quot; that brought down President Philibert Tsiranana and the 2009 Malagasy political crisis, which resulted in Andry Rajoelina replacing Marc Ravalomanana as head of state.

The 2022 Antananarivo floods hit the city in January of that year, causing multiple deaths and significant damage to almost 7,000 houses.

On 26 August 2023, at least 12 people died during a crush incident at the Mahamasina Municipal Stadium, during the opening of Indian Ocean Island Games.

==Geography==

Antananarivo is situated approximately above sea level in the Central Highlands region of Madagascar, at 18.55&#x27; South and 47.32&#x27; East. The city is located centrally along the north–south axis of the country, and east of the center along the east–west axis. It is from the east coast and from the west coast. The city occupies a commanding position on the summit and slopes of a long, narrow, rocky ridge extending north and south for about and rising to about above the extensive rice fields to the west.

The official boundaries of the city of Antananarivo encompass an urban area of approximately . It was founded above sea level at the apex of three hill ranges that converge in a Y form, above the surrounding Betsimitatatra paddy fields and the grassy plains beyond. The city gradually spread out from this central point to cover the hillsides; by the late 19th century it had expanded to the flat terrain at the base of the hills. These plains are susceptible to flooding during the rainy season; they are drained by the Ikopa River, which skirts the capital to the south and west. The western slopes and plains, being best protected from cyclone winds originating over the Indian Ocean, were settled before those to the east.

Greater Antananarivo is a continuous, urbanized area spreading beyond the city&#x27;s official boundaries for north to south between Ambohimanarina and Ankadimbahoaka, and west to east between the Ikopa River dike and Tsiadana. The population of the greater Antananarivo area was estimated at 3 million people in 2012; it is expected to rise to 6 million by 2030.

===Climate===
Under the Köppen-Geiger climate classification system, Antananarivo has a humid subtropical climate with dry season defined (&quot;Cwa&quot;, bordering on &quot;Cwb&quot;), characterized by mild, dry winters and warm, rainy summers. The city receives nearly all of its average annual rainfall between November and April. Frosts are rare in the city; they are more common at higher elevations. Daily mean temperatures range from in December to in July.

==Cityscape==
Antananarivo encompasses three ridges that intersect at their highest point. The Manjakamiadana royal palace is located at the summit of these hills and is visible from every part of the city and the surrounding hills. The Manjakamiadina was the largest structure within the rova of Antananarivo; its stone casing is the only remnant of the royal residences to survive a 1995 fire at the site. For 25 years, the roofless shell dominated the skyline; its west wall collapsed in 2004. In 2009, the stone casing had been fully restored and the building was re-roofed. It is illuminated at night. Conservation and reconstruction work at the site is ongoing. The city skyline is a jumble of colorful, historic houses and churches. More recent residential and commercial buildings and family rice fields occupy lower terrain throughout the capital. The Betsimitatatra and other rice fields surround the city.

The city&#x27;s neighborhoods emerge from historic ethnic, religious, and caste divisions. The assignment of certain neighborhoods to particular noble sub-castes under the Kingdom of Imerina established divisions; the highest-ranking nobles were typically assigned to neighborhoods closest to the royal palace and were required to live in higher elevation portions of the city. During and after French colonization, the expansion of the city continued to reflect these divisions. Today, the &quot;haute ville&quot; is mainly residential and viewed as a prestigious area in which to live; many of the city&#x27;s wealthiest and most influential Malagasy families live there. The part of &quot;la haute&quot; closest to the Rova contains much of the city&#x27;s pre-colonial heritage and is considered it&#x27;s historic part. It includes the royal palace, Andafiavaratra Palacethe former residence of Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony, Andohalothe principal town square until 1897, a cathedral near Andohalo built to commemorate early Malagasy Christian martyrs, the city&#x27;s most intact historic entrance gate and the 19th-century houses of Merina nobles.

Under the Kingdom of Madagascar, the commoner class (&quot;hova&quot;) settled at the periphery of the noble districts, gradually spreading along the slopes of the lower hills during the late 19th century. This &quot;ville moyenne&quot; became increasingly populous under French colonial authority, which targeted them for redesign and development. Today, the neighborhoods in the &quot;ville moyenne&quot; are densely populated and lively, containing residences, historic sites, and businesses. The neighborhood of Antaninarenina contains the historic Hôtel Colbert, numerous jewelers&#x27; shops and other luxury goods stores, and administrative offices. In addition to Antaninarenina, the principal neighborhoods of &quot;la ville moyenne&quot; are Ankadifotsy on the eastern hills and Ambatonakanga and Isoraka to the west, all of which are largely residential. Isoraka has developed lively nightlife, with houses converted to upscale restaurants and inns. Isoraka also houses the tomb of Prime Minister Rainiharo (1833–1852), whose sons and later Prime Ministers Rainivoninahitriniony and Rainilaiarivony are buried with him. Bordering these neighborhoods are the commercial areas of Besarety and Andravoahangy.
The commercial center of town, Analakely, is located on the valley floor between these two &quot;ville moyenne&quot; hill ranges. King Andrianampoinimerina established the city&#x27;s first marketplace on the grounds today occupied by the market&#x27;s tile-roofed pavilions, constructed in the 1930s. Andrianampoinimerina decreed Friday (&quot;Zoma&quot;) as market day, when merchants would erect stalls shaded with white parasols, which extended throughout the valley forming what has been called the largest open-air marketplace in the world. The market caused traffic congestion and safety hazards prompting government officials to divide and relocate the Friday merchants to several other districts in 1997. The city&#x27;s other main commercial and administrative neighborhoods, which spread out from Analakely and extend into the adjacent plain, were established by the French, who drained and filled in the extant rice fields and swampland to create much of the area&#x27;s design and infrastructure. The &quot;Avenue de l&#x27;Indépendance&quot; runs from the gardens of Ambohijatovo south of the market pavilions, through Analakely to the city&#x27;s railroad station at Soarano. To the west of Soarano lies the dense commercial district of Tsaralalana; it is the only district to be built on a grid and is the center of the city&#x27;s South Asian community. Behoririka, to the east of Soarano, is built around a lake of the same name and abuts the sprawling Andravoahangy district at the eastern edge of the city. Antanimena borders Soarano and Behoririka to the north. A tunnel built by the French in the early 20th century cuts through the hillside; it connects Ambohijatovo with Ambanidia and other residential areas in the south of the city.

Since pre-colonial times the lower classes, including those descended from the slave class (&quot;andevo&quot;) and rural migrants, have occupied the flood-prone lower districts bordering the Betsimitatatra rice fields to the west of the city. This area is connected to Analakely by a tunnel constructed by the French in the early 20th century. The tunnel opens toward Lake Anosy and the national Supreme Court buildings and provides access to the residential neighborhood of Mahamasina and its stadium. The bordering neighborhood of Anosy was developed in the 1950s to house most of the national ministries and the Senate. Anosy, the planned residential district of &quot;Soixante-Sept Hectares&quot; (often abbreviated to &quot;67&quot;) and the neighborhood of Isotry are among the city&#x27;s most densely populated, crime-ridden and impoverished neighborhoods. Approximately 40 percent of inhabitants with electricity in their homes in the &quot;ville basse&quot; obtain it illegally by splicing into city power lines. In these areas, houses are more vulnerable to fires, flooding, and landslides, which are often triggered by the annual cyclone season.

===Architecture===
Before the mid-19th century, all houses and marketplaces in Antananarivo, and throughout Madagascar, were constructed of woods, grasses, reeds, and other plant-based materials viewed as appropriate for structures used by the living. Only family tombs were built from stone, an inert material viewed as appropriate to use for the dead. British missionaries introduced brick-making to the island in the 1820s, and French industrialist Jean Laborde used stone and brick to build his factories over the next few decades. It was not until the royal edict on construction materials was lifted in the 1860s that stone was used to encase the royal palace. Many aristocrats, inspired by the royal palace and the two-story, brick houses with wrapped verandas and divided interior spaces built by British missionaries, copied the British model for their own large homes in the &quot;haute ville&quot;. The model, known as &quot;trano gasy&quot; (&quot;Malagasy house&quot;), rapidly spread throughout the Central Highlands of Madagascar, where it remains the predominant house construction style.

Since 1993, the &quot;Commune urbaine d&#x27;Antananarivo&quot; (CUA) has increasingly sought to protect and restore the city&#x27;s architectural and cultural heritage. In 2005, CUA authorities partnered with the city planners of the Île-de-France to develop the &quot;Plan VertPlan Bleu&quot; strategy for creating a classification system for &quot;Zones de Protection du Patrimoine Architectural, Urbain et Paysager&quot;, areas of the city benefiting from legal protection and financial support for their historic and cultural heritage. The plan, which is being implemented by the &quot;Institut des Métiers de la Ville&quot;, prevents the destruction of historic buildings and other structures, and establishes construction codes that ensure new structures follow historic aesthetics. It also provides for awareness-raising campaigns in favor of historic preservation and undertakes projects to restore dilapidated historic buildings and sites. Under this plan, 19th-century sites, like the Ambatondrafandrana tribunal and the second residence of Rainilaiarivony, have been renovated.

==Demographics==
Antananarivo has been the largest city on the island since at least the late 18th century, when its population was estimated at 15,000. By 1810, the population had grown to 80,000, before declining dramatically between 1829 and 1842 during the reigns of Radama I and especially Ranavalona I. Because of a combination of war, forced labor, disease and harsh measures of justice, the population of Imerina fell from 750,000 to 130,000 during this period. In the final years of the Kingdom of Imerina, the population of Antananarivo had recovered to between 50,000 and 75,000; most of the population were slaves who were largely captured in provincial military campaigns. In 1950, Antananarivo&#x27;s population was around 175,000. By the late 1990s the population of the metropolitan area had reached 1.4 million, and – while the city itself now has a population of 1,275,207 (at the 2018 Census) – with suburbs lying outside the city limits it had grown to almost 2.3 million in 2018. The metropolitan area is thus home to nearly 10 percent of the island&#x27;s 25.68 million residents. Rural migration to the capital propels this growth; the city&#x27;s population exceeds that of the other five provincial capitals combined.

As the historic capital of Imerina, Antananarivo is centrally located in the homeland of the Merina people, who comprise about 24 percent of the population and are the largest Malagasy ethnic group. The city&#x27;s history as the island&#x27;s major center for politics, culture, and trade has ensured a cosmopolitan mix of ethnic groups from across the island and overseas. Most Antananarivo residents have strong ties to their &quot;tanindrazana&quot; (ancestral village), where the extended family and typically a family tomb or burial place is located; many older residents leave the city upon retirement to return to their rural area of origin.

===Crime===
Despite ongoing efforts by the Ministry of Domestic Security, crime has worsened in Antananarivo since 2009. Between 1994 and 1998, the city had an average of eight to twelve police officers for every 10,000 inhabitants; large cities typically have closer to fifteen. Under the mayorship of Marc Ravalomanana (1998–2001), street lights were installed or repaired throughout the city to improve night-time safety. He increased the number of police officers on the streets, leading to a drop in crime. , the city lacks a comprehensive strategy for reducing crime. The recent increase in crime and the inadequate response from the CUA has prompted the growth of private security firms in the city.

The Antanimora Prison is located in the Antanimora district of the city. The facility has a maximum capacity of 800 inmates and has been reported to be severely overcrowded, at times housing more than 4000 detainees.

==Economy==
Agriculture is the mainstay of the Malagasy economy. The land is used for the cultivation of rice and other crops, raising of zebu and other livestock, the fabrication of bricks, and other traditional livelihoods. Access to land is guaranteed and protected by law for every resident of the city. The CUA manages requests to lease or purchase land, but demand dramatically outstrips supply, and much of the unallocated land fails to meet the requisite criteria for parceling, such as land where floodwater runoff is diverted. Much of this marginal land has been illegally occupied and developed by land-seeking residents, creating shantytown slums in pockets throughout the lower portions of the city. This uncontrolled development poses sanitation and safety risks to residents in these areas.

Industry accounts for around 13 percent of Madagascar&#x27;s gross domestic product (GDP) and is largely concentrated in Antananarivo. Key industries include soap production, food and tobacco processing, brewing, textiles, and leather manufacturing, employing around 5.5 percent of the workforce. The city&#x27;s extensive infrastructure and its role as the economic center of the country make it a favorable location for large businesses. Business owners are drivers of growth for the city; in 2010, 60 percent of all new buildings in the country were located in Antananarivo, most of which were built for commercial purposes. Unemployment and poverty are also growing, fueled in part by an inadequately skilled and unprofessional workforce and the lack of a comprehensive national strategy for economic development since 2009. Formal sector job growth has not kept pace with population growth, and many residents earn their livelihood in the informal sector as street vendors and laborers. Under Ravalomanana, construction in the capital increased sharply; twelve new supermarkets were constructed in two years.

The residents of urban areasin particular Antananarivohave been hardest hit by economic downturns and economic policy shifts. The national economic crisis in the mid-1970s and early 1980s, and the World Bank&#x27;s imposition of a structural adjustment program lowered living standards for the average resident of the city. The end of state subsidies, rapid inflation, higher taxes, widespread impoverishment, and the decline of the middle class was especially evident in Antananarivo, as was the growing wealth of a tiny political and economic elite in the city. In 2007, two-thirds of Antananarivo residents had access to electricity, while ten percent of households owned a scooter, car or another motor vehicle. Running water was installed in fewer than 25 percent of homes, small restaurants, and businesses in 2007, necessitating the collection of water from household wells or neighborhood pumps and the use of outdoor pit toilets detached from the main building. In 2007, 60 percent of households were using shared public latrines. Most homes use charcoal for daily cooking; stocks of charcoal and rice are kept in the kitchen. The average city household spends just under half of its budget on food. Owing to its increasingly high cost, consumption of meat by city residents has sharply declined since the 1970s; the urban poor eat meat on holidays only once or twice a year.

==Culture==
In Antananarivo and throughout the highlands, Merina and Betsileo families practice the &quot;famadihana&quot;, an ancestor reburial ceremony. This ceremony typically occurs five to seven years after the death of a relative and is celebrated by removing the relative&#x27;s &quot;lamba&quot;-wrapped remains from the family tomb, rewrapping it with fresh silk shrouds and returning it to the tomb. Relatives, friends, and neighbors are invited to take part in the music, dancing, and feasting that accompanies the event. The &quot;famadihana&quot; is costly; many families sacrifice higher living standards to set aside money for the ceremony.

===Historic sites and museums===

The city has numerous monuments, historic buildings, sites of significance, and traditions related to the customs and history of the Central Highlands people. The city skyline is dominated by the Rova of Antananarivo. The nearby Andafiavaratra Palace was the home of 19th-century Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony and contains a museum featuring historic artifacts of the Kingdom of Imerina, including items saved from the fire at the Rova. Downhill from the palaces is Andohalo square, where Merina kings and queens delivered speeches to the public. Tsimbazaza Zoo displays many of the island&#x27;s unique animal species and a complete skeleton of the extinct elephant bird. Other historic buildings include the Ambatondrafandrana tribunal where Ranavalona I dispensed judgment, the second residence of Rainilaiarivony with its indigenous medicinal plant garden, the recently renovated Soarano railroad station, four late 19th-century memorial churches built to commemorate early Malagasy Christian martyrs, the tomb of Prime Minister Rainiharo, and the early 20th century pavilions of the Analakely market. Open-air markets include Le Pochard and the artisan market at Andravoahangy. The Museum of Art and Archaeology in the Isoraka neighborhood features exhibits on the history and cultures of Madagascar&#x27;s diverse ethnic groups. The Pirates Museum in Tsaralalàna explains the history of maritime pirates and the story of the pirates in Madagascar and their mysterious Republic of Libertalia. 

===Arts===
The arts scene in Antananarivo is the largest and most vibrant in the country. Madagascar&#x27;s diverse music is reflected in the many concerts, cabarets, dance clubs, and other musical venues throughout Antananarivo. In the dry season, outdoor concerts are regularly held in venues including the Antsahamanitra amphitheater and Mahamasina Stadium. Concerts and nightclubs are attended mainly by young people of the middle to upper classes who can afford the entrance fees. More affordable are performances of traditional &quot;vakindrazana&quot; or Malagasy operettas at Isotry Theater and &quot;hira gasy&quot; at the city&#x27;s outdoor &quot;cheminots&quot; theater or &quot;Alliance française&quot;; these performances are more popular with older and rural audiences than among urban youth. Nightlife is the most animated in the &quot;ville moyenne&quot; neighborhoods of Antaninarenina, Tsaralalana, Behoririka, Mahamasina, and Andohalo.

The &quot;Palais des Sports&quot; in the Mahamasina neighborhood is the country&#x27;s only indoor performance space built to international standards. It was built in 1995 by the Government of China; it regularly hosts concerts, dance, and other arts performances, expositions, and novelty events like monster truck rallies. The city lacks a dedicated classical music performance space, and concerts by international artists are infrequent. Performances of classical, jazz, and other foreign musical genres, modern and contemporary dance, theater, and other arts occur at cultural arts centers funded by foreign governments or private entities. Among the best-known of these is the &quot;Centre Culturel Albert Camus&quot; and &quot;Alliance française d&#x27;Antananarivo&quot;, both funded by the French government. the &quot;Cercle Germano-Malgache&quot;, a branch of the Goethe-Institut funded by the German government; The American Center is funded by the United States government. Antananarivo has two dedicated cinemas, the Rex and the Ritz, both of which were built in the colonial era. These venues do not show international releases but occasionally screen Malagasy films or are used for private events and religious services.

===Sports===
Rugby Union is considered the national sport of Madagascar. The national rugby team is nicknamed the Makis after the local word for the indigenous ring-tailed lemur. The team trains and plays domestic matches at Maki Stadium in Antananarivo. Constructed in 2012, the stadium has a capacity of 15,000 and houses a gym and administrative offices for the team.

Several soccer teams are based in Antananarivo; AS Adema Analamanga and Ajesaia are associated with the Analamanga region; USCA Foot is associated with the CUA and the AS Saint Michel has been affiliated since 1948 with the historic secondary school of the same name. All four teams train and play local games in Mahamasina Municipal Stadium, the largest sporting venue in the country. The men&#x27;s basketball teams Challenger and SOE (&quot;Équipe du Stade olympique de l&#x27;Emyrne&quot;) are based in Antananarivo and play in the &quot;Palais des Sports&quot; at Mahamasina.

The sports facilities of the University of Antananarivo were used to host the official 2011 African Basketball Championship.

== Places of worship == 

Among the places of worship, they are predominantly Christian churches and temples : Church of Jesus Christ in Madagascar (World Communion of Reformed Churches), Malagasy Lutheran Church (Lutheran World Federation), Assemblies of God, Association of Bible Baptist Churches in Madagascar (Baptist World Alliance), Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Antananarivo (Catholic Church). There are also Muslim mosques.

==Government==
Antananarivo is the capital of Madagascar, and the federal governance structures, including the Senate, National Assembly, the Supreme Court, and the presidential office are housed there. The main presidential offices are located south of the city. The city hosts diplomatic missions of 21 countries.

The CUA is divided into six numbered &quot;arrondissements&quot; (administrative sub-districts); it has historically been administered by an elected mayor and associated staff. Since the 2009 political crisis, in which the Mayor of Antananarivo, Andry Rajoelina, unconstitutionally seized power as head of state, the CUA has been administered by a &quot;délégation spéciale&quot; (special delegation) composed of a president and &quot;de facto&quot; mayor with the support of two vice presidents, all of whom are appointed by the president. The position of President of the Special Delegation has been held by Ny Hasina Andriamanjato since March 2014.

The mayoral administration of the CUA is empowered to govern the city with &quot;de jure&quot; autonomy; a wide range of mechanisms have been established to facilitate governance, although they are of limited effectiveness. An urban master plan guides major policies for city management but personnel within the mayoral office commonly lack the urban planning and management ability to effectively implement the plan in response to long-term and immediate needs. This challenge is compounded by the high turnover rate of mayors and staff that frequently disrupts initiatives begun by previous CUA administrations. A mayor under former President Didier Ratsiraka created &quot;red zones&quot;; areas where public gathering and protests were prohibited. On 28 June 2001, Ravalomanana abolished these areas, liberalizing freedom of assembly.

Antananarivo has suffered from debt and mismanagement. The CUA estimated in 2012 that the cost of running the city to international standards would reach annually, while annual revenues average around $12 million. In good years, the CUA can reserve $1–2 million to spend on city improvement projects. By 2008, the city&#x27;s treasury had accumulated 8.2 billion Malagasy &quot;ariary&quot;approximately in debts under previous mayors. In 2008, water was cut off at public pumps, and there were regular brownouts of city street lights because of 3.3 million ariary of unpaid debts to the Jirama public utility company by the City of Antananarivo. In response, Mayor Rajoelina undertook an audit that identified and sought to address long-standing procedural irregularities and corruption in the city&#x27;s administration. The CUA continues to be challenged by a shortage of revenues relative to its expenses caused by the high cost of retaining a large number of CUA personnel, weak structures for managing revenues from public rents and inadequate collection of tax revenues from city residents and businesses.

===Twin towns and sister cities===
Antananarivo has established sister city agreements with four cities. The city was twinned with Yerevan, Armenia in 1981. The city is also twinned with Vorkuta, Russia; Suzhou, China; and Montreal, Quebec, Canada. A sister city relationship between Antananarivo and Nice, France, established in 1962, is not active. In 2019, the Mayor of the Commune Urbaine Antananarivo was inviting the City of Kota Kinabalu in Malaysia to enter into a sister relationship with the City of Antananarivo.

==Education==

Most of Madagascar&#x27;s public and private universities are located in Antananarivo. This includes the country&#x27;s oldest higher education institute, the College of Medicine established under the Merina monarchy and the University of Antananarivo, established under the French colonial administration. The Centre National de Télé-Enseignement de Madagascar (CNETMAD) is located in Antananarivo. The city hosts many private pre-primary, primary and secondary schools and the national network of public schools. The city houses multiple French international schools, including Lycée Français de Tananarive, Lycée La Clairefontaine, Lycée Peter Pan, and École de l&#x27;Alliance française d&#x27;Antsahabe. It also houses an American school, American School of Antananarivo, and a Russian school, the Russian Embassy School in Antananarivo ().

The nation&#x27;s most prestigious dance school, &quot;K&#x27;art Antanimena&quot;, is located in Antananarivo. Other major dance schools based in the city include &quot;Le Club de Danse de l&#x27;Université Catholique de Madagascar&quot;, &quot;Club de danse Kera arts&#x27;space à Antanimena&quot; and &quot;Le Club Mills&quot;.

==Health and sanitation==
In general, the availability and quality of health care are better in Antananarivo than elsewhere in Madagascar, although it remains inadequate across the country relative to that in more developed countries. One of Madagascar&#x27;s two medical schools is located in Antananarivo; most medical technicians and specialists are trained there. Neonatal and antenatal care are significantly better in Antananarivo than elsewhere on the island. Despite the presence of facilities and trained personnel, the high cost of health care places it beyond the reach of most residents of Antananarivo. Pharmaceuticals are imported, making them particularly unaffordable; traditional herbal medicines remain popular and are readily available in local markets frequented by most of the population.

The large population in Antananarivo and the high density of its residential zones pose challenges to public health, sanitation, and access to clean drinking water. Processing and disposal of industrial and residential waste are inadequate. Wastewater is often discharged directly into the city&#x27;s waterways. Air pollution from vehicle exhaust, residential coal-burning stoves, and other sources is worsening. While the city has set up clean water pumps, they remain inadequate and are not distributed according to population density, with poor access in the poorest and most populous parts of the city. Antananarivo is one of the two urban areas in Madagascar where bubonic plague is endemic.

In 2017, Antananarivo was ranked as the 7th worst city for particulate-matter air pollution in the world.

These problems were diminished but not eliminated under the mayoral administration of Marc Ravalomanana, who prioritized sanitation, security, and public administration. He obtained funds from international donors to establish garbage collection and disposal systems, restore dilapidated infrastructures such as roads and marketplaces, and replanted public gardens. To improve sanitation in the city, he constructed public latrines in densely populated and highly frequented areas.

==Transport==
The majority of the city&#x27;s residents move about Antananarivo on foot. The CUA sets and enforces rules that govern a system of 2,400 franchised private minibuses running on 82 numbered routes throughout the city. An additional 2,000 minibuses managed by the Ministry of Transportation run along 8 lines into the neighboring suburbs. These interlinked bus systems served around 700,000 passengers each day. These minibuses often fail to meet safety standards or air quality requirements and are typically overcrowded with passengers and their cargo. Police and &quot;gendarmes&quot; assist in regulating traffic at peak periods in the morning and evening, or around special events and holidays. Private licensed and unlicensed taxis are common; most vehicles are older Renaults or Citroens. Newer vehicles congregate near hotels and other locales frequented by foreigners willing or able to pay higher prices for better services.

The city is encircled by a ring road and connected by direct &quot;routes nationales&quot; (national highways) to Mahajanga, Toliara, Antsirabe, Fianarantsoa and Toamasina. Branches and feeder roads from these major highways connect the city to the national road network. Antananarivo was connected by train to Toamasina to the east and Manakara to the southeast via Antsirabe and Fianarantsoa, but since 2019 passenger trains have not been operated anymore. The city&#x27;s principal railway station is centrally located at Soarano at one end of the &quot;Avenue de l&#x27;Indépendance&quot;. Ivato International Airport is located approximately from the center of the city, connecting Antananarivoto to all national airports. Ivato is the hub of the national airline Air Madagascar, and is the only airport on the island hosting long-haul carriers. Direct flights connect Antananarivo to cities in South Africa and Europe.

==Media==

Government television and radio broadcasting centers, and the headquarters of numerous private stations are located in Antananarivo. Eighty percent of households in Antananarivo own a radio; the medium is popular across social classes. Stations like &quot;Fenon&#x27;ny Merina&quot; appeal to Merina listeners of all ages by playing traditional and contemporary music of the highlands region. Youth-oriented stations play a blend of Western artists and Malagasy performers of Western genres, as well as fusion and coastal musical styles. Evangelical broadcasts and daily international and local news are available in Malagasy, French, and English. Forty percent of Antananarivo residents own a television receiver. All major Malagasy newspapers are printed in the city and are widely available. Communications services in Antananarivo are the best in the country. Internet and mobile telephone networks are readily available and affordable, although service disruptions occur periodically. The national postal service is headquartered in Antananarivo, and private international shipping companies like FedEx, DHL Express, and United Parcel Service provide services to the city.

==Notable people==
* Lucile Allorge (born 1937), botanist

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==See also==
* Antananarivo City Hall

==External links==


* Antananarivo Renivohitra – official website (archived 30 March 2007)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3915" start="0" end="12" title="Antananarivo" label="Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930" start="14" end="22" title="Malagasy language" label="Malagasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="26" end="32" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915" start="103" end="107" title="Antananarivo" label="Tana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="119" end="126" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="147" end="157" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q484625" start="324" end="334" title="Analamanga" label="Analamanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299166" start="419" end="456" title="List of capital cities by elevation" label="highest national capital by elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="467" end="483" title="Island country" label="island countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q853010" start="579" end="589" title="President of Madagascar" label="Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141206" start="591" end="608" title="National Assembly of Madagascar" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510853" start="610" end="616" title="Senate of Madagascar" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616448" start="662" end="684" title="List of diplomatic missions in Madagascar" label="21 diplomatic missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="756" end="759" title="NGO" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378422" start="947" end="952" title="Rugby union in Madagascar" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358997" start="963" end="968" title="Madagascar national rugby union team" label="Makis"/>
<link wikidata="Q844538" start="1036" end="1049" title="Merina people" label="Merina people"/>
<link wikidata="Q310983" start="1246" end="1268" title="Malagasy people" label="Malagasy ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275518" start="1294" end="1301" title="Chinese people in Madagascar" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192943" start="1303" end="1309" title="Indians in Madagascar" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502323" start="1311" end="1319" title="French people in Madagascar" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q510246" start="1417" end="1428" title="Andrianjaka" label="Andrianjaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123073" start="1454" end="1461" title="Vazimba" label="Vazimba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1492" end="1502" title="Twelve sacred hills of Imerina#Hill of Analamanga" label="Analamanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107774" start="1568" end="1572" title="Rova (Madagascar)" label="rova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290337" start="1634" end="1647" title="Rova of Antananarivo" label="royal palaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071439" start="1655" end="1673" title="Kingdom of Imerina" label="Kingdom of Imerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846853" start="1737" end="1755" title="Andriamasinavalona" label="Andriamasinavalona"/>
<link wikidata="Q218622" start="2069" end="2089" title="Andrianampoinimerina" label="Andrianampoinimerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q458167" start="2093" end="2104" title="Ambohimanga" label="Ambohimanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q525141" start="2293" end="2301" title="Radama I" label="Radama I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501842" start="2504" end="2527" title="French Madagascar" label="colonized by the French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043435" start="2699" end="2717" title="Special delegation (France)" label="Special Delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181663" start="3105" end="3126" title="Andafiavaratra Palace" label="Andafiavaratra Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q218957" start="3140" end="3149" title="Rainiharo" label="Rainiharo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849674" start="3151" end="3165" title="Tsimbazaza Zoo" label="Tsimbazaza Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129178" start="3167" end="3185" title="Mahamasina Stadium" label="Mahamasina Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15278794" start="3187" end="3197" title="Lake Anosy" label="Lake Anosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146531" start="3217" end="3232" title="Christianity in Madagascar" label="martyr churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370232" start="3242" end="3271" title="University of Madagascar&amp;#x27;s Museum of Art and Archaeology" label="Museum of Art and Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3537" end="3547" title="Twelve sacred hills of Imerina#Hill of Analamanga" label="Analamanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128625" start="3594" end="3611" title="Central Highlands (Madagascar)" label="Central Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930" start="3627" end="3644" title="Malagasy language" label="Malagasy language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123073" start="3691" end="3698" title="Vazimba" label="Vazimba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071439" start="3735" end="3741" title="Merina Kingdom" label="Merina"/>
<link wikidata="Q510246" start="3747" end="3758" title="Andrianjaka" label="Andrianjaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846853" start="4053" end="4071" title="Andriamasinavalona" label="Andriamasinavalona"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107774" start="4414" end="4418" title="Rova (Madagascar)" label="rova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290337" start="4493" end="4506" title="Rova of Antananarivo" label="royal palaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q466259" start="4649" end="4659" title="Corvée" label="fanampoana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071439" start="4958" end="4976" title="Kingdom of Imerina" label="Kingdom of Imerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q721588" start="5458" end="5462" title="hova (Madagascar)" label="hova"/>
<link wikidata="Q9145130" start="5496" end="5504" title="andriana" label="andriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509906" start="5862" end="5866" title="Fady (taboo)" label="fady"/>
<link wikidata="Q458167" start="6262" end="6273" title="Ambohimanga" label="Ambohimanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q218622" start="6324" end="6344" title="Andrianampoinimerina" label="Andrianampoinimerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q525141" start="6799" end="6807" title="Radama I" label="Radama I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="7080" end="7105" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160968" start="7181" end="7194" title="James Cameron (missionary)" label="James Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q15278794" start="7244" end="7254" title="Lake Anosy" label="Lake Anosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q310983" start="7469" end="7491" title="Malagasy people" label="Malagasy ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q169794" start="7921" end="7933" title="Ranavalona I" label="Ranavalona I"/>
<link wikidata="Q259345" start="7972" end="7984" title="Jean Laborde" label="Jean Laborde"/>
<link wikidata="Q218957" start="8025" end="8034" title="Rainiharo" label="Rainiharo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751996" start="8201" end="8209" title="Mantasoa" label="Mantasoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q240168" start="8612" end="8625" title="Ranavalona II" label="Ranavalona II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146531" start="9306" end="9327" title="Christianity in Madagascar" label="Christians in Imerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q528996" start="10096" end="10111" title="Rainilaiarivony" label="Rainilaiarivony"/>
<link wikidata="Q225533" start="10167" end="10177" title="Rasoherina" label="Rasoherina"/>
<link wikidata="Q233326" start="10197" end="10211" title="Ranavalona III" label="Ranavalona III"/>
<link wikidata="Q181663" start="10584" end="10605" title="Andafiavaratra Palace" label="Andafiavaratra Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501842" start="10704" end="10740" title="French Madagascar" label="French military invaded Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741668" start="11266" end="11289" title="Ambohitsorohitra Palace" label="Ambohitsorohitra Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138020" start="11695" end="11706" title="Ikopa River" label="Ikopa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q178067" start="12394" end="12403" title="Toamasina" label="Toamasina"/>
<link wikidata="Q527441" start="12408" end="12420" title="Fianarantsoa" label="Fianarantsoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12610" end="12622" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820954" start="12796" end="12807" title="Arivonimamo" label="Arivonimamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q670038" start="12858" end="12885" title="Ivato International Airport" label="Ivato International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443595" start="12926" end="12952" title="University of Antananarivo" label="University of Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498460" start="13005" end="13041" title="Museum of Ethnology and Paleontology" label="Museum of Ethnology and Paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="13658" end="13670" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="13924" end="13932" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725766" start="13939" end="13963" title="Immaculate Conception Cathedral, Antananarivo" label="Roman Catholic cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="13985" end="13993" title="see city" label="see city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363981" start="14015" end="14041" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Antananarivo" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107768" start="14161" end="14167" title="rotaka" label="rotaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q315944" start="14202" end="14221" title="Philibert Tsiranana" label="Philibert Tsiranana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628984" start="14230" end="14260" title="2009 Malagasy political crisis" label="2009 Malagasy political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q57363" start="14280" end="14295" title="Andry Rajoelina" label="Andry Rajoelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q155554" start="14306" end="14323" title="Marc Ravalomanana" label="Marc Ravalomanana"/>
<link wikidata="Q110613272" start="14347" end="14371" title="2022 Antananarivo floods" label="2022 Antananarivo floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q109905701" start="14534" end="14548" title="Crowd collapses and crushes" label="crush incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129178" start="14556" end="14584" title="Mahamasina Municipal Stadium" label="Mahamasina Municipal Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628831" start="14608" end="14633" title="Indian Ocean Island Games" label="Indian Ocean Island Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="16284" end="16327" title="Köppen-Geiger climate classification system" label="Köppen-Geiger climate classification system"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="16348" end="16373" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396490" start="19870" end="19891" title="Rainivoninahitriniony" label="Rainivoninahitriniony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787157" start="23875" end="23885" title="Architecture of Madagascar" label="trano gasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13917" start="24280" end="24293" title="Île-de-France" label="Île-de-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q310983" start="26556" end="26577" title="Malagasy people" label="Malagasy ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q92205269" start="27743" end="27760" title="Antanimora Prison" label="Antanimora Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q46889" start="28095" end="28099" title="zebu" label="zebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="28825" end="28847" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="30076" end="30086" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141807" start="30110" end="30139" title="Structural adjustment" label="structural adjustment program"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097999" start="30805" end="30815" title="pit toilet" label="pit toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395073" start="31371" end="31381" title="famadihana" label="famadihana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216602" start="31557" end="31562" title="lamba (garment)" label="lamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q214508" start="32615" end="32628" title="elephant bird" label="elephant bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370232" start="33144" end="33173" title="University of Madagascar&amp;#x27;s Museum of Art and Archaeology" label="Museum of Art and Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091536" start="33573" end="33578" title="Music of Madagascar" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553356" start="34066" end="34075" title="hiragasy" label="hira gasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q936190" start="34593" end="34612" title="Government of China" label="Government of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q34670" start="35118" end="35130" title="Albert Camus" label="Albert Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q655810" start="35147" end="35185" title="Alliance française" label="Alliance française d&amp;#x27;Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450662" start="35212" end="35229" title="Cabinet of France" label="French government"/>
<link wikidata="Q157033" start="35288" end="35303" title="Goethe-Institut" label="Goethe-Institut"/>
<link wikidata="Q313827" start="35318" end="35335" title="Government of Germany" label="German government"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="35374" end="35398" title="United States Department of State" label="United States government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220803" start="35431" end="35438" title="Cinema of Madagascar" label="cinemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378422" start="35664" end="35675" title="Rugby union in Madagascar" label="Rugby Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358997" start="35728" end="35747" title="Madagascar national rugby union team" label="national rugby team"/>
<link wikidata="Q185385" start="35811" end="35828" title="ring-tailed lemur" label="ring-tailed lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868059" start="36071" end="36079" title="AS Adema" label="AS Adema"/>
<link wikidata="Q978779" start="36095" end="36102" title="Ajesaia" label="Ajesaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q493144" start="36146" end="36155" title="USCA Foot" label="USCA Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834253" start="36191" end="36206" title="AS Saint Michel" label="AS Saint Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129178" start="36336" end="36364" title="Mahamasina Municipal Stadium" label="Mahamasina Municipal Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443595" start="36634" end="36660" title="University of Antananarivo" label="University of Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638878" start="36692" end="36728" title="2011 African Basketball Championship" label="2011 African Basketball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370598" start="36767" end="36784" title="places of worship" label="places of worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="36809" end="36818" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116920" start="36842" end="36878" title="Church of Jesus Christ in Madagascar" label="Church of Jesus Christ in Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246720" start="36880" end="36916" title="World Communion of Reformed Churches" label="World Communion of Reformed Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497901" start="36919" end="36943" title="Malagasy Lutheran Church" label="Malagasy Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q942284" start="36945" end="36970" title="Lutheran World Federation" label="Lutheran World Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q494890" start="36973" end="36990" title="Assemblies of God" label="Assemblies of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q56813842" start="36992" end="37043" title="Association of Bible Baptist Churches in Madagascar" label="Association of Bible Baptist Churches in Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929251" start="37045" end="37067" title="Baptist World Alliance" label="Baptist World Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363981" start="37070" end="37112" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Antananarivo" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="37114" end="37129" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="37147" end="37153" title="Islam" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510853" start="37275" end="37281" title="Senate of Madagascar" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141206" start="37283" end="37300" title="National Assembly (Madagascar)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107038" start="37371" end="37396" title="Iavoloha Palace" label="main presidential offices"/>
<link wikidata="Q30059" start="37524" end="37538" title="arrondissement" label="arrondissement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797654" start="37704" end="37725" title="Mayor of Antananarivo" label="Mayor of Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043435" start="37862" end="37880" title="Special delegation (France)" label="special delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q315953" start="38779" end="38795" title="Didier Ratsiraka" label="Didier Ratsiraka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584" start="39352" end="39358" title="ariary" label="ariary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976620" start="39477" end="39486" title="Brownout (electricity)" label="brownouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092876" start="39562" end="39568" title="Jirama" label="Jirama"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="40152" end="40163" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="sister city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953" start="40219" end="40226" title="Yerevan" label="Yerevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q133529" start="40275" end="40282" title="Vorkuta" label="Vorkuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q42622" start="40292" end="40298" title="Suzhou" label="Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="40311" end="40327" title="Montreal" label="Montreal, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="40389" end="40393" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q137271" start="40519" end="40532" title="Kota Kinabalu" label="Kota Kinabalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443595" start="40853" end="40879" title="University of Antananarivo" label="University of Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19572732" start="41208" end="41236" title="Lycée Français de Tananarive" label="Lycée Français de Tananarive"/>
<link wikidata="Q55621487" start="41238" end="41261" title="Lycée La Clairefontaine" label="Lycée La Clairefontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q55621488" start="41263" end="41278" title="Lycée Peter Pan" label="Lycée Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41284" end="41335" title="École de l&amp;#x27;Alliance française d&amp;#x27;Antsahabe" label="École de l&amp;#x27;Alliance française d&amp;#x27;Antsahabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744928" start="41372" end="41403" title="American School of Antananarivo" label="American School of Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41431" end="41469" title="Russian Embassy School in Antananarivo" label="Russian Embassy School in Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30294285" start="41672" end="41707" title="Université Catholique de Madagascar" label="Université Catholique de Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="43289" end="43303" title="bubonic plague" label="bubonic plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q155554" start="43510" end="43527" title="Marc Ravalomanana" label="Marc Ravalomanana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="44693" end="44700" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746" start="44705" end="44713" title="Citroën" label="Citroens"/>
<link wikidata="Q218753" start="44969" end="44978" title="Mahajanga" label="Mahajanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q824043" start="44980" end="44987" title="Toliara" label="Toliara"/>
<link wikidata="Q583184" start="44989" end="44998" title="Antsirabe" label="Antsirabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q527441" start="45000" end="45012" title="Fianarantsoa" label="Fianarantsoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q178067" start="45017" end="45026" title="Toamasina" label="Toamasina"/>
<link wikidata="Q991066" start="45192" end="45200" title="Manakara" label="Manakara"/>
<link wikidata="Q670038" start="45449" end="45476" title="Ivato International Airport" label="Ivato International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q253858" start="45624" end="45638" title="Air Madagascar" label="Air Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46048" end="46068" title="Fenon&amp;#x27;ny Merina" label="Fenon&amp;#x27;ny Merina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132299" start="46786" end="46809" title="Paositra Malagasy" label="national postal service"/>
<link wikidata="Q459477" start="46894" end="46899" title="FedEx" label="FedEx"/>
<link wikidata="Q489815" start="46901" end="46912" title="DHL Express" label="DHL Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q155026" start="46918" end="46939" title="United Parcel Service" label="United Parcel Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982210" start="46992" end="47006" title="Lucile Allorge" label="Lucile Allorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q123348926" start="47095" end="47117" title="Antananarivo City Hall" label="Antananarivo City Hall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56598" wikidata="Q5718098" url="?curid=56598" title="Henry Bergh">
<text>Henry Bergh (August 29, 1813 – March 12, 1888) founded the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) in April, 1866, three days after the first effective legislation against animal cruelty in the United States was passed into law by the New York State Legislature. 
One of the tasks he undertook was to pass a law that would prohibit the use of dogs for the monotonous and hot task of turning grills in restaurants.
Later, when Bergh went to visit restaurants to monitor law enforcement, he discovered that numerous restaurants had replaced dogs with black children.
Therefore, Bergh also prompted the formation, in 1874, of the New York Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (MSPCC).

== Life ==
Henry Bergh was born August 29, 1813, in New York City, to Christian Bergh III and Elizabeth Bergh. His father, an ethnic German, was a successful shipbuilder who had completed a series of contracts for the government. Henry Bergh joined his father in 1835 at the C. Bergh &amp; Co., shipbuilding business. Upon his death in 1843, he left a large estate to the benefit of the three Bergh children, including Henry.

Bergh attended Columbia College in New York City, but left before completing his degree, deciding instead to tour Europe, where he remained for five years.

In 1862 Bergh entered government service when President Abraham Lincoln appointed him secretary of the U.S. legation in Tsarist Russia. He served time in St. Petersburg as acting vice-consul. He resigned his position in 1864 owing to Russia&#x27;s severe winter weather.

=== Advocacy ===

==== Animal welfare ====

During his stay in Europe, Bergh witnessed various cruelties committed upon animals, which affected him greatly. In England Bergh met Lord Harrowby, president of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, who impressed upon Bergh the importance of his mission, leading Bergh to dedicate the rest of his life to the cause of ending animal cruelty.

On April 10, 1866, an act of incorporation of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) was granted by the New York state legislature, with Bergh assuming the role of president of the new association, for which he received no financial compensation. Bergh and his wife provided initial funding for the private organization, but after some time Bergh was requested to meet an old man in a hospital, Louis Bonard, a rich Frenchman who had earned a fortune trading animal furs. Bonard was full of praise for Bergh&#x27;s work. He wanted to leave a fortune of $100,000 to the society. He said to Bergh, &quot;I shall help you! Only if you promise that if ever you have the power, you will extend your protection to the wild things of forest and plain.&quot; Bergh promised and accepted the $100,000. Branches of the ASPCA were subsequently established throughout the United States and Canada.

Under Bergh&#x27;s leadership, the early ASPCA involved itself in a wide variety of issues, including slaughterhouse practices, animal transportation, care of horses, elimination of vivisection, cock fighting, and dog fighting, and the abolition of use of live pigeons in shooting matches. Bergh and the ASPCA are particularly credited for the use of clay pigeons in trap shooting.

During the 1872 outbreak of horse flu, Bergh stood wearing a top hat in the middle of New York City&#x27;s streets and stopped horse-drawn trolleys and wagons being pulled by sick animals, sending them back to their stables. Although he was threatened with lawsuits by transit companies, his advocacy raised the profile of the cause.

In 1873, Bergh conducted a national lecture tour taking him across the American West. He was also able to speak on the animal welfare cause before the Evangelical Alliance and the Episcopal convention, with the latter passing a resolution giving its clergy express permission to preach an annual sermon against cruelty to animals.

==== Child welfare ====

In 1874, Bergh was approached by a Methodist missionary named Etta Agnell Wheeler, who sought help rescuing a child named Mary Ellen Wilson from her cruel abuser, Mary Connolly. After Mary Ellen&#x27;s story was heard, and she was subsequently rescued through Bergh&#x27;s efforts, other complaints came in to Bergh. In response, Bergh himself, along with Elbridge T. Gerry and John D. Wright, formed the New York Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NYSPCC) in 1875. Over the coming years, other SPCC organizations were formed, such as the Massachusetts organization in 1888, the Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (MSPCC).

==Death and legacy==

Bergh died on March 12, 1888, in New York City. Poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow eulogized Bergh as &quot;among the noblest in the land, Though he may count himself the least,That man I honour and revere, Who without favour,without fear,In the great city dares to stand The friend to every friendless beast.&quot; Henry Bergh is interred at Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn, New York.

A 1982 children&#x27;s book about Bergh, &quot;The Man Who Loved Animals&quot;, was written by Syd Hoff.

In the spring of 2006 at Green-Wood Cemetery, while making preparations to honor Bergh, the ASPCA discovered that his wife was also in that mausoleum. On May 6, substantive ceremonies were held before a large audience which was allowed to bring their pets into the cemetery – including dogs, for the first time in over a century. The NYPD Emerald Society bagpipers and ASPCA HLE Agents were there also. After a walk to Bergh&#x27;s tomb, the bas-relief statue was revealed that now rests in front. At the same time as these ceremonies, in the cemetery&#x27;s large chapel building an exhibit was opened celebrating the history of the ASPCA and Henry Bergh. 

== Literary works ==

=== Tales and sketches ===
* &quot;The Streets of New York&quot;
* &quot;The Portentous Telegram&quot;
* &quot;The Ocean Paragon&quot;

=== Plays ===

* &quot;A Decided Scamp&quot;
* &quot;An Extraordinary Envoy&quot;
* &quot;Peculiar People&quot;
* &quot;Love&#x27;s Alternative&quot;

=== Poetry ===

*&quot;Married Off&quot; (1859), a long poem

==See also==

* &quot;Henry Bergh&quot; (sculpture), an 1891 statue by American artist James H. Mahoney

==Footnotes==
==Further reading==

*Sydney H. Coleman. (1924). &quot;Henry Bergh: Founders of the Anticruelty Cause in America&quot;. In &quot;Humane Society Leaders in America&quot;. The American Humane Association, 1924.
* Ernest Freeberg, &quot;A Traitor to his Species: Henry Bergh and the Birth of the Animal Rights Movement&quot;. New York: Basic Books, 2020.
* Nancy Furstinger, &quot;Mercy: The Incredible Story of Henry Bergh, Founder of the ASPCA and Friend of Animals.&quot; New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2016.
* Gary Kaskel, &quot;Monsters and Miracles: Henry Bergh&#x27;s America.&quot; Infinity Publications, 2013.
* Mildred Mastin Pace, &quot;Friend of Animals: The Story of Henry Bergh.&quot; New York: Charles Scribner&#x27;s Sons, 1942.
* J. Riis, &quot;The Child-Saving Movement,&quot; in P. Fass and M.A. Mason (eds.), &quot;Childhood in America.&quot; New York: New York University Press, 2000; pp. 539–542.
* Eric A. Shelman &amp; Stephen Lazoritz, &quot;The Mary Ellen Wilson Child Abuse Case and the Beginning of Children&#x27;s Rights in 19th Century America.&quot; New York, McFarland &amp; Company, 2005.
* Eric A. Shelman and Stephen Lazoritz, &quot;Out of the Darkness: The Story of Mary Ellen Wilson.&quot; Lake Forest, CA, Dolphin Moon Publishing, 1999.
* Zulma Steele, &quot;Angel in Top Hat.&quot; New York: Harper &amp; Brothers Publishers, 1942.

==External links==

* BridgeportMath.org – Henry Bergh and P.T. Barnum
* ASPCA.org – &#x27;The life of Henry Bergh,&#x27; a biography at ASPCA.org
* Unitarianism in America – Henry Bergh
* Dictionary of Unitarian and Universalist Biography – Henry Bergh</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5718098" start="0" end="11" title="Henry Bergh" label="Henry Bergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416421" start="59" end="116" title="American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals" label="American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270268" start="261" end="287" title="New York State Legislature" label="New York State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013994" start="653" end="711" title="New York Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children" label="New York Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="774" end="787" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q105094851" start="792" end="807" title="Christian Bergh" label="Christian Bergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="855" end="861" title="German people" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q105094851" start="997" end="1015" title="Christian Bergh" label="C. Bergh &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="1164" end="1180" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia College"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="1362" end="1377" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="1426" end="1440" title="Russian Empire" label="Tsarist Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="1460" end="1474" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1738" end="1745" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311965" start="1756" end="1769" title="Dudley Ryder, 2nd Earl of Harrowby" label="Lord Harrowby"/>
<link wikidata="Q584819" start="1788" end="1842" title="Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals" label="Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416421" start="2037" end="2094" title="American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals" label="American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="2317" end="2337" title="non-governmental organization" label="private organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q259567" start="3087" end="3098" title="vivisection" label="vivisection"/>
<link wikidata="Q319771" start="3100" end="3113" title="cock fighting" label="cock fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066914" start="3119" end="3131" title="dog fighting" label="dog fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130059" start="3256" end="3268" title="clay pigeons" label="clay pigeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753787" start="3316" end="3325" title="Equine influenza" label="horse flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="3694" end="3707" title="Western United States" label="American West"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931133" start="3774" end="3794" title="Evangelical Alliance" label="Evangelical Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="4015" end="4024" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16037921" start="4042" end="4061" title="Etta Agnell Wheeler" label="Etta Agnell Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779470" start="4102" end="4119" title="Mary Ellen Wilson" label="Mary Ellen Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013994" start="4385" end="4443" title="New York Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children" label="New York Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013994" start="4445" end="4451" title="New York Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children" label="NYSPCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784372" start="4575" end="4638" title="Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children" label="Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784372" start="4640" end="4645" title="Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children" label="MSPCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q152513" start="4724" end="4750" title="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow" label="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q239043" start="5011" end="5030" title="Green-Wood Cemetery" label="Green-Wood Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="5034" end="5042" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="5044" end="5052" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659694" start="5150" end="5158" title="Syd Hoff" label="Syd Hoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q239043" start="5186" end="5205" title="Green-Wood Cemetery" label="Green-Wood Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5718089" start="6207" end="6242" title="Henry Bergh (sculpture)" label="&amp;quot;Henry Bergh&amp;quot; (sculpture)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56601" wikidata="Q1055058" url="?curid=56601" title="Fuzzy set">
<text>In mathematics, fuzzy sets (also known as uncertain sets) are sets whose elements have degrees of membership. Fuzzy sets were introduced independently by Lotfi A. Zadeh in 1965 as an extension of the classical notion of set.
At the same time, defined a more general kind of structure called an &quot;&quot;L&quot;-relation&quot;, which he studied in an abstract algebraic context; 
fuzzy relations are special cases of &quot;L&quot;-relations when &quot;L&quot; is the unit interval [0, 1].
They are now used throughout fuzzy mathematics, having applications in areas such as linguistics , decision-making , and clustering .

In classical set theory, the membership of elements in a set is assessed in binary terms according to a bivalent condition—an element either belongs or does not belong to the set. By contrast, fuzzy set theory permits the gradual assessment of the membership of elements in a set; this is described with the aid of a membership function valued in the real unit interval [0, 1]. Fuzzy sets generalize classical sets, since the indicator functions (aka characteristic functions) of classical sets are special cases of the membership functions of fuzzy sets, if the latter only takes values 0 or 1. In fuzzy set theory, classical bivalent sets are usually called &quot;crisp sets&quot;. The fuzzy set theory can be used in a wide range of domains in which information is incomplete or imprecise, such as bioinformatics.

==Definition==

A fuzzy set is a pair formula_1 where formula_2 is a set (often required to be non-empty) and formula_3 a membership function. 
The reference set formula_2 (sometimes denoted by formula_5 or formula_6) is called universe of discourse, and for each formula_7 the value formula_8 is called the grade of membership of formula_9 in formula_10. 
The function formula_11 is called the membership function of the fuzzy set formula_12.

For a finite set formula_13 the fuzzy set formula_1 is often denoted by formula_15

Let formula_16. Then formula_9 is called 
* not included in the fuzzy set formula_10 if (no member), 
* fully included if (full member), 
* partially included if 
The (crisp) set of all fuzzy sets on a universe formula_2 is denoted with formula_20 (or sometimes just formula_21).

===Crisp sets related to a fuzzy set===
For any fuzzy set formula_22 and formula_23 the following crisp sets are defined:
* formula_24 is called its α-cut (aka α-level set) 
* formula_25 is called its strong α-cut (aka strong α-level set) 
* formula_26 is called its support 
* formula_27 is called its core (or sometimes kernel formula_28).

Note that some authors understand &quot;kernel&quot; in a different way; see below.

===Other definitions===
* A fuzzy set formula_22 is empty (formula_30) iff (if and only if)
::formula_31formula_32

* Two fuzzy sets formula_33 and formula_34 are equal (formula_35) iff
::formula_36

* A fuzzy set formula_33 is included in a fuzzy set formula_34 (formula_39) iff
::formula_40

* For any fuzzy set formula_33, any element formula_16 that satisfies
::formula_43 
:is called a crossover point.

* Given a fuzzy set formula_33, any formula_23, for which formula_46 is not empty, is called a level of A. 
* The level set of A is the set of all levels formula_47 representing distinct cuts. It is the image of formula_48:
::formula_49formula_50formula_51

* For a fuzzy set formula_33, its height is given by
::formula_53
:where formula_54 denotes the supremum, which exists because formula_55 is non-empty and bounded above by 1. If &quot;U&quot; is finite, we can simply replace the supremum by the maximum.

* A fuzzy set formula_33 is said to be normalized iff
::formula_57
:In the finite case, where the supremum is a maximum, this means that at least one element of the fuzzy set has full membership. A non-empty fuzzy set formula_33 may be normalized with result formula_59 by dividing the membership function of the fuzzy set by its height:
::formula_60
:Besides similarities this differs from the usual normalization in that the normalizing constant is not a sum.

* For fuzzy sets formula_33 of real numbers formula_62 with bounded support, the width is defined as
::formula_63
:In the case when formula_64 is a finite set, or more generally a closed set, the width is just
::formula_65
:In the &quot;n&quot;-dimensional case formula_66 the above can be replaced by the &quot;n&quot;-dimensional volume of formula_64. 
:In general, this can be defined given any measure on &quot;U&quot;, for instance by integration (e.g. Lebesgue integration) of formula_64.

* A real fuzzy set formula_69 is said to be convex (in the fuzzy sense, not to be confused with a crisp convex set), iff
::formula_70.
: Without loss of generality, we may take &quot;x&quot; ≤ &quot;y&quot;, which gives the equivalent formulation
::formula_71.
: This definition can be extended to one for a general topological space &quot;U&quot;: we say the fuzzy set formula_33 is convex when, for any subset &quot;Z&quot; of &quot;U&quot;, the condition 
::formula_73
: holds, where formula_74 denotes the boundary of &quot;Z&quot; and formula_75 denotes the image of a set &quot;X&quot; (here formula_74) under a function &quot;f&quot; (here formula_48).

===Fuzzy set operations===

Although the complement of a fuzzy set has a single most common definition, the other main operations, union and intersection, do have some ambiguity.
* For a given fuzzy set formula_33, its complement formula_79 (sometimes denoted as formula_80 or formula_81) is defined by the following membership function:
::formula_82.
* Let t be a t-norm, and s the corresponding s-norm (aka t-conorm). Given a pair of fuzzy sets formula_83, their intersection formula_84 is defined by:
::formula_85,
:and their union formula_86 is defined by:
::formula_87.

By the definition of the t-norm, we see that the union and intersection are commutative, monotonic, associative, and have both a null and an identity element. For the intersection, these are ∅ and &quot;U&quot;, respectively, while for the union, these are reversed. However, the union of a fuzzy set and its complement may not result in the full universe &quot;U&quot;, and the intersection of them may not give the empty set ∅. Since the intersection and union are associative, it is natural to define the intersection and union of a finite family of fuzzy sets recursively. It is noteworthy that the generally accepted standard operators for the union and intersection of fuzzy sets are the max and min operators:
* formula_88 and formula_89.

* If the standard negator formula_90 is replaced by another strong negator, the fuzzy set difference may be generalized by
::formula_91
* The triple of fuzzy intersection, union and complement form a De Morgan Triplet. That is, De Morgan&#x27;s laws extend to this triple.
:Examples for fuzzy intersection/union pairs with standard negator can be derived from samples provided in the article about t-norms.

:The fuzzy intersection is not idempotent in general, because the standard t-norm is the only one which has this property. Indeed, if the arithmetic multiplication is used as the t-norm, the resulting fuzzy intersection operation is not idempotent. That is, iteratively taking the intersection of a fuzzy set with itself is not trivial. It instead defines the &quot;m&quot;-th power of a fuzzy set, which can be canonically generalized for non-integer exponents in the following way:

* For any fuzzy set formula_33 and formula_93 the ν-th power of formula_33 is defined by the membership function:
::formula_95
The case of exponent two is special enough to be given a name.
* For any fuzzy set formula_33 the concentration formula_97 is defined
::formula_98
Taking formula_99, we have formula_100 and formula_101

* Given fuzzy sets formula_83, the fuzzy set difference formula_103, also denoted formula_104, may be defined straightforwardly via the membership function:
::formula_105
:which means formula_106, e. g.:
::formula_107

:Another proposal for a set difference could be: 
::formula_108

* Proposals for symmetric fuzzy set differences have been made by Dubois and Prade (1980), either by taking the absolute value, giving
::formula_109
:or by using a combination of just , , and standard negation, giving
::formula_110

:Axioms for definition of generalized symmetric differences analogous to those for t-norms, t-conorms, and negators have been proposed by Vemur et al. (2014) with predecessors by Alsina et al. (2005) and Bedregal et al. (2009).

* In contrast to crisp sets, averaging operations can also be defined for fuzzy sets.

===Disjoint fuzzy sets===
In contrast to the general ambiguity of intersection and union operations, there is clearness for disjoint fuzzy sets:
Two fuzzy sets formula_83 are disjoint iff
:formula_112
which is equivalent to
:formula_113 formula_114
and also equivalent to 
:formula_115
We keep in mind that / is a t/s-norm pair, and any other will work here as well.

Fuzzy sets are disjoint if and only if their supports are disjoint according to the standard definition for crisp sets.

For disjoint fuzzy sets formula_83 any intersection will give ∅, and any union will give the same result, which is denoted as
:formula_117 
with its membership function given by
:formula_118
Note that only one of both summands is greater than zero.

For disjoint fuzzy sets formula_83 the following holds true:
:formula_120

This can be generalized to finite families of fuzzy sets as follows:
Given a family formula_121 of fuzzy sets with index set &quot;I&quot; (e.g. &quot;I&quot; = {1,2,3...,&quot;n&quot;}). This family is (pairwise) disjoint iff
:formula_122

A family of fuzzy sets formula_121 is disjoint, iff the family of underlying supports formula_124 is disjoint in the standard sense for families of crisp sets.

Independent of the t/s-norm pair, intersection of a disjoint family of fuzzy sets will give ∅ again, while the union has no ambiguity:
:formula_125 
with its membership function given by
:formula_126
Again only one of the summands is greater than zero.

For disjoint families of fuzzy sets formula_121 the following holds true:
:formula_128

===Scalar cardinality===
For a fuzzy set formula_33 with finite support formula_64 (i.e. a &quot;finite fuzzy set&quot;), its cardinality (aka scalar cardinality or sigma-count) is given by
:formula_131.
In the case that &quot;U&quot; itself is a finite set, the relative cardinality is given by 
:formula_132.
This can be generalized for the divisor to be a non-empty fuzzy set: For fuzzy sets formula_133 with &quot;G&quot; ≠ ∅, we can define the relative cardinality by:
:formula_134,
which looks very similar to the expression for conditional probability.
Note:
* formula_135 here.
* The result may depend on the specific intersection (t-norm) chosen.
* For formula_136 the result is unambiguous and resembles the prior definition.

===Distance and similarity===
For any fuzzy set formula_33 the membership function formula_138 can be regarded as a family formula_139. The latter is a metric space with several metrics formula_140 known. A metric can be derived from a norm (vector norm) formula_141 via
:formula_142.
For instance, if formula_2 is finite, i.e. formula_144, such a metric may be defined by: 
:formula_145 where formula_146 and formula_147 are sequences of real numbers between 0 and 1. 
For infinite formula_2, the maximum can be replaced by a supremum.
Because fuzzy sets are unambiguously defined by their membership function, this metric can be used to measure distances between fuzzy sets on the same universe:
:formula_149,
which becomes in the above sample:
:formula_150.
Again for infinite formula_2 the maximum must be replaced by a supremum. Other distances (like the canonical 2-norm) may diverge, if infinite fuzzy sets are too different, e.g., formula_152 and formula_2.

Similarity measures (here denoted by formula_154) may then be derived from the distance, e.g. after a proposal by Koczy:
:formula_155 if formula_156 is finite, formula_157 else, 
or after Williams and Steele:
:formula_158 if formula_156 is finite, formula_157 else
where formula_161 is a steepness parameter and formula_162.

===&quot;L&quot;-fuzzy sets===
Sometimes, more general variants of the notion of fuzzy set are used, with membership functions taking values in a (fixed or variable) algebra or structure formula_163 of a given kind; usually it is required that formula_163 be at least a poset or lattice. These are usually called &quot;L&quot;-fuzzy sets, to distinguish them from those valued over the unit interval. The usual membership functions with values in [0, 1] are then called [0, 1]-valued membership functions. These kinds of generalizations were first considered in 1967 by Joseph Goguen, who was a student of Zadeh. A classical corollary may be indicating truth and membership values by {f, t} instead of {0, 1}.

An extension of fuzzy sets has been provided by Atanassov. An intuitionistic fuzzy set (IFS) formula_33 is characterized by two functions:
:1. formula_166 – degree of membership of &quot;x&quot;
:2. formula_167 – degree of non-membership of &quot;x&quot;
with functions formula_168 with formula_169.

This resembles a situation like some person denoted by formula_9 voting 
* for a proposal formula_33: (formula_172), 
* against it: (formula_173), 
* or abstain from voting: (formula_174).
After all, we have a percentage of approvals, a percentage of denials, and a percentage of abstentions.

For this situation, special &quot;intuitive fuzzy&quot; negators, t- and s-norms can be defined. With formula_175 and by combining both functions to formula_176 this situation resembles a special kind of &quot;L&quot;-fuzzy sets.

Once more, this has been expanded by defining picture fuzzy sets (PFS) as follows: A PFS A is characterized by three functions mapping &quot;U&quot; to [0, 1]: formula_177, &quot;degree of positive membership&quot;, &quot;degree of neutral membership&quot;, and &quot;degree of negative membership&quot; respectively and additional condition formula_178
This expands the voting sample above by an additional possibility of &quot;refusal of voting&quot;.

With formula_179 and special &quot;picture fuzzy&quot; negators, t- and s-norms this resembles just another type of &quot;L&quot;-fuzzy sets.

===Pythagorean fuzzy sets===
One extension of IFS is what is known as Pythagorean fuzzy sets. Such sets satisfy the constraint formula_180, which is reminiscent of the Pythagorean theorem. Pythagorean fuzzy sets can be applicable to real life applications in which the previous condition of formula_181 is not valid. However, the less restrictive condition of formula_180 may be suitable in more domains.

== Fuzzy logic ==
As an extension of the case of multi-valued logic, valuations (formula_183) of propositional variables (formula_184) into a set of membership degrees (formula_185) can be thought of as membership functions mapping predicates into fuzzy sets (or more formally, into an ordered set of fuzzy pairs, called a fuzzy relation). With these valuations, many-valued logic can be extended to allow for fuzzy premises from which graded conclusions may be drawn.

This extension is sometimes called &quot;fuzzy logic in the narrow sense&quot; as opposed to &quot;fuzzy logic in the wider sense,&quot; which originated in the engineering fields of automated control and knowledge engineering, and which encompasses many topics involving fuzzy sets and &quot;approximated reasoning.&quot;

Industrial applications of fuzzy sets in the context of &quot;fuzzy logic in the wider sense&quot; can be found at fuzzy logic.

== Fuzzy number ==

A fuzzy number is a fuzzy set that satisfies all the following conditions:
* A is normalised;
* A is a convex set;
* The membership function formula_186 achieves the value 1 at least once;
* The membership function formula_186 is at least segmentally continuous.

If these conditions are not satisfied, then A is not a fuzzy number. The core of this fuzzy number is a singleton; its location is:
:: formula_188

Fuzzy numbers can be likened to the funfair game &quot;guess your weight,&quot; where someone guesses the contestant&#x27;s weight, with closer guesses being more correct, and where the guesser &quot;wins&quot; if he or she guesses near enough to the contestant&#x27;s weight, with the actual weight being completely correct (mapping to 1 by the membership function).

The kernel formula_189 of a fuzzy interval formula_33 is defined as the &#x27;inner&#x27; part, without the &#x27;outbound&#x27; parts where the membership value is constant ad infinitum. In other words, the smallest subset of formula_191 where formula_166 is constant outside of it, is defined as the kernel.

However, there are other concepts of fuzzy numbers and intervals as some authors do not insist on convexity.

==Fuzzy categories==
The use of set membership as a key component of category theory can be generalized to fuzzy sets. This approach, which began in 1968 shortly after the introduction of fuzzy set theory, led to the development of Goguen categories in the 21st century. In these categories, rather than using two valued set membership, more general intervals are used, and may be lattices as in &quot;L&quot;-fuzzy sets.

There are numerous mathematical extensions similar to or more general than fuzzy sets. Since fuzzy sets were introduced in 1965 by Zadeh, many new mathematical constructions and theories treating imprecision, inaccuracy, vagueness, uncertainty and vulnerability have been developed. Some of these constructions and theories are extensions of fuzzy set theory, while others attempt to mathematically model inaccuracy/vagueness and uncertainty in a different way. The diversity of such constructions and corresponding theories includes:

* Fuzzy Sets (Zadeh, 1965)
* interval sets (Moore, 1966),
* L-fuzzy sets (Goguen, 1967),
* flou sets (Gentilhomme, 1968),
* type-2 fuzzy sets and type-n fuzzy sets (Zadeh, 1975),
* interval-valued fuzzy sets (Grattan-Guinness, 1975; Jahn, 1975; Sambuc, 1975; Zadeh, 1975),
* level fuzzy sets (Radecki, 1977)
* rough sets (Pawlak, 1982),
* intuitionistic fuzzy sets (Atanassov, 1983),
* fuzzy multisets (Yager, 1986),
* intuitionistic L-fuzzy sets (Atanassov, 1986),
* rough multisets (Grzymala-Busse, 1987),
* fuzzy rough sets (Nakamura, 1988),
* real-valued fuzzy sets (Blizard, 1989),
* vague sets (Wen-Lung Gau and Buehrer, 1993),
* α-level sets (Yao, 1997), 
* shadowed sets (Pedrycz, 1998),
* neutrosophic sets (NSs) (Smarandache, 1998),
* bipolar fuzzy sets (Wen-Ran Zhang, 1998),
* genuine sets (Demirci, 1999),
* soft sets (Molodtsov, 1999),
* complex fuzzy set (2002),
* intuitionistic fuzzy rough sets (Cornelis, De Cock and Kerre, 2003)
* L-fuzzy rough sets (Radzikowska and Kerre, 2004),
* multi-fuzzy sets (Sabu Sebastian, 2009),
* generalized rough fuzzy sets (Feng, 2010)
* rough intuitionistic fuzzy sets (Thomas and Nair, 2011),
* soft rough fuzzy sets (Meng, Zhang and Qin, 2011)
* soft fuzzy rough sets (Meng, Zhang and Qin, 2011)
* soft multisets (Alkhazaleh, Salleh and Hassan, 2011)
* fuzzy soft multisets (Alkhazaleh and Salleh, 2012)
* pythagorean fuzzy set (Yager , 2013), 
* picture fuzzy set (Cuong, 2013),
* spherical fuzzy set (Mahmood, 2018).

== Fuzzy relation equation ==

The fuzzy relation equation is an equation of the form , where &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; are fuzzy sets, &quot;R&quot; is a fuzzy relation, and stands for the composition of &quot;A&quot; with &quot;R&quot; .

==Entropy==
A measure &quot;d&quot; of fuzziness for fuzzy sets of universe formula_2 should fulfill the following conditions for all formula_16:
#formula_195 if formula_33 is a crisp set: formula_197
#formula_198 has a unique maximum iff formula_199
#formula_200
:::formula_201
:::formula_202
::which means that &quot;B&quot; is &quot;crisper&quot; than &quot;A&quot;.
#formula_203 
In this case formula_198 is called the entropy of the fuzzy set &quot;A&quot;.

For finite formula_144 the entropy of a fuzzy set formula_33 is given by
:formula_207,
::formula_208
or just
:formula_209
where formula_210 is Shannon&#x27;s function (natural entropy function)
:formula_211
and formula_212 is a constant depending on the measure unit and the logarithm base used (here we have used the natural base e).
The physical interpretation of &quot;k&quot; is the Boltzmann constant &quot;k&quot;&quot;B&quot;.

Let formula_33 be a fuzzy set with a continuous membership function (fuzzy variable). Then 
:formula_214
and its entropy is 
:formula_215

==Extensions==
There are many mathematical constructions similar to or more general than fuzzy sets. Since fuzzy sets were introduced in 1965, many new mathematical constructions and theories treating imprecision, inexactness, ambiguity, and uncertainty have been developed. Some of these constructions and theories are extensions of fuzzy set theory, while others try to mathematically model imprecision and uncertainty in a different way.

==See also==

* Alternative set theory
* Defuzzification
* Fuzzy concept
* Fuzzy mathematics
* Fuzzy set operations
* Fuzzy subalgebra
* Interval finite element
* Linear partial information
* Multiset
* Neuro-fuzzy
* Rough fuzzy hybridization
* Rough set
* Sørensen similarity index
* Type-2 fuzzy sets and systems
* Uncertainty
== References ==

== Bibliography ==
* Atanassov, K. T. (1983) Intuitionistic fuzzy sets, VII ITKR&#x27;s Session, Sofia (deposited in Central Sci.-Technical Library of Bulg. Acad. of Sci., 1697/84) (in Bulgarian) 
* 
* 
* Brutoczki Kornelia: Fuzzy Logic (Diploma) – 
* Burgin, M. Theory of Named Sets as a Foundational Basis for Mathematics, in Structures in Mathematical Theories, San Sebastian, 1990, pp.  417–420
* 
* Chapin, E.W. (1974) Set-valued Set Theory, I, Notre Dame J. Formal Logic, v. 15, pp. 619–634
* Chapin, E.W. (1975) Set-valued Set Theory, II, Notre Dame J. Formal Logic, v. 16, pp. 255–267
* 
* 
* 
* Gentilhomme, Y. (1968) Les ensembles flous en linguistique, Cahiers de Linguistique Théorique et Appliquée, 5, pp. 47–63 
* . preprint..
* Grattan-Guinness, I. (1975) Fuzzy membership mapped onto interval and many-valued quantities. Z. Math. Logik. Grundladen Math. 22, pp. 149–160.
* Grzymala-Busse, J. Learning from examples based on rough multisets, in Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on Methodologies for Intelligent Systems, Charlotte, NC, USA, 1987, pp. 325–332 
* Gylys, R. P. (1994) Quantal sets and sheaves over quantales, Liet. Matem. Rink., v. 34, No. 1, pp. 9–31.
* 
* Kaufmann, Arnold. &quot;Introduction to the theory of fuzzy subsets.&quot; Vol. 2. Academic Press, 1975.
* 
* 
* 
* Moore, R.E. Interval Analysis, New York, Prentice-Hall, 1966
* Nakamura, A. (1988) Fuzzy rough sets, &#x27;Notes on Multiple-valued Logic in Japan&#x27;, v. 9, pp. 1–8 
* Narinyani, A.S. Underdetermined Sets – A new datatype for knowledge representation, Preprint 232, Project VOSTOK, issue 4, Novosibirsk, Computing Center, USSR Academy of Sciences, 1980
* 
* 
* Ramakrishnan, T.V., and Sabu Sebastian (2010) &#x27;A study on multi-fuzzy sets&#x27;, Int. J. Appl. Math. 23, 713–721.
* Sabu Sebastian and Ramakrishnan, T. V.(2010) &#x27;Multi-fuzzy sets&#x27;, Int. Math. Forum 50, 2471–2476.
* 
* Sabu Sebastian and Ramakrishnan, T. V.(2011) Multi-fuzzy extension of crisp functions using bridge functions, Ann. Fuzzy Math. Inform. 2 (1), 1–8
* Sambuc, R. Fonctions φ-floues: Application à l&#x27;aide au diagnostic en pathologie thyroidienne, Ph.D. Thesis Univ. Marseille, France, 1975.
* Seising, Rudolf: The Fuzzification of Systems. The Genesis of Fuzzy Set Theory and Its Initial Applications—Developments up to the 1970s (Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computing, Vol. 216) Berlin, New York, [et al.]: Springer 2007.
* Werro, Nicolas: Fuzzy Classification of Online Customers , University of Fribourg, Switzerland, 2008, Chapter 2 
* Yao, Y.Y., Combination of rough and fuzzy sets based on α-level sets, in: Rough Sets and Data Mining: Analysis for Imprecise Data, Lin, T.Y. and Cercone, N. (Eds.), Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, pp. 301–321, 1997.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055058" start="16" end="26" title="Fuzzy set" label="fuzzy sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055058" start="42" end="56" title="Fuzzy set" label="uncertain sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="62" end="66" title="Set (mathematics)" label="sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q379825" start="73" end="81" title="Element (mathematics)" label="elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q92767" start="154" end="168" title="Lotfi Asker Zadeh" label="Lotfi A. Zadeh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="300" end="322" title="L-relation" label="&amp;quot;L&amp;quot;-relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="353" end="369" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987578" start="469" end="482" title="unit interval" label="unit interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511129" start="520" end="537" title="fuzzy mathematics" label="fuzzy mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="576" end="587" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331926" start="590" end="605" title="Decision making" label="decision-making"/>
<link wikidata="Q622825" start="612" end="622" title="Cluster analysis" label="clustering"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="639" end="649" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110857" start="730" end="748" title="Principle of bivalence" label="bivalent condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967302" start="943" end="962" title="Membership function (mathematics)" label="membership function"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="977" end="981" title="Real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q371983" start="1052" end="1070" title="indicator function" label="indicator function"/>
<link wikidata="Q128570" start="1427" end="1441" title="bioinformatics" label="bioinformatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q226183" start="1539" end="1548" title="empty set" label="non-empty"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="2753" end="2756" title="iff" label="iff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2776" end="2786" title="Universal quantification#notation" label="formula_31"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="3294" end="3299" title="image (mathematics)" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q773483" start="3327" end="3337" title="Existential quantification" label="formula_50"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="3445" end="3453" title="Infimum and supremum" label="supremum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095069" start="4005" end="4018" title="normalizing constant" label="normalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q726212" start="4127" end="4134" title="bounded set" label="bounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="4247" end="4257" title="closed set" label="closed set"/>
<link wikidata="Q192276" start="4465" end="4472" title="Measure (mathematics)" label="measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q853831" start="4525" end="4545" title="Lebesgue integration" label="Lebesgue integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q193657" start="4667" end="4677" title="convex set" label="convex set"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="4879" end="4896" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q875399" start="5073" end="5081" title="Boundary (topology)" label="boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="5126" end="5131" title="image (mathematics)" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383161" start="5589" end="5595" title="t-norm" label="t-norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="5876" end="5887" title="commutative" label="commutative"/>
<link wikidata="Q194404" start="5889" end="5898" title="monotonic" label="monotonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q177251" start="5900" end="5911" title="associative" label="associative"/>
<link wikidata="Q187420" start="5929" end="5933" title="absorbing element" label="null"/>
<link wikidata="Q185813" start="5941" end="5957" title="identity element" label="identity element"/>
<link wikidata="Q856215" start="6343" end="6349" title="Indexed family" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6607" end="6621" title="t-norm#Non-standard negators" label="strong negator"/>
<link wikidata="Q173300" start="6775" end="6796" title="De Morgan&amp;#x27;s laws" label="De Morgan&amp;#x27;s laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383161" start="6945" end="6951" title="t-norm" label="t-norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q368988" start="6986" end="6996" title="Idempotence" label="idempotent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="7399" end="7406" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="8166" end="8180" title="absolute value" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8828" end="8839" title="Existential quantification#Negation" label="formula_113"/>
<link wikidata="Q215382" start="9029" end="9037" title="disjoint sets" label="disjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q327069" start="10696" end="10719" title="conditional probability" label="conditional probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="11050" end="11062" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q956437" start="11134" end="11138" title="Norm (mathematics)" label="norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q205464" start="12357" end="12364" title="algebraic structure" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851710" start="12368" end="12377" title="structure (mathematical logic)" label="structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="12461" end="12466" title="poset" label="poset"/>
<link wikidata="Q595364" start="12470" end="12477" title="lattice (order)" label="lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283491" start="12761" end="12774" title="Joseph Goguen" label="Joseph Goguen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436345" start="12950" end="12959" title="Krassimir Atanassov" label="Atanassov"/>
<link wikidata="Q185502" start="14781" end="14799" title="multi-valued logic" label="multi-valued logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492863" start="14829" end="14851" title="propositional variable" label="propositional variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967302" start="14935" end="14955" title="membership function (mathematics)" label="membership functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144319" start="14964" end="14974" title="Predicate (mathematical logic)" label="predicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q321703" start="15148" end="15155" title="premise" label="premise"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="15363" end="15374" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q184199" start="15385" end="15394" title="automation" label="automated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540472" start="15407" end="15428" title="knowledge engineering" label="knowledge engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q224821" start="15641" end="15652" title="fuzzy logic" label="fuzzy logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165112" start="16043" end="16052" title="Singleton (mathematics)" label="singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q288514" start="16123" end="16130" title="funfair" label="funfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="16909" end="16923" title="Set theory" label="set membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="16946" end="16961" title="category theory" label="category theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055058" start="19345" end="19368" title="fuzzy relation equation" label="fuzzy relation equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q244761" start="19506" end="19517" title="Function composition" label="composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913893" start="20164" end="20187" title="Binary entropy function" label="Shannon&amp;#x27;s function"/>
<link wikidata="Q82435" start="20352" end="20353" title="e (mathematical constant)" label="e"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962" start="20408" end="20426" title="Boltzmann constant" label="Boltzmann constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q681771" start="21053" end="21075" title="Alternative set theory" label="Alternative set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251735" start="21078" end="21093" title="Defuzzification" label="Defuzzification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511110" start="21096" end="21109" title="Fuzzy concept" label="Fuzzy concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511129" start="21112" end="21129" title="Fuzzy mathematics" label="Fuzzy mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511133" start="21132" end="21152" title="Fuzzy set operations" label="Fuzzy set operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511136" start="21155" end="21171" title="Fuzzy subalgebra" label="Fuzzy subalgebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057275" start="21174" end="21197" title="Interval finite element" label="Interval finite element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826475" start="21200" end="21226" title="Linear partial information" label="Linear partial information"/>
<link wikidata="Q864377" start="21229" end="21237" title="Multiset" label="Multiset"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165150" start="21240" end="21251" title="Neuro-fuzzy" label="Neuro-fuzzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370883" start="21254" end="21279" title="Rough fuzzy hybridization" label="Rough fuzzy hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137210" start="21282" end="21291" title="Rough set" label="Rough set"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613728" start="21294" end="21319" title="Sørensen similarity index" label="Sørensen similarity index"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860605" start="21322" end="21351" title="Type-2 fuzzy sets and systems" label="Type-2 fuzzy sets and systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649246" start="21354" end="21365" title="Uncertainty" label="Uncertainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436345" start="21405" end="21421" title="Krassimir Atanassov" label="Atanassov, K. T."/>
<link wikidata="Q30881839" start="22584" end="22600" title="Kaufmann, Arnold" label="Kaufmann, Arnold"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56602" wikidata="Q1520" url="?curid=56602" title="Astana">
<text>Astana, formerly known as Nur-Sultan, Akmolinsk, Tselinograd, and Akmola, is the capital city of Kazakhstan. With a population of 1,350,228 within the city limits, it is the second-largest in the country after Almaty, which had been the capital until 1997. The city lies on the banks of the Ishim River in the north-central part of Kazakhstan, within the Akmola Region, though administered as a city with special status separately from the rest of the region. Initially founded as Akmoly in 1830, the city was later renamed Akmolinsk, Tselinograd, and Akmola before adopting the name Astana in 1998, which means &quot;capital city&quot; in Kazakh. In 2019, the city briefly adopted the name Nur-Sultan in honor of former president Nursultan Nazarbayev, but it returned to the name Astana in 2022.

Astana’s history is marked by rapid growth, especially after becoming the capital. Its transformation into a modern and planned city was guided by a master plan designed by Japanese architect Kisho Kurokawa. Today, Astana is known for its futuristic architecture, housing key government institutions like the Akorda Residence, the Parliament House, and the Supreme Court. It has become an important center for culture, education, and commerce in Kazakhstan and Central Asia.

The city is renowned for its modern landmarks, including the Baiterek, which symbolizes Kazakhstan&#x27;s independence, the Khan Shatyr Entertainment Center, and the Hazrat Sultan Mosque, one of the largest in Central Asia. The Palace of Peace and Reconciliation, designed to host cultural and interfaith events, highlights the city’s role as a hub for dialogue and cooperation. In 2021, Astana was recognized as one of Kazakhstan&#x27;s 10 priority tourist destinations, reflecting its growing appeal. Visitors can explore cultural venues such as the Astana Opera and the National Museum of the Republic of Kazakhstan, alongside parks like Presidential Park and Central Park, which offer recreational spaces along the Ishim.

Astana gained international recognition when it hosted the 2011 Asian Winter Games, an event that showcased the city’s ability to organize large-scale sporting events. The city also hosted Expo 2017, a major international exhibition focused on the theme of &quot;Future Energy,&quot; which brought global attention to its commitment to sustainability and innovation. Astana is also home to the Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions, a prominent event that brings together religious leaders from around the world to foster mutual understanding and peace.

The city’s transport infrastructure includes the Nursultan Nazarbayev International Airport, a key hub for both domestic and international flights. Astana is also well-connected by two railway stations, Astana-1 and Astana-Nurly Zhol, which provide services to major cities across Kazakhstan and beyond. The city&#x27;s public transport system includes buses, and the planned Astana Light Metro system, currently under construction, is expected to significantly enhance the city’s transport network, offering efficient and sustainable travel within the city.

Astana is home to notable educational institutions, such as Nazarbayev University, L.N. Gumilyov Eurasian National University, and Astana IT University, contributing to its role as a hub for education and innovation. These institutions support the city’s growth in technology, research, and higher learning, making Astana an increasingly important center for knowledge and progress in the region.

== Names ==
The settlement of Akmoly was founded in 1830, possibly named after a local landmark. &quot;Ақ мола&quot; (Aqmola) literally means &quot;white grave&quot; or &quot;white tomb&quot; in Kazakh, although this theory is not universally accepted. In 1832, it was granted town status and renamed Akmolinsk. In 1961, under Nikita Khrushchev, it was renamed Tselinograd, Russian for &quot;City of Virgin Lands&quot;. In 1991, following Kazakhstan&#x27;s independence, the name was changed to Akmola.

In December 1997, the city replaced Almaty as the capital of Kazakhstan, and in May 1998, it was renamed Astana, which means &quot;capital city&quot; in Kazakh. In March 2019, the capital was renamed to Nur-Sultan (; ) in honor of the long-ruling President Nursultan Nazarbayev, shortly after his resignation. In September 2022, President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev signed a constitutional amendment to revert to the name Astana. , it holds the Guinness World Record for the capital city with the most name changes in modern times.

==History==
Many centuries ago, the Bozok settlement was located on the territory of modern Astana. It was a military fortress of the Steppe section of the Silk Road. The etymology of the Turkic word &quot;Boz&quot; carries several meanings such as &#x27;untouched earth&#x27;, &#x27;virgin soil&#x27; and &#x27;feather grass&#x27;. It was a large settlement of the 12-14th centuries. At present, Astana is expanding to the territory of ancient Bozok.

=== Early years (1830–1918) ===
The settlement of Akmoly was established on the Ishim River in 1830 as the seat of an okrug. In 1832, the settlement was granted town status and named &quot;Akmolinsk&quot;. The advantages of the position of the town were clear as early as 1863. It describes how picket roads and lines connected this geographic center to Kargaly in the East, Aktau Fort in the South and through Atbasar to Kokshetau in the West. In 1838, at the height of the great national and liberation movement headed by Kenesary Khan, the Akmolinsk Fortress was burned. After the repression of the liberation movement, the fortress was rebuilt. On 16 July 1863, Akmolinsk was officially declared an uyezd town. During the rapid development of the Russian capitalist market, the huge Saryarka areas were actively exploited by the colonial administration. To draft Regulation governing the Kazakh steppe the Government of the Russian Empire formed Steppe Commission in 1865.

In 1869, Akmolinsk&#x27;s external district and department were cancelled, and Akmolinsk became the center of the newly established Akmolinsk Oblast. In 1879, Major General Dubelt proposed to build a railway between Tyumen and Akmolinsk to the Ministry of Communications of Russia. In the course of the first 30 years of its existence, the population of Akmola numbered a trifle more than 2,000 people. Over the next 30 years, the city&#x27;s population increased by three times according to volosts and settlements of Akmolinsk Oblast. In 1893, Akmolinsk was an uyezd with a 6,428 strong population, three churches, five schools and colleges and three factories.

=== Soviet era (1918–1991) ===
During World War II, Akmolinsk served as a route for the transport of engineering tools and equipment from evacuated plants in the Ukrainian SSR, Byelorussian SSR, and Russian SFSR located in the oblasts of the Kazakh SSR. Local industries were appointed to respond to war needs, assisting the country to provide the battle and home fronts with all materials needed. In the post-war years, Akmolinsk became a beacon of economic revival in the west of the Soviet Union ruined by the war. Additionally, many Russian-Germans were resettled here after being deported under Joseph Stalin&#x27;s rule.

In 1954, Northern Kazakh SSR oblasts became a territory of the Virgin Lands Campaign, in order to turn the region into a second grain producer for the Soviet Union. In December 1960, Central Committee made a resolution to create the Tselinniy Krai, which comprised five regions of the Northern Kazakh SSR oblasts. Akmolinsk Oblast was ceased to exist as a separate administrative entity. Its districts were directly subordinated to the new krai administration, and Akmolinsk became the krai capital, as well as the administrative seat of the new Virgin Lands economic region. On 14 March 1961, Khrushchev suggested the city should have a name corresponding to its role in the Virgin Lands Campaign. On 20 March 1961, the Supreme Soviet of the Kazakh SSR renamed Akmolinsk to &quot;Tselinograd&quot;. On 24 April 1961, the region was reconstituted as &quot;Tselinograd Oblast&quot;. In the 1960s, Tselinograd was completely transformed. In 1963, work on the first three new high-rise housing districts began. In addition, the city received a number of new monumental public buildings, including the Virgin Lands Palace, a Palace of Youth, a House of Soviets, a new airport, and several sports venues. In 1971, the Tselinniy Krai was abolished and Tselinograd became the oblast&#x27;s new capital.

=== Contemporary era (1991–present) ===
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the consequent independence of Kazakhstan, the city&#x27;s original name was restored in the modified form &quot;Akmola&quot;. On 6 July 1994, the Supreme Council of Kazakhstan adopted the decree &quot;On the transfer of the capital of Kazakhstan&quot;. After the capital of Kazakhstan was moved from Almaty to Akmola on 10 December 1997, the city was consequently renamed Astana in 1998. On 10 June 1998, Astana was presented as the capital internationally. Due to several determined advantages, Astana was chosen as the capital: large urban areas, favorable geographical position, proximity to the major economic centers of the region, considerable demographic capacity, good transportation facilities, and a relatively favorable climate. On 16 July 1999, Astana was awarded the medal and title of the City of Peace by UNESCO.

In March 2019, the Kazakhstani government renamed the city Nur-Sultan to honour the country&#x27;s outgoing long-term authoritarian president, Nursultan Nazarbayev. In September 2022, after a number of controversies and unrest resulting in Nazarbayev&#x27;s resignation from the Security Council of Kazakhstan, the name of the capital was changed back to Astana.

==Geography==

Astana is almost from the country&#x27;s largest city and former capital, Almaty. The nearest big cities are Karaganda () and Omsk in Russia ().

===Topography===
Astana is located in central Kazakhstan on the Ishim River in a very flat, semi-arid steppe region which covers most of the country&#x27;s territory. It is at 51° 10&#x27; north latitude and 71° 26&#x27; east longitude. The city encompasses . The elevation of Astana is above sea level. Astana is in a spacious steppe landscape, in the transitional area between the north of Kazakhstan and the extremely thinly settled national centre, because of the Ishim River. The older boroughs lie north of the river, whilst the new boroughs are located south of the Ishim.

=== Time ===
The time offset from the UTC used by Astana is 5 hours ahead of UTC, or UTC+5:00.

===Climate===
Astana is the second-coldest national capital in the world after Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia, a position formerly held by the capital of Canada, Ottawa, until Astana attained capital city status in 1997. Astana has an extreme continental climate with warm summers (featuring occasional brief rain showers) and long, very cold, dry winters. Summer temperatures occasionally reach while is not unusual between mid-December and early March. Typically, the city&#x27;s river is frozen over between the second week of November and the beginning of April. Astana has a well-deserved reputation among Kazakhs for its frequent high winds, the effects of which are felt particularly strongly on the fast-developing but relatively exposed Left Bank area of the city.

Overall, Astana has a humid continental climate classification in Köppen scheme (&quot;Dfb&quot;). The average annual temperature in Astana is . January is the coldest month with an average temperature of and record lowest is in January 1893&#x27;s cold wave reaching temperatures down to . July is the hottest month with an average temperature of .

==Demographics==
=== Population ===
As of January 2020, the population of Astana is 1,136,008; more than double the 2002 population of 493,000.

As of 2018, ethnic Kazakhs made up 80.6% of the city population, representing a significant increase from only 17% at the time of the country&#x27;s independence.

Ethnic groups (2020):
* Kazakh: 79.1%
*Russian: 12.85%
*Ukrainian: 1.32%
*Tatar: 1.08%
*Uzbek: 0.96%
* Others: 4.65%

In 1989, Tselinograd had a population of 281,000. The ethnic mix was about 17.7% Kazakh, 54.1% Russian and 28.2% other ethnic groups.

By 2007, Astana&#x27;s population had more than doubled since becoming the capital, to over 600,000, and it topped 1 million in 2017. Migrant workers—legal and illegal—have been attracted from across Kazakhstan and neighbouring states such as Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan, and Astana is a magnet for young professionals seeking to build a career. Most of the immigrants in Astana are Russian.

=== Religion ===

Islam and Christianity (primarily Russian Orthodoxy, Roman Catholicism, and Protestantism) are the predominant religions of the city. Other religions practiced are Judaism, Lutheranism, and Buddhism.
The Palace of Peace and Reconciliation was specially constructed in 2006 to host the Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions. It contains accommodations for different religions: Judaism, Islam, Christianity, Buddhism, Hinduism, Taoism and other faiths.

Central Asia&#x27;s largest mosque, as well as Central Asia&#x27;s largest synagogue are found in Astana.

===Metropolitan area===
The metropolitan area centered upon Astana includes the Arshaly, Shortandy, Tselinograd and (partially) Akkol districts of Akmola Region. The area contains 1.2 million people.

==Economy==

Astana&#x27;s economy is based on trade, industrial production, transport, communication and construction. The city&#x27;s industrial production is mainly focused on producing building materials, foodstuff and mechanical engineering.

Astana is a major hub of the Belt and Road Initiative, including for financial services and legal services connected to BRI projects.

Astana is the leader in the CIS region on Global Financial Centers Index rank in 2022.

The Astana International Financial Center (AIFC) opened in July 2018 to become a hub for financial services in Central Asia.

Astana is the headquarters of state-owned corporations such as Samruk-Kazyna, Kazakhstan Temir Zholy, KazMunayGas, KazTransOil, Kazatomprom, KEGOC, Kazpost and Kazakhtelecom.

The shift of the capital has given it a powerful boost to Astana&#x27;s economic development. The high economic growth rate of the city has attracted numerous investors. In the 16 years since Astana became the capital, the volume of investments has increased by almost 30 times, the gross regional product has increased by 90 times, and industrial output has increased by 11 times. The city&#x27;s Gross Regional Product makes up about 8.5 per cent of the republic&#x27;s Gross domestic product.

The Astana – New City special economic zone was established in 2001 to help develop industry and increase the attractiveness of the city to investors. The SEZ plans to commission five projects worth 20 billion KZT (around $108 million) in the Industrial Park No. 1 in 2015. The projects include construction of a plant for production of diesel engines, a fast food complex, temporary storage warehouses and a business center, a furniture factory, and production of military and civil engineering machinery. The new Astana International Financial Centre opened in July 2018.

Astana&#x27;s administration is promoting the development of small and medium-sized businesses through the cooperation of the Sovereign Welfare Fund Samruk-Kazyna and National Economic Chamber. Support is provided by a special programme of crediting. As a result, the number of small and medium-sized businesses increased by 13.7% to over 96,000 compared to the previous year as of 1 July 2015. In addition, the number of people employed in small and medium-sized business increased by 17.8% to over 234,000 people as of 1 April 2015.

Astana was included in the list of top 21 intelligent communities of the world, according to the report released by the Intelligent Community Forum in October 2016. The rating list includes the cities, regions and communities which use digital instruments for the construction of local economy and society.

In 2018, Astana attracted more than three trillion tenge (US$7.91 billion) in foreign direct investment, a record amount for the city. The growth was achieved due to a large number of construction projects.

Tourism becomes one of the factors that drive economic growth in the city. Astana is among the top ten most attractive tourist cities in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).

== Diplomacy platform ==
Astana has become a platform for high-profile diplomatic talks and summits on critical global issues. Astana has hosted multiple rounds of talks between the Syrian Arab Republic government led by Bashar al-Assad and Syrian opposition. The 12th Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization (WTO) was originally scheduled to take place in June 2020 in then Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan, but was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In May 2020, WTO members discussed Kazakhstan&#x27;s offer to reschedule the conference to June 2021 but postponed taking a decision due to the ongoing pandemic. In April 2021, members agreed that MC12 would take place in Geneva from 30 November to 3 December. Since 2003, Astana has hosted the Congress on World and Traditional Religions, which is a diverse gathering of religious leaders to discuss religious harmony and ending terrorism and extremism.

==Cityscape==


Astana is subdivided into four districts. Almaty District was created on 6 May 1998 by presidential decree. The district&#x27;s territory encompasses an area of with a population of 375,938 people. The district has five villages. Yesil District, which is also called left bank of the city, was created on 5 August 2008 by presidential decree. The district&#x27;s territory encompasses an area of with a population of 119,929 people. Saryarka District was created on 6 May 1998 by presidential decree. The district&#x27;s territory encompasses an area of with a population of 339,286 people. Baykonyr District was created on 16 March 2018 by presidential decree. The district&#x27;s territory encompasses an area of with a population of 233 351 people.

In April 1998, the Government of Kazakhstan asked architects and urban planners of international renown to participate in a design competition for the new capital. On 6 October 1998, Japanese architect Kisho Kurokawa was awarded the First Prize. Kurokawa&#x27;s proposal aimed to preserve and redevelop the existing city, and create a new city at the south and the east sides of the Ishim River, enabling the Symbiosis of the History and the Future.

North of the railway line, which crosses Astana in an east–west direction, are industrial and poorer residential areas. Between the railway line and the Ishim river is the city centre, where at present intense building activity is occurring. To the west and east are more elevated residential areas with parks and the new area of government administration to the south of the Ishim River. Here many large building projects are under way; for example, the construction of a diplomatic quarter, and government buildings. By 2030, these quarters are to be completed. Astana&#x27;s chief planner, Vladimir Laptev, wants to build a Berlin in a Eurasian style. He has stated that a purely administrative capital such as Canberra is not one of his goals.

Two of the most significant structures in Asatana&#x27;s developing urban landscape are the Palace of Peace and Reconciliation and the Khan Shatyr Entertainment Center. Their architectural styles are intended to echo features of the nomadic empires that shaped the history of the Eurasian steppes.

==Sport==


The city has a variety of sports teams. The major association football team is the FC Astana of the Kazakhstan Premier League. Founded in 2009, the FC Astana won six league titles, three Kazakh Cups and five Kazakh Super Cups. Their home stadium is the Astana Arena, which also serves as a home for the Kazakhstan national football team and the FC Bayterek. The FC Bayterek is a member of the Kazakhstan First Division. They were founded in 2012, to develop youth football. The FC Astana-1964 is based in the Kazhymukan Munaitpasov Stadium and plays in the Astana Municipal Football League. The club&#x27;s most successful years were 2000s, when they won 3 league titles.

Astana is home to several professional ice hockey teams. The Barys Astana, a founding member of the Kontinental Hockey League in 2008 and based in the Barys Arena. The Nomad Astana and HC Astana play in the Kazakhstan Hockey Championship. The Snezhnye Barsy of the Junior Hockey League is a junior team of the Barys Astana. Astana annually hosts the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan&#x27;s Cup ice hockey tournament.

The Astana Pro Team, founded in 2007, participates in the UCI World Tour. The team is one of the most successful road cycling teams of recent years, winning several grand tours. The BC Astana of the VTB United League and the Kazakhstan Basketball League is the only professional basketball team in Astana. It is the most successful basketball team in Kazakhstan with three Kazakhstan Basketball League titles and four Kazakhstan Basketball Cups. Its home arena is the Saryarka Velodrome, which is mainly used for track cycling events. The Saryarka Velodrome hosted the UCI Track Cycling World Cup stage in 2011. The Astana Presidential Sports Club was founded in 2012, to combine the main sports teams in Astana. The organization is supported by Sovereign Wealth Fund Samruk-Kazyna. The 2011 Asian Winter Games were partly held in the capital. The Alau Ice Palace, hosted the 2015 World Sprint Speed Skating Championships. The President&#x27;s Cup tennis tournament is annually held at the Daulet National Tennis Centre.

The martial art palace was opened on 6 July 2019. Sports facilities for five thousand spectators can take part in international competitions in boxing, wrestling, judo, weightlifting, and other Olympic and non-Olympic disciplines. The palace has a 25-meter pool, fitness and wrestling rooms, a football field, as well as a comfortable hotel. The object will be made available to the pupils of the sports school.

==Education==

Astana has many universities and junior colleges. academic year, Astana had a total enrollment of 53,561 students in its 14 higher educational institutions, a 10% increase from the prior year. The L.N.Gumilyov Eurasian National University is the biggest university in Astana with 16,558 students and 1,678 academic staff. It was founded as the result of merging the Akmola Civil Engineering Institute with the Akmola Pedagogical Institute on 23 May 1996. The oldest university in Astana is the S. Seifullin Kazakh Agro Technical University founded in 1957. Nazarbayev University is an autonomous research university founded in 2010 in partnership with some of the world&#x27;s top universities. The Kazakh University of Economics, Finance and International Trade is an economic institution in Astana. The Kazakh Humanities and Law Institute is a law university founded by initiative of Ministry of Justice in 1994. The Astana Medical University was the only medical school in Astana until the opening of the School of Medicine at Nazarbayev University in 2014. The Kazakh National University of Arts is the premier music school and has provided Astana with highly qualified professional specialists in the field of Arts.

Astana schools enrolls about 103,000 students across 83 schools, including 71 state schools and 12 private schools. The Miras International School, established 1999, was the first private high school established in Astana. The Haileybury Astana school was established in 2011, as a branch of the Haileybury and Imperial Service College, an independent school in the United Kingdom. The Astana Kazakh-Turkish High Schools are run by the International KATEV foundation. There are Kazakh-Turkish High Boarding Schools for gifted boys and girls, separately and the Nurorda International School. Astana hosts two Nazarbayev Intellectual Schools (NIS), including the School of Physics and Mathematics and International Baccalaureate world school. The QSI International School of Astana is an international school that provides an American curriculum to its students. The school is a branch of the Quality Schools International that started in the Middle East.

==Transportation==

=== City transport ===
The city transport in Astana consists of buses and taxis. Over 720,000 people use public transport daily. There are over 60 bus lines served by more than 1000 vehicles, with over 3000 people working in the public transport sector. Just like buses, share taxis have their own predefined routes and work on a shared basis. There are three share taxi routes in total.

Trolleybus routes were opened in 1983. There were originally 3 routes, however, by 2006, only one route was left. In 2008, the only trolleybus fleet by the special state commission was declared unprofitable due to debts to the energy supply company and as a result, it was completely closed.

In 2011, the Akimat of Astana established a company to implement a series of changes and programmes in the metropolis known as the &quot;New transport system of Astana&quot;. As part of these programmes, bus rapid transit (BRT) lines were opened. That same year, the construction of a light rail (LRT) was to begin. It was planned that the first stage of construction of a 16.4-kilometer line, which would&#x27;ve included nine stations, was planned to be completed by 1 December 2013. However, as of May 2020, construction has not started. In November 2013, President Nursultan Nazarbayev condemned the construction of LRT because of the high cost. In exchange, there was a promise to launch high-speed buses. Despite the controversy, the construction of the LRT began in 2017 with the flyovers along to which the trains will pass. After a corruption scandal in 2019, the project stagnated until 2023, when construction resumed. The LRT is set to open in 2024-25.

The bicycle-sharing program AstanaBike has been operating in Astana since 2014. In 2017, the system consisted of 40 stations with 1000 bicycles. The registration in the system for a season costs 5000 tenge ($28), plus a deposit for an RFID card ($5.50), the first half-hour of bike rental is free, the next hour is 100 tenge ($0.55). After more than 4 hours, the rent costs 1000 tenge.

=== Air ===
Nursultan Nazarbayev International Airport , located south-east of the city center, is the main gateway for the city&#x27;s domestic and international civilian air traffic. It is the second-busiest airport in Kazakhstan, with 7,500,000 passengers passing through it in 2023. The airport hosts 21 airlines operating regular passenger flights inside the country and internationally. Air Astana maintains its second-largest hub at the airport. An expected 50% increase in passenger traffic by 2017 has spurred the construction of a new terminal with an area of about .

=== Railway and roads ===
Astana is located in the centre of the country, serving as a well-positioned transport node for rail and automotive networks.

Astana railway station is the city&#x27;s main railway station and serves approximately 7,000 people each day. A new railway station, Nurly Zhol was built during the Expo 2017 event with a customer capacity of 12,000. Tulpar Talgo is a daily express train to Almaty. Short-term plans include the construction of a new railway station in the industrial district; in the vicinity of CHPP-3 a new terminal will be erected for freight cars.

M-36 Chelyabinsk-Almaty and A-343 Astana-Petropavlovsk highways are routed through the city. The strategic geographical positioning of Astana allows the city to serve as a transport and reload centre for cargoes formed at adjacent stations in the area.

=== River transport ===
Since 2008, navigation on the Esil River has been organized within the city. The Akimat of the city in the framework of the implementation of the &quot;Shipping Esil&quot; program created a specialized enterprise GKKP &quot;Esil-Astana&quot;.

==Expo 2017==

On 1 July 2010, at the 153rd General Assembly of Bureau International des Expositions held in Paris, representatives from then-Astana presented the city&#x27;s bid to host the Specialised Expo 2017. The Kazakh concept for this exhibition relates to the impact of energy on society in the modern world. The theme of the Astana Expo was &quot;Future Energy&quot;.

Expo 2017 opened to much fanfare on 10 June 2017, with heads of state from 17 nations in attendance. It is the first world&#x27;s fair to be held in Central Asia and its central pavilion, &quot;Nur Alem&quot;, is the largest spherical building in the world. The two-millionth visitor was registered on 7 August. More than 4 million people attended the event.

==Sightseeing==

*Akorda is the residence of the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan
*Astana Grand Mosque – the largest mosque in Central Asia, completed in 2022
*Baiterek is the main attraction and symbol of Astana
*&quot;Ethnoaul National Cultural Complex&quot; – a unique cultural, tourist and image project for Expo 2017.&lt;br&gt;Ethnoaul is a real opportunity to travel to the past and feel like a real nomad, to feel the atmosphere of centuries past. The national-cultural complex will acquaint visitors with the rich history, culture, art and traditions of the Kazakh people, where anyone who is interested will be transferred to the ethno-cultural environment of the nomadic civilization and fully enjoy the daily and festive life of the aul
* is a landmark architectural structure, erected in honour of the anniversary of independence of Kazakhstan on the idea of Nursultan Nazarbayev
*Independence Palace – a building designed for diplomatic and other events of international level; the building also has a large-scale layout plan of Astana with existing and future facilities
*&quot;Jastar&quot; – the Palace of creativity of schoolchildren and youth
*Kazakh Eli – (&quot;The Country of Kazakhs&quot;) – a monument on Independence Square. The 91-meter stele is crowned with the Samruk bird (Samұryқ, Simurg) – the king of all birds, the keeper of the peoples. The mythological image of Samruk also includes the second important monument of Kazakhstan – &quot;Baiterek&quot;, in the translation &quot;Tree of Life&quot;, under which the king of birds sits and spreads seeds on the ground from the flapping of wings
*&quot;Kazakhstan&quot; – Central Concert Hall
*Khan Shatyr is the largest shopping and entertainment center (considered the largest tent in the world). Architect Norman Foster
* Kazakhstan Pavilion of Expo 2017
**Kazakhstan Pavilion and Science Museum &quot;Nur Alem&quot; is the tallest building with a spherical shape, 30 meters in diameter, than the Ericsson-Glob Arena in Stockholm
**National Space Center Future Energy Museum &quot;Nur Alem&quot; EXPO 2017 – the spherical building &quot;Nur Alem&quot; (Kaz. Shining World). Its height is 100 meters and its diameter is 80 meters
*Nurjol Boulevard (formerly Water-Green Boulevard) is a recreational pedestrian zone with an Alley of Singing Fountains
*Palace of Peace and Reconciliation is the Congress Hall, designed for summits and congresses of representatives of traditional Kazakhstan and world religions. Architect Norman Foster
*Shabyt Palace – Kazakh National University of Arts

==Theaters, concert halls, and museums==

There are 27 libraries in Astana, whose services in 2011 were used by 153 people for every thousand residents, 8 state museums, which were visited by 415,500 people in 2011 and which conducted 68,514 excursions, 10 recreation parks, in 2011 1492.2 thousand visitors were received and 99 events, 6 state museums and 6 cinemas were held.
*The Central Concert Hall Kazakhstan is a unique complex of the young capital designed for events of various levels: concerts of world and domestic stars, celebrations and official meetings, exhibitions, conferences, presentations. Architect Manfredi Nicoletti
*Astana Circus is an entertaining circus institution in the city of Nur Sultan. One of the three main circuses of Kazakhstan; in the territory of the former USSR, one of the newest circuses and one of two unique circus buildings in the form of a &quot;flying saucer&quot; (along with the Kazan circus)
*The National Opera and Ballet Theater named after K. Baiseitova is the youngest musical theater in the country, the bearer of the traditions of the Kazakh and world musical culture, comprehending the classical heritage and realizing the spiritual needs of the renewed Kazakhstani society
*Astana Opera is a theater founded by the initiative of the first president of Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbayev. The theater building, built in 2013, this Parthenon-styled edifice is one of the cultural centers of the city, staging both classical and original works, is recognized as an architectural monument of national importance
*Kazakh Music and Drama Theater named after K. Kuanyshbaev
*State Academic Russian Drama Theater named after Maxim Gorky
*The National Museum of the Republic of Kazakhstan is the largest museum in Central Asia. The museum was created on behalf of the first president of the Republic of Kazakhstan N.A. *Nazarbayev in the framework of the State program &quot;Cultural Heritage&quot;
*Modern Art Museum
*Presidential Center of Culture – created on the initiative of the head of state N. Nazarbayev. The uniqueness of the research, cultural and educational complex of the capital is that its structure includes a museum, a library, a concert hall
*ALZhIR (Akmola camp of wives of traitors to the motherland) – the largest Soviet women&#x27;s camp, one of the three &quot;islands&quot; of the &quot;Gulag Archipelago&quot;
*Atameken is an ethno-memorial complex of nature, architecture and life on a large-scale map of Kazakhstan
*Museum of the First President of the Republic of Kazakhstan
*Memorial complex of the Ministry of Internal Affairs (in honor of the heroes of the Great Patriotic War in the capital)
*Museum of The Future (Nur-Alem Pavilion) – is more than just a monument of EXPO2017. The museum exhibition is all about the energy of the future. You can learn everything there is to know about renewable, green, and solar-powered energy sources, as well as see a model of the city proposed for 2050

==Twin towns – sister cities==

Astana is twinned with:

* Amman, Jordan (2005)
* Ankara, Turkey (2001)
* Ashgabat, Turkmenistan (2017)
* Bangkok, Thailand (2004)
* Beijing, China (2006)
* Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan (2011)
* Damascus, Syria
* Gdańsk, Poland (1996)
* Hanoi, Vietnam (2009)
* Islamabad, Pakistan
* Kazan, Russia (2004)
* Kyiv, Ukraine (1998)
* Manila, Philippines
* Moscow, Russia
* Nice, France (2013)
* Nusantara, Indonesia (2023)
* Oulu, Finland (2013)
* Putrajaya, Malaysia
* Riga, Latvia (1998)
* Saint Petersburg, Russia (1996)
* Seoul, South Korea (2004)
* Tashkent, Uzbekistan
* Tbilisi, Georgia (1996)
* Ufa, Russia (2010)
* Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia (2019)
* Uşak, Turkey
* Vilnius, Lithuania
* Warsaw, Poland (2002)
* Zagreb, Croatia (2014)

===Friendly cities===
Astana also cooperates with:

* Baku, Azerbaijan
* Belgrade, Serbia
* Berlin, Germany
* Bucharest, Romania
* Budapest, Hungary
* Cairo, Egypt
* Chelyabinsk, Russia
* Chișinău, Moldova
* Kurgan, Russia
* Kursk, Russia
* Minsk, Belarus
* Omsk, Russia
* Penza, Russia
* Saratov, Russia
* Sverdlovsk Oblast, Russia
* Tomsk, Russia
* Ürümqi, China
==Smart city initiative==
The Smart Astana project is an initiative developed by the then-Astana city administration that incorporates technology-driven solutions in various sectors, like hospitals, schools, the ticket booking system and street lighting. These projects run on an interconnected application, the Smart Astana.

Astana&#x27;s smart city sector includes the annual Astana Innovations Challenge, designed to bring attention to the smart city concept. In addition, the world&#x27;s first smart sustainable city acceleration hub is set to open in Astana. This hub was planned to integrate from 10 to 15 startup solutions into the infrastructure of Kazakhstan.

==See also==
* List of people from Astana
== Footnotes ==
== References ==
===Sources===
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* Official website of the BIE</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1520" start="0" end="6" title="Astana" label="Astana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520" start="26" end="36" title="Astana" label="Nur-Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520" start="38" end="47" title="Astana" label="Akmolinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520" start="49" end="60" title="Astana" label="Tselinograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520" start="66" end="72" title="Astana" label="Akmola"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="81" end="93" title="capital city" label="capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="97" end="107" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35493" start="210" end="216" title="Almaty" label="Almaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q191524" start="291" end="302" title="Ishim (river)" label="Ishim River"/>
<link wikidata="Q485056" start="355" end="368" title="Akmola Region" label="Akmola Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q57394" start="731" end="751" title="Nursultan Nazarbayev" label="Nursultan Nazarbayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="918" end="930" title="planned city" label="planned city"/>
<link wikidata="Q358502" start="990" end="1004" title="Kisho Kurokawa" label="Kisho Kurokawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q413579" start="1107" end="1123" title="Akorda Residence" label="Akorda Residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4109099" start="1155" end="1168" title="Supreme Court of Kazakhstan" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q804210" start="1335" end="1343" title="Baiterek (monument)" label="Baiterek"/>
<link wikidata="Q671484" start="1398" end="1430" title="Khan Shatyr Entertainment Center" label="Khan Shatyr Entertainment Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4494668" start="1440" end="1460" title="Hazrat Sultan Mosque" label="Hazrat Sultan Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="1484" end="1496" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119741" start="1502" end="1536" title="Palace of Peace and Reconciliation" label="Palace of Peace and Reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21371563" start="1826" end="1838" title="Astana Opera" label="Astana Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q18405670" start="1847" end="1892" title="National Museum of the Republic of Kazakhstan" label="National Museum of the Republic of Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q104866684" start="1915" end="1932" title="Presidential Park" label="Presidential Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045872" start="2060" end="2083" title="2011 Asian Winter Games" label="2011 Asian Winter Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074528" start="2190" end="2199" title="Expo 2017" label="Expo 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907440" start="2395" end="2449" title="Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions" label="Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q174233" start="2622" end="2664" title="Nursultan Nazarbayev International Airport" label="Nursultan Nazarbayev International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q800403" start="2776" end="2784" title="Astana-1 station" label="Astana-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642068" start="2789" end="2806" title="Astana-Nurly Zhol station" label="Astana-Nurly Zhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q779673" start="2949" end="2967" title="Astana Light Metro" label="Astana Light Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783344" start="3193" end="3214" title="Nazarbayev University" label="Nazarbayev University"/>
<link wikidata="Q127745" start="3216" end="3258" title="L. N. Gumilev Eurasian National University" label="L.N. Gumilyov Eurasian National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="3726" end="3732" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="3858" end="3875" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973506" start="3931" end="3943" title="Tselina" label="Virgin Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q35493" start="4071" end="4077" title="Almaty" label="Almaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q57394" start="4292" end="4312" title="Nursultan Nazarbayev" label="Nursultan Nazarbayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q200881" start="4374" end="4395" title="Kassym-Jomart Tokayev" label="Kassym-Jomart Tokayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="4475" end="4496" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="4719" end="4728" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q191524" start="5096" end="5107" title="Ishim River" label="Ishim River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427085" start="5134" end="5139" title="okrug" label="okrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q4214672" start="5370" end="5377" title="Kargaly" label="Kargaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q198989" start="5391" end="5396" title="Aktau" label="Aktau"/>
<link wikidata="Q612144" start="5427" end="5434" title="Atbasar" label="Atbasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q490643" start="5438" end="5447" title="Kokshetau" label="Kokshetau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997636" start="5540" end="5553" title="Kenesary Khan" label="Kenesary Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364324" start="5719" end="5724" title="uyezd" label="uyezd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559020" start="5803" end="5817" title="Saryarka — Steppe and Lakes of Northern Kazakhstan" label="Saryarka areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q602925" start="5908" end="5921" title="Kazakh steppe" label="Kazakh steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="5944" end="5958" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q604615" start="6126" end="6142" title="Akmolinsk Oblast (Russian Empire)" label="Akmolinsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5815" start="6210" end="6216" title="Tyumen" label="Tyumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q687121" start="6486" end="6492" title="volost" label="volost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364324" start="6557" end="6562" title="uyezd" label="uyezd"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6697" end="6709" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83405" start="6807" end="6812" title="Factory" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="6821" end="6834" title="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Ukrainian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895" start="6836" end="6852" title="Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Byelorussian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="6858" end="6870" title="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="Russian SFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q171308" start="6886" end="6892" title="oblast" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q168811" start="6901" end="6911" title="Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Kazakh SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7145" end="7157" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021324" start="7196" end="7211" title="History of Germans in Russia, Ukraine and the Soviet Union" label="Russian-Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q85125" start="7244" end="7252" title="Population transfer in the Soviet Union" label="deported"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="7259" end="7272" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006581" start="7350" end="7371" title="Virgin Lands Campaign" label="Virgin Lands Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="7415" end="7420" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7438" end="7450" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971373" start="7470" end="7487" title="Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q485056" start="7601" end="7617" title="Akmola Region" label="Akmolinsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738486" start="7727" end="7731" title="krai" label="krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="8634" end="8665" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247199" start="8817" end="8846" title="Mazhilis" label="Supreme Council of Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35493" start="8971" end="8977" title="Almaty" label="Almaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="9491" end="9497" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q57394" start="9643" end="9663" title="Nursultan Nazarbayev" label="Nursultan Nazarbayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q110413718" start="9720" end="9726" title="2022 Kazakhstan unrest" label="unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q11294054" start="9779" end="9809" title="Security Council of Kazakhstan" label="Security Council of Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35493" start="9953" end="9959" title="Almaty" label="Almaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q484706" start="9988" end="9997" title="Karaganda" label="Karaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q898" start="10005" end="10009" title="Omsk" label="Omsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q191524" start="10089" end="10100" title="Ishim River" label="Ishim River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="10312" end="10327" title="Metres above sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q187110" start="10623" end="10634" title="UTC offset" label="time offset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="10644" end="10647" title="Coordinated Universal Time" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10691" end="10699" title="UTC+05:00" label="UTC+5:00"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="10781" end="10792" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="10855" end="10861" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="10936" end="10955" title="continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="11490" end="11515" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="11534" end="11547" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="11983" end="11990" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="12152" end="12158" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976251" start="12167" end="12174" title="Russians in Kazakhstan" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470683" start="12184" end="12193" title="Ukrainians in Kazakhstan" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404206" start="12202" end="12207" title="Ethnic demography of Kazakhstan" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404206" start="12216" end="12221" title="Ethnic demography of Kazakhstan" label="Uzbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="12327" end="12333" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="12341" end="12348" title="Russians" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="12790" end="12795" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="12800" end="12812" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="12824" end="12841" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="12843" end="12860" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="12866" end="12879" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="12954" end="12961" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="12963" end="12974" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="12980" end="12988" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119741" start="12994" end="13028" title="Palace of Peace and Reconciliation" label="Palace of Peace and Reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="13223" end="13231" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="13233" end="13239" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q113675887" start="13259" end="13293" title="Astana Grand Mosque" label="Central Asia&amp;#x27;s largest mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q42416691" start="13306" end="13343" title="Beit Rachel Synagogue, Astana" label="Central Asia&amp;#x27;s largest synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321988" start="13446" end="13453" title="Arshaly District" label="Arshaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556281" start="13455" end="13464" title="Shortandy District" label="Shortandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224859" start="13466" end="13477" title="Tselinograd District" label="Tselinograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456359" start="13494" end="13499" title="Akkol District" label="Akkol"/>
<link wikidata="Q485056" start="13513" end="13526" title="Akmola Region" label="Akmola Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="13614" end="13619" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419090" start="13621" end="13642" title="industrial production" label="industrial production"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="13644" end="13653" title="transport" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="13655" end="13668" title="communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="13673" end="13685" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608318" start="13756" end="13774" title="List of building materials" label="building materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="13776" end="13780" title="food" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="13790" end="13812" title="mechanical engineering" label="mechanical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q19692715" start="13844" end="13868" title="Belt and Road Initiative" label="Belt and Road Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="14194" end="14218" title="State-owned enterprise" label="state-owned corporations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407014" start="14227" end="14240" title="Samruk-Kazyna" label="Samruk-Kazyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069105" start="14242" end="14264" title="Kazakhstan Temir Zholy" label="Kazakhstan Temir Zholy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417227" start="14266" end="14277" title="KazMunayGas" label="KazMunayGas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737468" start="14279" end="14290" title="KazTransOil" label="KazTransOil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590386" start="14292" end="14303" title="Kazatomprom" label="Kazatomprom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045983" start="14305" end="14310" title="KEGOC" label="KEGOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q746263" start="14312" end="14319" title="Kazpost" label="Kazpost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046154" start="14324" end="14337" title="Kazakhtelecom" label="Kazakhtelecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610525" start="14738" end="14760" title="Gross Regional Product" label="Gross Regional Product"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="14812" end="14834" title="Gross domestic product" label="Gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q494978" start="14859" end="14880" title="special economic zone" label="special economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="15174" end="15187" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81799" start="15192" end="15201" title="fast food" label="fast food"/>
<link wikidata="Q28155597" start="15352" end="15389" title="Astana International Financial Centre" label="Astana International Financial Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407014" start="15561" end="15574" title="Samruk-Kazyna" label="Samruk-Kazyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="16830" end="16861" title="Syria" label="Syrian Arab Republic government"/>
<link wikidata="Q44329" start="16869" end="16884" title="Bashar al-Assad" label="Bashar al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024068" start="16889" end="16906" title="Syrian opposition to Bashar al-Assad" label="Syrian opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="16947" end="16971" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12528524" start="17624" end="17639" title="Almaty District" label="Almaty District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16648877" start="17812" end="17826" title="Yesil District" label="Yesil District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16694762" start="18015" end="18032" title="Saryarka District" label="Saryarka District"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18173" end="18190" title=":ru:Байконурский район" label="Baykonyr District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814905" start="18354" end="18378" title="Government of Kazakhstan" label="Government of Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131062" start="18400" end="18413" title="urban planner" label="urban planner"/>
<link wikidata="Q358502" start="18537" end="18551" title="Kisho Kurokawa" label="Kisho Kurokawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q191524" start="18718" end="18729" title="Ishim River" label="Ishim River"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="19413" end="19419" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="19425" end="19432" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="19500" end="19508" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119741" start="19627" end="19661" title="Palace of Peace and Reconciliation" label="Palace of Peace and Reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q671484" start="19670" end="19702" title="Khan Shatyr Entertainment Center" label="Khan Shatyr Entertainment Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="19896" end="19916" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q779698" start="19929" end="19938" title="FC Astana" label="FC Astana"/>
<link wikidata="Q326422" start="19946" end="19971" title="Kazakhstan Premier League" label="Kazakhstan Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418264" start="20033" end="20044" title="Kazakhstan Cup" label="Kazakh Cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498874" start="20054" end="20071" title="Kazakhstan Super Cup" label="Kazakh Super Cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q746559" start="20099" end="20111" title="Astana Arena" label="Astana Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q183468" start="20149" end="20182" title="Kazakhstan national football team" label="Kazakhstan national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4075760" start="20191" end="20202" title="FC Bayterek" label="FC Bayterek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119268" start="20304" end="20318" title="Youth system" label="youth football"/>
<link wikidata="Q753004" start="20324" end="20338" title="FC Astana-1964" label="FC Astana-1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986461" start="20355" end="20385" title="Kazhymukan Munaitpasov Stadium (Astana)" label="Kazhymukan Munaitpasov Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="20558" end="20568" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q809683" start="20580" end="20592" title="Barys Astana" label="Barys Astana"/>
<link wikidata="Q190001" start="20619" end="20644" title="Kontinental Hockey League" label="Kontinental Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16632800" start="20670" end="20681" title="Barys Arena" label="Barys Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866037" start="20687" end="20699" title="Nomad Astana" label="Nomad Astana"/>
<link wikidata="Q369037" start="20704" end="20713" title="HC Astana" label="HC Astana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036730" start="20726" end="20756" title="Kazakhstan Hockey Championship" label="Kazakhstan Hockey Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4425545" start="20762" end="20776" title="Snezhnye Barsy" label="Snezhnye Barsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q887386" start="20784" end="20804" title="Junior Hockey League (Russia)" label="Junior Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q17560815" start="20869" end="20919" title="President of the Republic of Kazakhstan&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="President of the Republic of Kazakhstan&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q478309" start="20948" end="20963" title="Astana Pro Team" label="Astana Pro Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q635366" start="21002" end="21016" title="UCI World Tour" label="UCI World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609" start="21057" end="21069" title="road bicycle racing" label="road cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q866427" start="21109" end="21120" title="Grand Tour (cycling)" label="grand tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q796152" start="21126" end="21135" title="BC Astana" label="BC Astana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414995" start="21143" end="21160" title="VTB United League" label="VTB United League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380779" start="21169" end="21197" title="Kazakhstan Basketball Championship" label="Kazakhstan Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="21223" end="21233" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126337" start="21362" end="21387" title="Kazakhstan Basketball Cup" label="Kazakhstan Basketball Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4408858" start="21412" end="21430" title="Saryarka Velodrome" label="Saryarka Velodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q221635" start="21457" end="21470" title="track cycling" label="track cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q801784" start="21513" end="21540" title="UCI Track Cycling World Cup" label="UCI Track Cycling World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152183" start="21560" end="21591" title="Astana Presidential Sports Club" label="Astana Presidential Sports Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407014" start="21712" end="21725" title="Samruk-Kazyna" label="Samruk-Kazyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045872" start="21731" end="21754" title="2011 Asian Winter Games" label="2011 Asian Winter Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072092" start="21792" end="21807" title="Alau Ice Palace" label="Alau Ice Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q15634958" start="21820" end="21865" title="2015 World Sprint Speed Skating Championships" label="2015 World Sprint Speed Skating Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910963" start="21871" end="21891" title="President&amp;#x27;s Cup (tennis)" label="President&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q20036756" start="21934" end="21963" title="Daulet National Tennis Centre" label="Daulet National Tennis Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q127745" start="22591" end="22632" title="L.N.Gumilyov Eurasian National University" label="L.N.Gumilyov Eurasian National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783344" start="22951" end="22972" title="Nazarbayev University" label="Nazarbayev University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="22990" end="23009" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q22031734" start="23093" end="23156" title="Kazakh University of Economics, Finance and International Trade" label="Kazakh University of Economics, Finance and International Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4287774" start="23313" end="23338" title="Astana Medical University" label="Astana Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021290" start="23509" end="23521" title="music school" label="music school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="23694" end="23706" title="state school" label="state school"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="23715" end="23729" title="private school" label="private school"/>
<link wikidata="Q25042277" start="23736" end="23762" title="Miras International School Astana" label="Miras International School"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222529" start="23843" end="23860" title="Haileybury Astana" label="Haileybury Astana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639263" start="23912" end="23951" title="Haileybury and Imperial Service College" label="Haileybury and Imperial Service College"/>
<link wikidata="Q12555808" start="24224" end="24255" title="Nazarbayev Intellectual Schools" label="Nazarbayev Intellectual Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q56404208" start="24315" end="24342" title="International Baccalaureate" label="International Baccalaureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346184" start="24361" end="24395" title="QSI International School of Astana" label="QSI International School of Astana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268762" start="24507" end="24536" title="Quality Schools International" label="Quality Schools International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="25477" end="25494" title="bus rapid transit" label="bus rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="25558" end="25568" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q57394" start="25842" end="25862" title="Nursultan Nazarbayev" label="Nursultan Nazarbayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q174233" start="26638" end="26680" title="Nursultan Nazarbayev International Airport" label="Nursultan Nazarbayev International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q406828" start="27019" end="27029" title="Air Astana" label="Air Astana"/>
<link wikidata="Q800403" start="27358" end="27380" title="Astana railway station" label="Astana railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="27405" end="27420" title="railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642068" start="27492" end="27502" title="Astana-Nurly Zhol station" label="Nurly Zhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074528" start="27524" end="27533" title="Expo 2017" label="Expo 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100969" start="27576" end="27588" title="Talgo" label="Tulpar Talgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35493" start="27617" end="27623" title="Almaty" label="Almaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010514" start="28382" end="28418" title="Bureau International des Expositions" label="Bureau International des Expositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074528" start="28521" end="28530" title="Expo 2017" label="Expo 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q413579" start="29074" end="29080" title="Akorda" label="Akorda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256775" start="29105" end="29144" title="President of the Republic of Kazakhstan" label="President of the Republic of Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q113675887" start="29146" end="29165" title="Astana Grand Mosque" label="Astana Grand Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q804210" start="29223" end="29231" title="Baiterek (monument)" label="Baiterek"/>
<link wikidata="Q57394" start="29934" end="29954" title="Nursultan Nazarbayev" label="Nursultan Nazarbayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4155890" start="29956" end="29975" title="Palace of Independence (Astana)" label="Independence Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="30224" end="30234" title="Kazakh Eli" label="Kazakh Eli"/>
<link wikidata="Q48780885" start="30290" end="30309" title="Independence Square, Astana" label="Independence Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q671484" start="30734" end="30745" title="Khan Shatyr Entertainment Center" label="Khan Shatyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q104898" start="30849" end="30862" title="Norman Foster" label="Norman Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q713955" start="31273" end="31289" title="Nurjol Boulevard" label="Nurjol Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119741" start="31393" end="31427" title="Palace of Peace and Reconciliation" label="Palace of Peace and Reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104898" start="31562" end="31575" title="Norman Foster" label="Norman Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q573362" start="32012" end="32043" title="Kazakhstan Central Concert Hall" label="Central Concert Hall Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q455114" start="32249" end="32267" title="Manfredi Nicoletti" label="Manfredi Nicoletti"/>
<link wikidata="Q21371563" start="32860" end="32872" title="Astana Opera" label="Astana Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q18405670" start="33318" end="33363" title="National Museum of the Republic of Kazakhstan" label="National Museum of the Republic of Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4059689" start="33837" end="33843" title="ALZhIR" label="ALZhIR"/>
<link wikidata="Q25500354" start="34119" end="34178" title="The Museum of the First President of the Republic of Kazakhstan" label="Museum of the First President of the Republic of Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074528" start="34376" end="34384" title="Expo 2017" label="EXPO2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="34643" end="34650" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805" start="34660" end="34665" title="Amman" label="Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="34683" end="34689" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q23438" start="34707" end="34715" title="Ashgabat" label="Ashgabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="34739" end="34746" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="34766" end="34773" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="34790" end="34797" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="34819" end="34827" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="34837" end="34843" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="34861" end="34866" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362" start="34885" end="34894" title="Islamabad" label="Islamabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q900" start="34907" end="34912" title="Kazan" label="Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="34930" end="34934" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="34953" end="34959" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="34975" end="34981" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="34992" end="34996" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q110601629" start="35014" end="35023" title="Nusantara (city)" label="Nusantara"/>
<link wikidata="Q47048" start="35044" end="35048" title="Oulu" label="Oulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q182378" start="35067" end="35076" title="Putrajaya" label="Putrajaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="35089" end="35093" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="35111" end="35127" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="35145" end="35150" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q269" start="35173" end="35181" title="Tashkent" label="Tashkent"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="35196" end="35203" title="Tbilisi" label="Tbilisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q911" start="35222" end="35225" title="Ufa" label="Ufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="35243" end="35254" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189134" start="35274" end="35278" title="Uşak" label="Uşak"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="35289" end="35296" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="35310" end="35316" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="35334" end="35340" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="35412" end="35416" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="35431" end="35439" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="35450" end="35456" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="35468" end="35477" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="35489" end="35497" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="35509" end="35514" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q906" start="35524" end="35535" title="Chelyabinsk" label="Chelyabinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="35546" end="35554" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q13379" start="35566" end="35572" title="Kurgan, Kurgan Oblast" label="Kurgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159" start="35583" end="35588" title="Kursk" label="Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="35599" end="35604" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q898" start="35616" end="35620" title="Omsk" label="Omsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540" start="35631" end="35636" title="Penza" label="Penza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332" start="35647" end="35654" title="Saratov" label="Saratov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462" start="35665" end="35682" title="Sverdlovsk Oblast" label="Sverdlovsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q976" start="35693" end="35698" title="Tomsk" label="Tomsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959" start="35709" end="35715" title="Ürümqi" label="Ürümqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18204929" start="36410" end="36436" title="List of people from Astana" label="List of people from Astana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56605" wikidata="Q2956224" url="?curid=56605" title="Inuit throat singing">
<text>Inuit throat singing, or katajjaq (Inuktitut syllabics: ᑲᑕᔾᔭᖅ), is a distinct type of throat singing uniquely found among the Inuit. It is a form of musical performance, traditionally consisting of two women who sing duets in a close face-to-face formation with no instrumental accompaniment, in an entertaining contest to see who can outlast the other; however, one of the genre&#x27;s most famous practitioners, Tanya Tagaq, performs as a solo artist. Several groups, including Tudjaat, The Jerry Cans, Quantum Tangle and Silla + Rise, also now blend traditional throat singing with mainstream musical genres such as pop, folk, rock and dance music.

An analogous form called &quot;rekuhkara&quot; was once practiced among the Ainu of Hokkaidō, Japan.

== Names ==
The name for throat singing in Canada varies with the geography:

* Iirngaaq – some Nunavut communities
* Piqqusiraarniq or Pirkusirtuk – Igloolik and Baffin Island
* Qiarvaaqtuq – Arviat
* Katajjaq or Katadjak – Nunavik and South Baffin
* Nipaquhiit – some Nunavut communities

==History==
Originally, katajjaq was a form of entertainment among Inuit women while men were away on hunting trips, and it was regarded more as a type of vocal or breathing game in the Inuit culture rather than a form of music. Katajjiniq sound can create an impression of rhythmic and harmonious panting. Inuit throat singing can also imitate wind, water, animal sounds and other everyday sounds.

This playful practice testifies to a long oral tradition of the women of Nunavik, a territory located in the North Québec region. From generation to generation, the Inuit have passed on knowledge of nature and the environment as well as the techniques associated with throat singing. Katajjaniq has rare, even unique, expressive characteristics. Even though Inuit throat singing is no longer performed to hasten the return of hunters, attract animals or influence the natural elements, they still retain some of their original functions, such as entertainment and group cohesion. 

Very much alive in the Inuit communities of Quebec, the katajjaniq still marks the high points of Nunavik people since it is present in calendar holidays, cultural celebrations and important political events. A source of great pride and a powerful symbol of identity, the katajjaniq is a distinctive expression of Nunavik culture. The Inuit recognize katajjaniq as part of their cultural heritage.

== Performance ==
Two women face each other usually in a standing position and holding each other&#x27;s arms. Sometimes they will do some kind of dance movements while singing (e.g., balancing from right to left). One singer leads by setting a short rhythmic pattern, which she repeats leaving brief silent intervals between each repetition. The other singer fills in the gap with another rhythmic pattern. The sounds used include voiced sounds as well as unvoiced ones, both through inhalation or exhalation. The first to run out of breath or be unable to maintain the pace of the other singer will start to laugh or simply stop and will thus be eliminated from the game. It generally lasts between one and three minutes. The winner is the singer who beats the largest number of people.

At one time, the lips of the two women almost touched, so that one singer used the mouth cavity of the other as a resonator, but this is less common in present day. Often, the singing is accompanied by a shuffling in rhythm from one foot to the other. The sounds may be actual words or nonsense syllables or created during exhalation.

The old woman who teaches the children [throat singing songs] corrects sloppy intonation of contours, poorly meshed phase displacements, and vague rhythms exactly like a Western vocal coach.
==Notable performers==
Notable performers include Tanya Tagaq, who performs in a contemporary style, and The Jerry Cans, who incorporate throat singing by band member Nancy Mike as a musical and rhythmic element in a conventional folk rock sound and style. Traditional performers include Qaunak Mikkigak, Kathleen Ivaluarjuk Merritt, as well as Alacie Tullaugaq and Lucy Amarualik who perform in the Katajjaq style.

==Inuit throat singing in popular culture==
*In 2005, Tafelmusik Baroque Orchestra recorded &quot;The Four Seasons Mosaic&quot; CD and DVD documentary. A reinvention of Vivaldi&#x27;s Four Seasons by Mychael Danna featuring Tafelmusik Baroque Orchestra; Jeanne Lamon, violin; Aruna Narayan, sarangi; Wen Zhao, pipa and throat singers Aqsarniit (Sylvia Cloutier and June Shappa).
*The British ITV documentary &quot;Billy Connolly: Journey to the Edge of the World&quot; features Billy Connolly in the Canadian Arctic. In the second episode, he visits a pair of women demonstrating the finer points of throat singing.
*The 2012 CBC TV drama series &quot;Arctic Air&quot; features a theme song written by Tim McCauley and performed by Tanya Tagaq, incorporating elements of traditional Inuit throat singing over a modern dance beat.
*Tanya Tagaq won the 2014 Polaris Music Prize for her album &quot;Animism&quot;.
*In November 2015, incoming Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and his cabinet were sworn in by the Governor General. A pair of eleven-year-old Inuit girls, Samantha Metcalfe and Cailyn Degrandpre, performed throat singing at the ceremony.
*In January 2019, performers Eva Kaukai and Manon Chamberland premiered the short film &quot;Throat Singing in Kangirsuk (Katatjatuuk Kangirsumi)&quot; at the Sundance Film Festival.
* In March 2020, professional singer Caroline Novalinga and her daughter Shina Novalinga gained recognition for videos throat singing on the video sharing app TikTok. They released an album together in June 2021.
* Throat singing duo Iva and Angu received a Juno Award nomination for Traditional Indigenous Artist of the Year at the Juno Awards of 2023 for their album &quot;Katajjausiit&quot;.

==Recognition==
In 2014, Nunavik throat singing (&quot;katajjaniq&quot;) became the first cultural item to be given the intangible cultural heritage designation by the government of the province of Quebec, Canada.

==See also==
*Akazehe
*Tuvan throat singing
*Throat singing

==References==
==External links==
*UBU.com, Canada Inuit Games and Songs, UbuWeb Ethnopoetics
*Video of Canadian Inuit throat singers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2956224" start="0" end="20" title="Inuit throat singing" label="Inuit throat singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274646" start="35" end="54" title="Inuktitut syllabics" label="Inuktitut syllabics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067089" start="86" end="100" title="throat singing" label="throat singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="126" end="131" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q109940" start="217" end="221" title="duet (music)" label="duet"/>
<link wikidata="Q759716" start="414" end="425" title="Tanya Tagaq" label="Tanya Tagaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851252" start="480" end="487" title="Tudjaat" label="Tudjaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q28001372" start="489" end="503" title="The Jerry Cans" label="The Jerry Cans"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467595" start="505" end="519" title="Quantum Tangle" label="Quantum Tangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q29026772" start="524" end="536" title="Silla + Rise" label="Silla + Rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310665" start="684" end="693" title="rekuhkara" label="rekuhkara"/>
<link wikidata="Q101828" start="729" end="733" title="Ainu people" label="Ainu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023" start="851" end="858" title="Nunavut" label="Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q999339" start="905" end="913" title="Igloolik" label="Igloolik"/>
<link wikidata="Q81178" start="918" end="931" title="Baffin Island" label="Baffin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q643346" start="948" end="954" title="Arviat" label="Arviat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074865" start="980" end="987" title="Nunavik" label="Nunavik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074865" start="1519" end="1526" title="Nunavik" label="Nunavik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074865" start="2126" end="2133" title="Nunavik" label="Nunavik"/>
<link wikidata="Q170406" start="2678" end="2694" title="rhythm" label="rhythmic pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q840343" start="2912" end="2922" title="inhalation" label="inhalation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197000" start="2926" end="2936" title="exhalation" label="exhalation"/>
<link wikidata="Q349669" start="3331" end="3340" title="resonator" label="resonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q14867674" start="3421" end="3430" title="Swung note" label="shuffling"/>
<link wikidata="Q759716" start="3794" end="3805" title="Tanya Tagaq" label="Tanya Tagaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q28001372" start="3849" end="3863" title="The Jerry Cans" label="The Jerry Cans"/>
<link wikidata="Q186472" start="3974" end="3983" title="folk rock" label="folk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q28923821" start="4032" end="4047" title="Qaunak Mikkigak" label="Qaunak Mikkigak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4049" end="4076" title="Kathleen Ivaluarjuk Merritt" label="Kathleen Ivaluarjuk Merritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q50378566" start="4089" end="4105" title="Alacie Tullaugaq" label="Alacie Tullaugaq"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4110" end="4124" title="Lucy Amarualik" label="Lucy Amarualik"/>
<link wikidata="Q218658" start="4215" end="4243" title="Tafelmusik Baroque Orchestra" label="Tafelmusik Baroque Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4575" end="4623" title="Billy Connolly: Journey to the Edge of the World" label="Billy Connolly: Journey to the Edge of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q32445" start="4813" end="4823" title="Arctic Air" label="Arctic Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q759716" start="4893" end="4904" title="Tanya Tagaq" label="Tanya Tagaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q17299871" start="5012" end="5036" title="2014 Polaris Music Prize" label="2014 Polaris Music Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148838" start="5057" end="5064" title="Animism (Tanya Tagaq album)" label="Animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099714" start="5124" end="5138" title="Justin Trudeau" label="Justin Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="5176" end="5192" title="Governor General" label="Governor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q85809428" start="5409" end="5436" title="Throat Singing in Kangirsuk" label="Throat Singing in Kangirsuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="5475" end="5497" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q107433955" start="5572" end="5587" title="Shina Novalinga" label="Shina Novalinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="5658" end="5664" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q116938682" start="5733" end="5745" title="Iva and Angu" label="Iva and Angu"/>
<link wikidata="Q507057" start="5757" end="5767" title="Juno Award" label="Juno Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q107298380" start="5783" end="5824" title="Juno Award for Traditional Indigenous Artist of the Year" label="Traditional Indigenous Artist of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802052" start="5832" end="5851" title="Juno Awards of 2023" label="Juno Awards of 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q84036549" start="6015" end="6043" title="intangible cultural heritage" label="intangible cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="6093" end="6099" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q123592830" start="6124" end="6131" title="Akazehe" label="Akazehe"/>
<link wikidata="Q108757333" start="6133" end="6153" title="Tuvan throat singing" label="Tuvan throat singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067089" start="6155" end="6169" title="Throat singing" label="Throat singing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56606" wikidata="Q3703" url="?curid=56606" title="Bamako">
<text>Bamako is the capital and largest city of Mali, with a 2022 population of 4,227,569. It is located on the Niger River, near the rapids that divide the upper and middle Niger valleys in the southwestern part of the country. 

Bamako is the nation&#x27;s administrative center. The city proper is a cercle in its own right. Bamako&#x27;s river port is located in nearby Koulikoro, along with a major regional trade and conference center. Bamako is the seventh-largest West African urban center after Lagos, Abidjan, Kano, Ibadan, Dakar, and Accra. Locally manufactured goods include textiles, processed meat, and metal goods as well as mining. Commercial fishing occurs on the Niger River.

In recent years, Bamako has seen significant urban development, with the construction of modern buildings, shopping malls, and infrastructure projects aimed at improving the quality of life for its residents. The city is home to many notable institutions such as the University of Bamako, the National Museum of Mali, the Mali National Zoo, the Grand Mosque of Bamako, and the Modibo Keita International Airport. The buildings of Bamako have a unique architectural style.

==History==

The area of the city has evidence of settlements since the Palaeolithic era. The fertile lands of the Niger River Valley provided the people with an abundant food supply and early chiefdoms in the area grew wealthy as they established trade routes linking across west Africa, the Sahara, and leading to northern Africa and Europe as early as 600s BCE. The early inhabitants traded gold, ivory, kola nuts, and salt. By the 11th century, the Empire of Ghana became the first kingdom to dominate the area, later succeeded by the Mali Empire.

The &quot;kafu&quot; (chiefdom) of Bamako was founded around 1650 by the Niare family, perhaps associated with a Soninke man named Bamba Sanogo. The Toure and Drave families, mostly clerics and merchants, were also prominent in early Bamako. It was a client state of the Segou Empire. The Scottish explorer Mungo Park visited Bamako in 1806 during his exploration of the Niger River. He estimated that the city at the time held 6000 inhabitants, similar to many other commercial settlements across West Africa at the time.
In February 1882, Samory Toure defeated the French at the Battle of Samaya outside Kinieran. Faced with Toure&#x27;s expanding Wassoulou Empire, some of the leaders of the Dyula community in Bamako began making overtures to join the anti-French alliance. The French commander Gustave Borgnis-Desbordes, eager to possess this key strategic location on the Niger, rushed a force to establish a fort there on 1 February 1883. Kebe Brema, Samory&#x27;s brother, led a force to Bamako to lure the French out of their defenses. They fought two battles at Woyo Wayanko creek in early April, with Kebe Brema winning the first but eventually being forced to retreat.

In 1904 a railroad was built connecting Bamako to Kayes, and the city began growing quickly upon being named the capital of French Sudan in 1908. The cercle of Mali at this time had around 160 000 inhabitants living in 4-500 villages. A railroad connecting Bamako to Dakar was completed in 1923. 

Mali gained independence from France in April 1960, and the Republic of Mali was later established. At this time, Bamako had a population of around 160,000. During the 1960s, the country became socialist and Bamako was subject to Soviet investment and influence. However, the economy declined as state enterprises collapsed and unrest was widespread. Eventually, Moussa Traoré led a successful coup and ruled Mali for 23 years. However his rule was characterised by severe droughts and poor government management and problems of food shortages.

In the late 1980s the people of Bamako and Mali campaigned for a free-market economy and multiparty democracy. In 1990, the National Congress for Democratic Initiative (&quot;Congrès National d&#x27;Initiative démocratique&quot;, CNID) was set up by the lawyer Mountaga Tall, and the Alliance for Democracy in Mali (&quot;Alliance pour la démocratie au Mali&quot;, ADEMA) by Abdramane Baba and historian Alpha Oumar Konaré. These with the &quot;Association des élèves et étudiants du Mali&quot; (AEEM) and the Association Malienne des Droits de l&#x27;Homme (AMDH) aimed to oust Moussa Traoré. Under the old constitution, all labor unions had to belong to one confederation, the National Union of Malian Workers (UNTM). When the leadership of the UNTM broke from the government in 1990, the opposition grew. Groups were driven by paycuts and layoffs in the government sector, and the Malian government acceding to pressure from international donors to privatise large swathes of the economy that had remained in public hands even after the overthrow of the socialist government in 1968. Students, even children, played an increasing role in the protest marches in Bamako, and homes and businesses of those associated with the regime were ransacked by crowds.

On 22 March 1991, a large-scale protest march in central Bamako was violently suppressed, with estimates of those killed reaching 300. Four days later, a military coup deposed Traoré. The &quot;Comité de Transition pour le Salut du Peuple&quot; was set up, headed by General Amadou Toumani Touré. Alpha Oumar Konari officially became president on 26 April 1992.

Bamako had been the target of numerous jihadist terrorist attacks during the Islamist insurgency in the Sahel. On 20 November 2015, two gunmen took 170 people hostage in the Radisson Blu hotel. Twenty-one people were killed along with the two gunmen during the seven-hour siege. In a series of attacks on 17 September 2024, a group of gunmen from Jama&#x27;at Nasr al-Islam wal-Muslimin (JNIM), an al-Qaeda affiliate, attacked a military training school, killing many gendarme and trainees, and set aircraft ablaze at the international airport. At least 77 people were killed. This was the first jihadist attack on Bamako since 2016. JNIM is a successor to some of the organizations responsible for the 2015 attack. The 2024 attack was downplayed by the Malian military junta (led by Assimi Goïta), which seized control over the country in a 2021 coup d&#x27;état.

==Geography==

Bamako is situated on the Niger River floodplain, which hampers development along the riverfront and the Niger&#x27;s tributaries. Bamako is relatively flat, except to the immediate north where an escarpment is found, being what remains of an extinct volcano. The Presidential Palace and main hospital are located here.

Originally, the city developed on the northern side of the river, but as it grew, bridges were developed to connect the north with the south. The first of these was the Pont des Martyrs (2-lane with two pedestrian sections) and the King Fahd Bridge (four-lane with two motorcycle and two pedestrian sections). Additionally, a seasonal causeway between the eastern neighborhoods of Sotuba and Misabugu was inherited from colonial times (alternated traffic on one lane with five crossing sections). The Sotuba Causeway (&quot;Chaussée submersible de Sotuba&quot; in French, and &quot;Babilikoroni&quot; in Bamanankan) is typically under water from July to January. A third bridge (1.4 km long, 24 m wide, four-lane with two motorcycle and two pedestrian sections) is being built at the same location to reduce downtown congestion, notably by trucks.

===Climate===
Under the Köppen climate classification, Bamako features a tropical savanna climate (Köppen &quot;Aw&quot;). Located in the Sudano-Sahelian zone, Bamako is very hot on average all year round with the hottest months being between March and May. The mildest months are between November and February. During the dry season, rainfall is scarce: virtually none falls between November and April due to the dominance of the Saharan anticyclone and the dry trade winds. The rainy season occurs in the summer with the peak occurring with a few storms beginning in May, then transitioning to the monsoon from June to October.
== Environment ==

=== Waste Management Controversy ===
In 2015, the Bamako city government privatized waste collection in the city. Before the introduction of this program there was a long standing informal waste collection system carried out by &quot;Economic interest groups.&quot; Before the privatization these independent groups collected waste throughout the city. After privatization, not only did many waste collectors become unemployed but the corporation that they enlisted to do the job was collecting only 30% of Bamako&#x27;s waste. The garbage build up creates toxic living conditions and it only worsens when it rains. Due to the prevalence of waste in Bamako&#x27;s streets, including informal dumping sites near a school, citizens have taken to protesting, marching and it has even escalated to the point of property damage.

==Administration==
The District of Bamako has been divided into six communes (distinguished by numbers, and not named) since Ordinance No. 78-34/CNLM of 18 August 1978, and amended by a law in February 1982 establishing the new boundaries of Communes III and IV. Each commune is administered by the municipal council and a mayor elected from among its members. The last elections were held on 26 April 2009 and the Alliance for Democracy in Mali hold the majority of representatives for the communes.

===Communes and neighborhoods===
Commune I has a population of 335,407 people (2009) and covers . It is bounded to the north by the rural commune of Djalakorodji (Kati Cercle), west by the Commune II, north-east by the rural commune of Sangarebougou (Kati Cercle), on the east by the rural commune of Gabakourou and south by the Niger River. Nine neighborhoods comprise this commune: Banconi, Boulkassombougou, Djelibougou, Doumanzana Fadjiguila, Sotuba Korofina North, and South Korofina Sikoroni.

Commune II has a population of 159,805 people (2009) and covers . It is bounded to the east by the backwater of Korofina at the west foot of the Point G hill, and to the south by Niger River. The municipality has eleven neighborhoods: Niaréla (the oldest), Bagadadji, Medina-Coura, Bozola, Missira, Hippodrome, Quinzambougou, Bakaribougou, TSF, Industrial Area, and Bougouba. The new Cité du Niger island is also located in the Commune II. The area is the most important in the industry sector in Bamako.

Commune III has a population of 128,872 people (2009) and covers . It is bounded on the north by the Kati, east by the Boulevard du Peuple, which separates it from the Commune II, south by the portion of the Niger River, between the Pont des Martyrs and the Motel de Bamako, and west by the Farako River and Avenue Cheick Zayed El Mahyan Ben Sultan with the neighborhood of ACI-2000. Commune III is the administrative and commercial center of Bamako. It accommodates in particular the two largest markets in the capital, the Grand Market and Dibida. Twenty neighborhoods make up this commune and the villages of Koulouninko and Sirakorodounfing were attached to the Commune III.

Commune IV has a population of 300,085 people (2009) and covers . It is bounded to the east by Commune III, north, west by Kati Cercle and south by the left bank of the Niger River. Commune IV consists of eight neighborhoods: Taliko, Lassa, Sibiribougou, Djikoroni Para, Sébénikoro, Hamdallaye, Lafiabougou and Kalabambougou.

Commune V has a population of 414,668 people (2009) and covers . It is bounded to the north by the Niger River, south by the airport and the commune of Kalabancoro, and to the east by the Commune VI and Niger. It consists of eight neighborhoods: Badalabougou, Sema I, Quartier Mali, Torokorobougou, Baco-Djicoroni, Sabalibougou, Daoudabougou and Kalaban-Coura.

Commune VI has a population of 470,269 people (2009) and covers . This is the largest of the communes that make up Bamako. It consists of ten neighborhoods: Banankabougou, Djanékéla, Faladié, Magnambougou, Missabougou, Niamakoro, Sénou, Sogoniko, Sokorodji and Yrimadio.

Bamako contains the following neighborhoods (quartiers): ACI-2000, Badalabugu, Bajalan I, Bajalan II, Bako Jikoroni, Bagadaji, Bamako Kura, Bankoni, Bolibana, Bozola, Bugudani, Bulkasumbugu, Dar Salam, N&#x27;tomikorobougou, Dawdabugu, Dravela, Fajigila, Falaje, Garantigibugu, Jalakoroji, Janekela, Janjigila, Jelibugu, Jikoroni Para, Jumanzana, Hamdallaye, Hippodrome, Kalaban Koro, Kalaban Kura, Korofina, Kuluba, Kulubleni, Lafiabugu, Madina Kura, Magnambugu (Magnambugu Faso Kanu), Misabugu, Misira, Niarela, Ntomikorobugu, Point G, Quartier du Fleuve, Quartier Mali, Quinzanbugu, Sabalibugu I, Sabalibugu II, Safo, Same, Sangarebugu, Saranbugu, Sebeninkoro, Sikoroni, Sirakoro, Senu, Sibiribugu, Sokoniko, Sokoroji, Sotuba, Titibugu, Torokorobugu, TSF-Sans Fil, Wolofobugu, Yirimanjo, Zone Industrielle

==Economy==
===Industry===
The District of Bamako concentrates 70% of industrial activity in the country.
 The service sector is the most developed, and the city thrives in crafts and trade.

The traditional commercial center of Bamako was located to the north of the river, and contained within a triangle bounded by Avenue du Fleuve, Rue Baba Diarra, and Boulevard du Peuple. This area contains the Marché Rose and Street Market.

The downtown area is highly congested, polluted, and expensive, and urbanization is sprawling at a rapid pace within a radius of . The largest urbanized area now lies on the southern bank of the Niger River. A modern central business district is rapidly developing immediately west of the downtown area in the ACI-2000 district, taking advantage of a well-designed geometric layout, legacy of the old airport runways and taxiways. A large administrative area is being developed at the junction between ACI-2000 and the King Fadh Bridge, containing most of the state departments (ministries) and administrative services in a central location. Bamako is also the headquarters of many large companies and administrative institutions. Air Mali (formerly Compagnie Aérienne du Mali) has its head office in Bamako. Bamako received much investment by Saudi Arabia for decades which saw a number of important structures being built. In recent years, China has become an important investor in Bamako, developing its infrastructure and facilities.
Agriculture is active in Bamako, with the presence of Bozo fisherman, and it is common to see cattle crossing the streets.

===Energy===

Much of the electricity is generated from the hydroelectric Sélingué Dam. The drinking water supply in Bamako and Kati is also ensured by a pumping station on the Niger River. However, the capacity of to provide drinking water per day is insufficient for the needs estimated at during the hot season between April and June. During this period, frequent water shortages are experienced. A new pumping station was to open in Kabala in 2009.

==Architecture==
The BCEAO Tower at 20 stories is the tallest building in the West African nation. It sits on the north (&quot;left&quot;) bank of the River Niger in the city centre. The BCEAO Tower is the Malian headquarters of the Central Bank of West African States, which provides development banking and government financial and currency services in several Francophone West African nations. Classified as Neo-Sudanic architecture, it is modeled on the Sudano-Sahelian architecture of the famous mosques of Djenne and Timbuktu. The building is located in the busy Commune III neighbourhood, where &quot;Avenue Moussa Tavele&quot; meets the waterside boulevard between the two main Bamako bridges: King Fahd Bridge a block west and Martyrs Bridge three blocks east. Just to the east of the BCEAO complex, a park and formal garden mark where the diagonally running &quot;Boulevard du Peuple&quot; reaches the river. By contrast, small market gardens and launching points or river canoes lie along the river front.

The Cité Administrative (Administrative City) is a complex of buildings located just west of the northern end of the King Fahd Bridge. The complex was begun in 2003 by then President Konaré with the help of funding from the government of Libya. The Cité Administrative was completed in 2010 and houses many of the offices of the government.

==Demographics==

Bamako has experienced staggering population growth. In 1884, it had only 2,500 inhabitants, 8,000 in 1908, 37,000 in 1945, and 100,000 in 1960. Today, the population is over 42 times what it was in 1960, with a population of 4,227,569 recorded at the 2022 census, and continues to attract a rural population in search of work. This uncontrolled growth has caused significant difficulties in terms of traffic, sanitation (including access to safe water), and pollution. Bamako hosts a diverse population composed of different ethnic groups in Mali and from neighboring countries.

==Culture==
The National Library of Mali was first created by the Institut Français d&#x27;Afrique Noire, an arm of the French colonial government, in 1944. Following Mali&#x27;s 1960 independence, this library became the Government Library; it would later be renamed again as the National Library of Mali. In 1968, the library was transferred from its initial home in Koulouba to Ouolofobougou, a section of Bamako. The library holds more than 60,000 works, including books, periodicals, audio documents, videos, and software. These materials are available free to the public, though a small subscription fee is required for borrowing privileges. The library also hosts some of the exhibits for African Photography Encounters, a biannual Bamako photography festival.

The National Museum of Mali is an archeological and anthropological museum, presenting permanent and temporary exhibits on the prehistory of Mali, as well as the musical instruments, dress, and ritual objects associated with Mali&#x27;s various ethnic groups. The National Museum began under French rule as the Sudanese Museum, part of the Institut Français d&#x27;Afrique Noire (IFAN) under Théodore Monod. It was opened on 14 February 1953, under the direction of Ukrainian archeologist Yuriy Shumovskyi. Shumovskyi had worked in the museum for nine years, gathering half (nearly 3,000) of today&#x27;s finds. The museum also houses indoor and outdoor exhibitions of works by local artists.
With the independence of the Republic of Mali in 1960, the Sudanese Museum became the National Museum of Mali, with the new objectives of promoting national unity and celebrating Malian traditional culture. However, lack of financial means and absence of qualified personnel caused some deterioration in the museum&#x27;s collections. On 30 March 1956, the National Museum moved into a new cemented structure, created by architect Jean-Loup Pivin from traditional Malian designs. Since the 1996 election of former archaeologist Alpha Oumar Konaré to Mali&#x27;s presidency, the museum&#x27;s funding has increased considerably, becoming among the best in West Africa. The museum often hosts part of the biannual African Photography Encounters, photography festival held in Bamako since 1994.

Also of note is the Muso Kunda Museum, the Bamako Regional Museum, Bamako Zoo, the Bamako Botanical Gardens, the National Conference Center Tower (NCC), the Souvenir Pyramid, the Independence Monument, Al Quoods Monument, the triangular &quot;Monument de la paix&quot;, the Hamdallaye obelisk, the Modibo Keita Memorial and many other monuments, the Palais de la Culture Amadou Hampaté Ba and the Point G hill, containing caves with rock paintings.

In 1988, Bamako was the location of a WHO conference known as the Bamako Initiative that helped reshape health policy of sub-Saharan Africa. The yearly held Budapest-Bamako rally has the endpoint in Bamako, with the Dakar Rally often passing through Bamako.

===Music===
A music boom in Bamako took off in the 1990s, when vocalist Salif Keita and singer-guitarist Ali Farka Touré achieved international fame. It attracted a number of tourists, record producers, and aspiring musicians to the city to try to follow in their footsteps. It is common to see musicians in the streets with &quot;djembes&quot; and percussion bands playing traditional Bamana rhythms.

== Education ==
In 2011, four universities were founded; the University of Social Sciences and Management of Bamako (USSGB), the University of Humanities and Social Sciences of Bamako (ULSHB), the University of Science, Technology and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB) and the University of Legal and Political Sciences of Bamako (USJPB).

In 1972, the Union Malienne Des Aveugles, an integrated school and centre for the blind and partially sighted, was established.

== Places of worship ==
Among the places of worship, they are predominantly Muslim mosques. There are also Christian churches and temples : Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bamako (Catholic Church), Église Chrétienne Évangélique du Mali (Alliance World Fellowship), Assemblies of God.

=== Islam ===

*Eyoub Mosque

==Transport==

The Dakar-Niger Railway links Bamako to Dakar via Kati, Négala, Kita, and Kayes.

In 2015, a rail link to San-Pédro in Ivory Coast is proposed.

The road network links Bamako to Koulikoro, Kati, Kolokani, Ségou, and Sikasso.

The Bamako-Sénou International Airport is from the city and opened to passengers in 1974. Passenger traffic steadily increased in the early 2000s. Government figures revealed 403,380 passengers in 1999, 423,506 in 2003, 486,526 in 2004, and 516,000 in 2005, and is predicted to reach over 900,000 by 2015 under a low (4%) yearly growth-rate scenario. To date this growth rate has been surpassed. Total air traffic the airport increased by 12.4% in 2007 and 14% in 2008. Most of this increase came in passenger transport, with the number of passengers served increasing by 20% in 2007 and 17% in 2008. Twenty-seven airline carriers operated weekly or better at Bamako-Sénou International Airport in the 2007–2008 period. This continued growth was offset by cargo flights&#x27; decline of 16.75% in 2007, and 3.93% in 2008. The highest frequency route is on the Bamako-Dakar sector with 29 weekly non-stop connections. Domestic flights also serve Mali&#x27;s regional capitals Kayes, Mopti, Timbuktu, Sikasso, Gao, and Kidal. Bamako Senou International Airport is managed by Aéroports du Mali (ADM). Its operations are overseen by the Malian Ministry of Equipment and Transports.

Today, with the new administrative arrangement, the territory of Mali will henceforth comprise twenty (20) Regions instead of eight (08), plus the District of Bamako which will henceforth comprise ten (10) urban communes instead of six (06). 

Much of the transportation is either by the Niger River, or by paved roads linking Bamako to other major urban areas. Navigating the river is possible from Koulikoro to Mopti and Gao. The bush taxi is one of the main modes of transport.

Bamako is situated on both sides of the Niger River and three bridges connect the two banks: the Bridge of Martyrs completed in 1960 and renamed in memory of protesters killed in March 1991 by the regime of Moussa Traoré, the King Fahd Bridge, named after the Saudi Arabian donor, and a third bridge, the &quot;Pont de l&#x27;amitié sino-malienne&quot; funded by the People&#x27;s Republic of China. Located in Sotuba area, it has the objective to decongest traffic in the city.

==Healthcare==
The Point G hospital, built between 1906 and 1913, covers . A former military hospital, it became a civilian hospital shortly before the independence of Mali, and is situated on a hill overlooking Bamako.

The second hospital of Bamako is the Gabriel Touré Hospital named after a young doctor and humanist Gabriel Touré who was born in 1910 in Ouagadougou and died in 1935 after having been contaminated by a patient with the pneumonic plague. The hospital was established in 1959.

The contract for the building of a new hospital in Bamako, to relieve pressure on the other hospital resources was signed on 27 December 2008. Located in the district of Yirimadio, the department will include a pediatric and obstetrics-gynecology facilities, a department of internal medicine, medical imagery facilities and hospital care with 150 beds to support the emergency services and intensive care. This hospital, like many recent developments in Bamako is financed and equipped with Chinese investment.

==In popular culture==
Bamako has provided the backdrop or been the subject of books and films such as &quot;Bamako&quot;, directed by Abderrahmane Sissako. The film depicts a trial taking place in Bamako, amid the daily life that is going on in the city. In the midst of that trial, two sides argue whether the World Bank and International Monetary Fund, or perhaps corruption, are guilty of the financial state of many poverty-stricken African countries. The film was first released at the Cannes Film Festival on 21 May 2006 and in Manhattan by New Yorker Films on 14 February 2007 and was the recipient of the first Film Award of the Council of Europe given at the Istanbul International Film Festival in April 2007.

Bamako was one of the cities featured in &quot;Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego?&quot;, an educational computer game staple of the 1980s.

==Notable people==


* Tiken Jah Fakoly
* Amadou &amp; Mariam
* Sangaré Niamoto Ba
* Ousmane Cisse
* Souleymane Cissé
* Idrissa Coulibaly
* Mohamed Coulibaly
* N&#x27;Faly Dante
* Massa Makan Diabaté
* Sidy Fassara Diabaté
* Drissa Diakite
* Mahamadou Diarra
* Drissa Diarra
* Moké Diarra
* Lamine Diawara
* Nare Diawara
* Yaya Dissa
* Adama Drabo
* Bakari Fofana
* Amara Morikè Kallé
* Ibrahim Kante
* Salif Keita
* Makan Konaté
* Amadou Konte
* Seydou Badian Kouyaté
* Abdoulaye Maïga
* Hamchétou Maïga
* Modibo Maiga
* Aya Nakamura
* Alpha Yaya Sangaré
* Adama Sanogo
* Amadou Sidibé
* Malick Sidibé
* Noé Sissoko
* Bakary Soumaré
* Tidiani (Jeff) Tall
* Jean Tigana
* Meiya Tireira
* Ali Farka Touré
* Almamy Toure
* Sidi Touré
* Dramane Traoré
==Gallery==
== Twin towns and sister cities==
Bamako is twinned with:

* Angers, France (1974)
* Ashgabat, Turkmenistan (1974)
* Bobo-Dioulasso, Burkina Faso (1994)
* Bordeaux, France (1999)
* Dakar, Senegal (1973)
* Nouakchott, Mauritania
* Rochester, United States (1975)

==See also==

* Railway stations in Mali
* List of cities in Mali

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 

==External links==
* Bamako-culture.org (French language)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3703" start="0" end="6" title="Bamako" label="Bamako"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="14" end="21" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="42" end="46" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542" start="106" end="117" title="Niger River" label="Niger River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115792" start="297" end="303" title="Cercles of Mali" label="cercle"/>
<link wikidata="Q863915" start="336" end="346" title="Inland port" label="river port"/>
<link wikidata="Q740974" start="368" end="377" title="Koulikoro" label="Koulikoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="466" end="478" title="West Africa" label="West African"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="498" end="503" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515" start="505" end="512" title="Abidjan" label="Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="514" end="518" title="Kano (city)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q183298" start="520" end="526" title="Ibadan" label="Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718" start="528" end="533" title="Dakar" label="Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761" start="539" end="544" title="Accra" label="Accra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442778" start="956" end="976" title="University of Bamako" label="University of Bamako"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867505" start="982" end="1005" title="National Museum of Mali" label="National Museum of Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477311" start="1034" end="1056" title="Grand Mosque of Bamako" label="Grand Mosque of Bamako"/>
<link wikidata="Q721258" start="1066" end="1100" title="Modibo Keita International Airport" label="Modibo Keita International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="1234" end="1246" title="Paleolithic" label="Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="1455" end="1461" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="1556" end="1560" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="1562" end="1567" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q912522" start="1569" end="1577" title="kola nut" label="kola nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q206789" start="1615" end="1630" title="Empire of Ghana" label="Empire of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q184536" start="1701" end="1712" title="Mali Empire" label="Mali Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146970" start="1828" end="1835" title="Soninke people" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q762084" start="1986" end="1998" title="Segou Empire" label="Segou Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q219086" start="2022" end="2032" title="Mungo Park (explorer)" label="Mungo Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q469314" start="2256" end="2268" title="Samory Toure" label="Samory Toure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12690167" start="2321" end="2329" title="Kinieran" label="Kinieran"/>
<link wikidata="Q568712" start="2365" end="2381" title="Wassoulou Empire" label="Wassoulou Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121126" start="2514" end="2539" title="Gustave Borgnis-Desbordes" label="Gustave Borgnis-Desbordes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559790" start="2776" end="2805" title="Battles of Woyowoyanko" label="battles at Woyo Wayanko creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q325164" start="2947" end="2952" title="Kayes" label="Kayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q508014" start="3021" end="3033" title="French Sudan" label="French Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115792" start="3047" end="3053" title="Cercles of Mali" label="cercle"/>
<link wikidata="Q743904" start="3132" end="3142" title="Dakar-Niger railroad" label="A railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718" start="3164" end="3169" title="Dakar" label="Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3425" end="3431" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q313242" start="3558" end="3571" title="Moussa Traoré" label="Moussa Traoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993172" start="3865" end="3908" title="National Congress for Democratic Initiative" label="National Congress for Democratic Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326057" start="4002" end="4015" title="Mountaga Tall" label="Mountaga Tall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838240" start="4025" end="4055" title="Alliance for Democracy in Mali" label="Alliance for Democracy in Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q313239" start="4145" end="4163" title="Alpha Oumar Konaré" label="Alpha Oumar Konaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867855" start="4251" end="4298" title="Association Malienne des Droits de l&amp;#x27;Homme" label="Association Malienne des Droits de l&amp;#x27;Homme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550378" start="4420" end="4452" title="National Union of Malian Workers" label="National Union of Malian Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q170597" start="5276" end="5296" title="Amadou Toumani Touré" label="Amadou Toumani Touré"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757343" start="5403" end="5411" title="jihadist" label="jihadist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="5412" end="5428" title="terrorist attack" label="terrorist attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q86831539" start="5441" end="5473" title="Islamist insurgency in the Sahel" label="Islamist insurgency in the Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21516923" start="5507" end="5530" title="2015 Bamako hotel attack" label="took 170 people hostage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281341" start="5538" end="5550" title="Radisson Blu" label="Radisson Blu"/>
<link wikidata="Q130325301" start="5648" end="5686" title="2024 Bamako attacks" label="series of attacks on 17 September 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q28877411" start="5711" end="5750" title="Jama&amp;#x27;at Nasr al-Islam wal-Muslimin" label="Jama&amp;#x27;at Nasr al-Islam wal-Muslimin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="5762" end="5770" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="5832" end="5840" title="gendarme" label="gendarme"/>
<link wikidata="Q721258" start="5886" end="5907" title="Modibo Keita International Airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q98497406" start="6148" end="6160" title="Assimi Goïta" label="Assimi Goïta"/>
<link wikidata="Q106975429" start="6206" end="6227" title="2021 Malian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="2021 coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174791" start="6442" end="6452" title="escarpment" label="escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397394" start="6735" end="6751" title="Martyrs Bridge (Bamako)" label="Pont des Martyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397513" start="6798" end="6814" title="King Fahd Bridge (Bamako)" label="King Fahd Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7067" end="7082" title="Sotuba Causeway" label="Sotuba Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q33243" start="7170" end="7180" title="Bambara language" label="Bamanankan"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="7439" end="7468" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q113562" start="7488" end="7512" title="tropical savanna climate" label="tropical savanna climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="7514" end="7520" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851721" start="7553" end="7559" title="Sudanian Savanna" label="Sudano"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="7560" end="7565" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="7878" end="7889" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838240" start="9304" end="9334" title="Alliance for Democracy in Mali" label="Alliance for Democracy in Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q27694864" start="9424" end="9433" title="Commune I, Bamako" label="Commune I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9540" end="9552" title="Djalakorodji" label="Djalakorodji"/>
<link wikidata="Q908462" start="9554" end="9565" title="Kati Cercle" label="Kati Cercle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762625" start="9627" end="9640" title="Sangarebougou" label="Sangarebougou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9692" end="9702" title="Gabakourou" label="Gabakourou"/>
<link wikidata="Q27694863" start="9891" end="9901" title="Commune II, Bamako" label="Commune II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542" start="10070" end="10081" title="Niger River" label="Niger River"/>
<link wikidata="Q27890514" start="10275" end="10288" title="Cité Niger" label="Cité du Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q27694865" start="10397" end="10408" title="Commune III, Bamako" label="Commune III"/>
<link wikidata="Q771251" start="10498" end="10502" title="Kati" label="Kati"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10688" end="10700" title="Farako River" label="Farako River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989404" start="11077" end="11087" title="Commune IV, Bamako" label="Commune IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q27694861" start="11404" end="11413" title="Commune V, Bamako" label="Commune V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862075" start="11556" end="11567" title="Kalabancoro" label="Kalabancoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q27694860" start="11766" end="11776" title="Commune VI, Bamako" label="Commune VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5768450" start="12397" end="12407" title="Hippodrome, Bamako" label="Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q407498" start="14012" end="14020" title="Air Mali (2005)" label="Air Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="14125" end="14137" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q896172" start="14373" end="14377" title="Bozo people" label="Bozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885448" start="14517" end="14529" title="Sélingué Dam" label="Sélingué Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q771251" start="14571" end="14575" title="Kati" label="Kati"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087" start="14918" end="14929" title="BCEAO Tower (Bamako)" label="BCEAO Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q620942" start="15130" end="15165" title="Central Bank of West African States" label="Central Bank of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003588" start="15260" end="15271" title="Francophone" label="Francophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="15272" end="15284" title="West African" label="West African"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15308" end="15319" title="Neo-Sudanic" label="Neo-Sudanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q489021" start="15355" end="15383" title="Sudano-Sahelian architecture" label="Sudano-Sahelian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q213507" start="15409" end="15415" title="Djenne" label="Djenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9427" start="15420" end="15428" title="Timbuktu" label="Timbuktu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15466" end="15477" title="Commune III (Bamako)" label="Commune III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397513" start="15599" end="15615" title="King Fahd Bridge" label="King Fahd Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397394" start="15633" end="15647" title="Martyrs Bridge (Bamako)" label="Martyrs Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15919" end="15938" title="Cité Administrative (Bamako)" label="Cité Administrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q313239" start="16098" end="16104" title="Alpha Oumar Konaré" label="Konaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090403" start="16872" end="16896" title="National Library of Mali" label="National Library of Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255542" start="16922" end="16960" title="Institut Français d&amp;#x27;Afrique Noire" label="Institut Français d&amp;#x27;Afrique Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425165" start="17552" end="17582" title="African Photography Encounters" label="African Photography Encounters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867505" start="17629" end="17652" title="National Museum of Mali" label="National Museum of Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="17870" end="17882" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255542" start="17965" end="18003" title="Institut Français d&amp;#x27;Afrique Noire" label="Institut Français d&amp;#x27;Afrique Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q956408" start="18017" end="18031" title="Théodore Monod" label="Théodore Monod"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="18091" end="18100" title="Ukraine" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061732" start="18114" end="18130" title="Yuriy Shumovskyi" label="Yuriy Shumovskyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="18708" end="18714" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18749" end="18764" title="Jean-Loup Pivin" label="Jean-Loup Pivin"/>
<link wikidata="Q313239" start="18846" end="18864" title="Alpha Oumar Konaré" label="Alpha Oumar Konaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425165" start="19030" end="19060" title="African Photography Encounters" label="African Photography Encounters"/>
<link wikidata="Q105706883" start="19131" end="19148" title="Muso Kunda Museum" label="Muso Kunda Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19154" end="19176" title="Bamako Regional Museum" label="Bamako Regional Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19178" end="19188" title="Bamako Zoo" label="Bamako Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19194" end="19218" title="Bamako Botanical Gardens" label="Bamako Botanical Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361048" start="19461" end="19499" title="Palais de la Culture Amadou Hampaté Ba" label="Palais de la Culture Amadou Hampaté Ba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19508" end="19515" title="Point G" label="Point G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211146" start="19544" end="19558" title="Rock art" label="rock paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="19599" end="19602" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q805921" start="19627" end="19644" title="Bamako Initiative" label="Bamako Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="19682" end="19700" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q835798" start="19718" end="19733" title="Budapest-Bamako" label="Budapest-Bamako"/>
<link wikidata="Q181336" start="19777" end="19788" title="Dakar Rally" label="Dakar Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q313318" start="19892" end="19903" title="Salif Keita" label="Salif Keita"/>
<link wikidata="Q334947" start="19925" end="19940" title="Ali Farka Touré" label="Ali Farka Touré"/>
<link wikidata="Q537750" start="20151" end="20157" title="djembe" label="djembe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20284" end="20338" title="University of Social Sciences and Management of Bamako" label="University of Social Sciences and Management of Bamako"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20352" end="20406" title="University of Humanities and Social Sciences of Bamako" label="University of Humanities and Social Sciences of Bamako"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20420" end="20480" title="University of Science, Technology and Technologies of Bamako" label="University of Science, Technology and Technologies of Bamako"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551742" start="20497" end="20549" title="University of Legal and Political Sciences of Bamako" label="University of Legal and Political Sciences of Bamako"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865078" start="20573" end="20600" title="Union Malienne Des Aveugles" label="Union Malienne Des Aveugles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370598" start="20723" end="20740" title="places of worship" label="places of worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="20765" end="20771" title="Islam" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="20796" end="20805" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074249" start="20829" end="20865" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bamako" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bamako"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="20867" end="20882" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272897" start="20924" end="20949" title="Alliance World Fellowship" label="Alliance World Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q494890" start="20952" end="20969" title="Assemblies of God" label="Assemblies of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q108559227" start="20988" end="21000" title="Eyoub Mosque" label="Eyoub Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q743904" start="21021" end="21040" title="Dakar-Niger Railway" label="Dakar-Niger Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718" start="21057" end="21062" title="Dakar" label="Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q771251" start="21067" end="21071" title="Kati" label="Kati"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21073" end="21079" title="Négala" label="Négala"/>
<link wikidata="Q578014" start="21081" end="21085" title="Kita, Mali" label="Kita"/>
<link wikidata="Q325164" start="21091" end="21096" title="Kayes" label="Kayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q609831" start="21123" end="21132" title="San-Pédro, Ivory Coast" label="San-Pédro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="21136" end="21147" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q740974" start="21195" end="21204" title="Koulikoro" label="Koulikoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q642276" start="21212" end="21220" title="Kolokani" label="Kolokani"/>
<link wikidata="Q333476" start="21222" end="21227" title="Ségou" label="Ségou"/>
<link wikidata="Q722827" start="21233" end="21240" title="Sikasso" label="Sikasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q721258" start="21247" end="21281" title="Bamako-Sénou International Airport" label="Bamako-Sénou International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q325164" start="22218" end="22223" title="Kayes" label="Kayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q211227" start="22225" end="22230" title="Mopti" label="Mopti"/>
<link wikidata="Q9427" start="22232" end="22240" title="Timbuktu" label="Timbuktu"/>
<link wikidata="Q722827" start="22242" end="22249" title="Sikasso" label="Sikasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q188904" start="22251" end="22254" title="Gao" label="Gao"/>
<link wikidata="Q650100" start="22260" end="22265" title="Kidal" label="Kidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876140" start="22316" end="22333" title="Aéroports du Mali" label="Aéroports du Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q313242" start="23111" end="23124" title="Moussa Traoré" label="Moussa Traoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397513" start="23130" end="23146" title="King Fahd Bridge (Bamako)" label="King Fahd Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777" start="23743" end="23754" title="Ouagadougou" label="Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986781" start="23825" end="23841" title="pneumonic plague" label="pneumonic plague"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24052" end="24061" title="Yirimadio" label="Yirimadio"/>
<link wikidata="Q178070" start="24504" end="24510" title="Bamako (film)" label="Bamako"/>
<link wikidata="Q308097" start="24530" end="24550" title="Abderrahmane Sissako" label="Abderrahmane Sissako"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="24707" end="24717" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="24722" end="24749" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="24930" end="24939" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015142" start="24943" end="24959" title="New Yorker Films" label="New Yorker Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415209" start="25015" end="25050" title="Film Award of the Council of Europe" label="Film Award of the Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666659" start="25064" end="25100" title="Istanbul International Film Festival" label="Istanbul International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205643" start="25164" end="25202" title="Where in the World Is Carmen Sandiego? (1985 video game)" label="Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego?"/>
<link wikidata="Q263170" start="25284" end="25300" title="Tiken Jah Fakoly" label="Tiken Jah Fakoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q452258" start="25303" end="25322" title="Amadou &amp;amp; Mariam" label="Amadou &amp;amp; Mariam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16269353" start="25325" end="25343" title="Sangaré Niamoto Ba" label="Sangaré Niamoto Ba"/>
<link wikidata="Q389708" start="25346" end="25359" title="Ousmane Cisse" label="Ousmane Cisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248110" start="25362" end="25378" title="Souleymane Cissé (film director)" label="Souleymane Cissé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340587" start="25381" end="25398" title="Idrissa Coulibaly" label="Idrissa Coulibaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454066" start="25401" end="25418" title="Mohamed Coulibaly (swimmer)" label="Mohamed Coulibaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q66428059" start="25421" end="25438" title="N&amp;#x27;Faly Dante" label="N&amp;#x27;Faly Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q540262" start="25441" end="25460" title="Massa Makan Diabaté" label="Massa Makan Diabaté"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483365" start="25463" end="25483" title="Sidy Fassara Diabaté" label="Sidy Fassara Diabaté"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321113" start="25486" end="25500" title="Drissa Diakite" label="Drissa Diakite"/>
<link wikidata="Q219768" start="25503" end="25519" title="Mahamadou Diarra" label="Mahamadou Diarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q673949" start="25522" end="25535" title="Drissa Diarra (footballer, born 1985)" label="Drissa Diarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895619" start="25538" end="25549" title="Moké Diarra" label="Moké Diarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481952" start="25552" end="25566" title="Lamine Diawara" label="Lamine Diawara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965740" start="25569" end="25581" title="Nare Diawara" label="Nare Diawara"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050506" start="25584" end="25594" title="Yaya Dissa" label="Yaya Dissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824045" start="25597" end="25608" title="Adama Drabo" label="Adama Drabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849012" start="25611" end="25624" title="Bakari Fofana" label="Bakari Fofana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071019" start="25627" end="25645" title="Amara Morikè Kallé" label="Amara Morikè Kallé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984611" start="25648" end="25661" title="Ibrahim Kante" label="Ibrahim Kante"/>
<link wikidata="Q964530" start="25664" end="25675" title="Salif Keïta (Malian footballer)" label="Salif Keita"/>
<link wikidata="Q10555516" start="25678" end="25690" title="Makan Konaté" label="Makan Konaté"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840882" start="25693" end="25705" title="Amadou Konte" label="Amadou Konte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100133" start="25708" end="25729" title="Seydou Badian Kouyaté" label="Seydou Badian Kouyaté"/>
<link wikidata="Q113577661" start="25732" end="25747" title="Abdoulaye Maïga (officer)" label="Abdoulaye Maïga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126374" start="25750" end="25765" title="Hamchétou Maïga" label="Hamchétou Maïga"/>
<link wikidata="Q650638" start="25768" end="25780" title="Modibo Maiga" label="Modibo Maiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q37793136" start="25783" end="25795" title="Aya Nakamura" label="Aya Nakamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q124738048" start="25798" end="25816" title="Alpha Yaya Sangaré" label="Alpha Yaya Sangaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q106818437" start="25819" end="25831" title="Adama Sanogo" label="Adama Sanogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q452337" start="25834" end="25847" title="Amadou Sidibé" label="Amadou Sidibé"/>
<link wikidata="Q781717" start="25850" end="25863" title="Malick Sidibé" label="Malick Sidibé"/>
<link wikidata="Q10520253" start="25866" end="25877" title="Noé Sissoko" label="Noé Sissoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q644655" start="25880" end="25894" title="Bakary Soumaré" label="Bakary Soumaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800907" start="25897" end="25916" title="Tidiani (Jeff) Tall" label="Tidiani (Jeff) Tall"/>
<link wikidata="Q295559" start="25919" end="25930" title="Jean Tigana" label="Jean Tigana"/>
<link wikidata="Q14320924" start="25933" end="25946" title="Meiya Tireira" label="Meiya Tireira"/>
<link wikidata="Q334947" start="25949" end="25964" title="Ali Farka Touré" label="Ali Farka Touré"/>
<link wikidata="Q19361375" start="25967" end="25979" title="Almamy Toure" label="Almamy Toure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700481" start="25982" end="25992" title="Sidi Touré" label="Sidi Touré"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993336" start="25995" end="26009" title="Dramane Traoré" label="Dramane Traoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="26066" end="26073" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q38380" start="26083" end="26089" title="Angers" label="Angers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23438" start="26107" end="26115" title="Ashgabat" label="Ashgabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q223761" start="26139" end="26153" title="Bobo-Dioulasso" label="Bobo-Dioulasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="26177" end="26185" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718" start="26203" end="26208" title="Dakar" label="Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3688" start="26227" end="26237" title="Nouakchott" label="Nouakchott"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="26252" end="26261" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284288" start="26301" end="26325" title="Railway stations in Mali" label="Railway stations in Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q499363" start="26328" end="26350" title="List of cities in Mali" label="List of cities in Mali"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56611" wikidata="Q9279" url="?curid=56611" title="Bandar Seri Begawan">
<text>Bandar Seri Begawan (BSB) is the capital and largest city of Brunei. It is officially a municipal area () with an area of and an estimated population of 100,700 as of 2007. It is part of Brunei–Muara District, the smallest yet most populous district which is home to over 70 percent of the country&#x27;s population. It is the country&#x27;s largest urban centre and nominally the country&#x27;s only city. The capital is home to Brunei&#x27;s seat of government, as well as a commercial and cultural centre. It was formerly known as Brunei Town until it was renamed in 1970 in honour of Omar Ali Saifuddien III, the 28th Sultan of Brunei and the father of Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah.

The history of Bandar Seri Begawan can be traced back to the establishment of a Malay stilt settlement on the waters of the Brunei River which became the predecessor of Kampong Ayer today. It became the capital of the Bruneian Sultanate from the 16th century onwards, as well as in the 19th century when it became a British protectorate. The establishment of a British Residency in the 20th century saw the establishment of modern-day administration on land, as well as the gradual resettlement of the riverine dwellers to the land. During World War II, the capital was occupied by the Japanese forces from 1941 and bombed in 1945 upon liberation by Allied forces. Brunei&#x27;s independence from the British was declared on 1 January 1984 on a square in the city centre.

Bandar Seri Begawan is home to Istana Nurul Iman, the largest residential palace in the world by the Guinness World Records, and Omar Ali Saifuddien Mosque, Brunei&#x27;s iconic landmark. It is also home to Kampong Ayer, the largest &#x27;water village&#x27; in the world and nicknamed Venice of the East. It was once the host city of the 20th Southeast Asian Games in 1999 and 8th APEC Summit in 2000.
== Etymology ==
Bandar Seri Begawan was named after Omar Ali Saifuddien III, the 28th Sultan of Brunei. Seri Begawan is part of the royal title bestowed on the late sultan upon his abdication in favor of his son, Hassanal Bolkiah, in 1967. The city was renamed on 4 October 1970 to commemorate his contribution to the modernisation of the country during his reign in the 20th century. Prior to this, the city had been known as Brunei Town or in Malay (literally &quot;Brunei City&quot;).

== History ==

=== Early history ===
The growth and development of Brunei&#x27;s historic capital city unfolded in three main stages. The first stage began in the 17th century with the emergence of a water settlement near present-day Kota Batu. In the second stage, the capital shifted to the area around what is now Kampong Ayer—a collection of water villages. Today, Kampong Ayer, originally the ancient capital built over the Brunei River, serves as a suburb of the modern capital on adjacent land, having thrived particularly during Sultan Bolkiah&#x27;s reign. This city was developed on land during the third phase, particularly after 1906.

Over 300 years of intermittent conflict between the Malay Muslim tribes and Spanish conquistadors, known in Spanish chronicles as the Moro Wars, began in 1578 when Catholic Spaniards attacked Kampong Ayer during the Castilian War. Pirates, many of whom were Muslim sailors from the southern Philippines and Borneo, including destitute princes from the royal families of Sulu and Brunei, took advantage of the void left by Kampong Ayer&#x27;s loss in authority throughout the 16th and 17th centuries. Along with other important sites like Endau and Jolo, the capital became a major hub for piracy and the trade in stolen goods and slaves as the sultan attempted to regulate or tax these pirate towns.Kampong Ayer was still humble and less affluent by the middle of the 19th century, and its look had not altered much since Antonio Pigafetta&#x27;s time. It was dubbed a &quot;Venice of hovels&quot; by Rajah James Brooke in 1841. Houses were constructed on mudflats, encircled by mud at low tide and water at high tide, and a floating market was crowded with people peddling things from canoes. Despite its unattractive appearance, the town was renowned for its packed buildings and the spacious but uncomfortable palace, where Brooke was made to feel quite welcome by the sultan and his court despite the gloomy and basic lodgings.

Known as the &quot;Venice of Borneo,&quot; Kampong Ayer is distinguished by its position on a wide river that empties into a sizeable lake and by the fact that its homes are perched on piles that are around above the tide. The formerly thriving town has lost both size and significance, as seen by its dilapidated buildings and shortage of defences. Once enclosed by a sturdy brick wall and furnished with opulent furnishings, the sultan&#x27;s palace looks like a cheap shed. The town&#x27;s filthy state is exacerbated by offensive smells coming from uncovered mud, where waste builds up. In sharp contrast to the town&#x27;s historical splendour, the majority of the population is made up of slaves and the Sultan&#x27;s and nobility&#x27;s dependents.

=== Colonial era ===
Brunei Town&#x27;s development unfolded in three major phases, with the third beginning in 1906 under Malcolm McArthur&#x27;s guidance, focusing on transitioning the settlement to land. His vision aimed to address the sanitation issues that were most severe in Kampong Ayer, a water village with 8,000–10,000 residents when the Residential system was introduced. McArthur prioritised constructing a land-based colony, starting with his own residence, Bubungan Dua Belas, even though the sultan&#x27;s palace remained in Kampong Ayer. By 1910, Chinese immigrants had opened shops, further establishing the colony on land.

In 1911, the water village, largely populated by Malay Muslim and a small Kedayan community in nearby areas, was home to many houses built over water. The capital endured severe hardship after losing Limbang, which had provided essential resources to river villagers; this loss also undermined Sultan Hashim Jalilul Alam Aqamaddin&#x27;s prestige and authority amid growing economic challenges. In 1920, the area was officially designated as Brunei’s capital and municipal territory. Along the western riverbanks, government buildings and a mosque were constructed in the same year. Later on 1 January 1921, the Brunei Town Sanitary Board (BTSB) was established to oversee its development. In 1922, Sultan Muhammad Jamalul Alam II&#x27;s decision to relocate his palace from Kampung Sultan Lama to the interior of Brunei Town renewed interest in Resident McArthur&#x27;s proposal for relocating the Kampong Ayer community. His involvement inspired Kampong Ayer residents to consider mainland resettlement, and relocation efforts in the 1920s began expanding beyond the city centre to areas like Tungkadeh and Kumbang Pasang, marking a significant shift in Brunei’s urban development.
After the Japanese launched an assault starting in Kuala Belait, Brunei Town was overrun by them on 22 December 1941. To British officers they had seized, the Japanese declared their intention to free Asia from colonial rule. Due to an Allied embargo that hampered the local economy, Brunei Town experienced extreme economic duress during the Japanese occupation. On 22 December 1941, Sultan Ahmad Tajuddin, who was based in Kampong Sumbiling, surrendered to General Tawaguchi. By encouraging agriculture and requiring farmers to turn over a percentage of their harvests, Japan sought to integrate Brunei&#x27;s culture and economy with its own, appointing Ibrahim Mohammad Jahfar as head of administration under Governor Takamura. The Japanese instituted stringent cultural initiatives, such as teaching Japanese language and values and establishing youth groups like the Brunei Malay Organisation, in an effort to exploit the oil riches. The town was brutally bombarded by Allied forces beginning in November 1944 and subjected to extreme brutality by the Japanese military police, the &quot;Kempeitai&quot;.

After three days of warfare, American and Australian forces captured Brunei on 10 June 1945, but Brunei Town suffered significant damage. Brunei Malays had a stronger sense of national identity at this time, and local partners went on to play important roles in the burgeoning nationalist movement. The town&#x27;s wartime population of 16,000 was reduced to a small number of people who remained when the war came to a close due to Allied bombs and food shortages. Residents were forced to observe from neighboring hills or take cover in the bush after the bombers destroyed almost all of the town&#x27;s homes and businesses. Bruneians started reconstructing their homes out of the debris left by the bombs after the Japanese withdrew into the forest in June 1945.

The town became a focal point for important institutional and religious transformation following the war. To further Islamic matters, a board of 19 notable individuals and not all of them were religious experts, was formed in 1948. In order to increase the sultan&#x27;s legitimacy in the face of British scrutiny, this reform sought to standardise religious courts, codify Islamic law, and enhance the management of Islamic services under his direct control. Despite having little contact with Brunei&#x27;s western regions, new groups like the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation contributed to the region&#x27;s religious life in the 1950s, which witnessed a considerable increase in religious activity in the town. Despite the oil industry&#x27;s fast growth in urban areas like Seria and Kuala Belait, no clear regional religious identity was able to emerge because of the close institutional ties between Brunei Town&#x27;s religious establishment and the surrounding districts.In the post-war period, particularly throughout the 1950s and 1960s, Brunei focused on social and religious growth as well as urban reconstruction. Years of occupation during the Pacific War had left the city’s infrastructure severely damaged, necessitating quick solutions like the rapid reconstruction of Brunei Town&#x27;s stores and the temporary thatched-roof rebuild of Masjid Kajang. In 1953, the town saw significant investment through a five-year National Development Plan funded with M$100 million, primarily for infrastructure, following Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddien III&#x27;s successful negotiation with the British for increased corporate taxes and expanded war reparations. In 1953, a major development plan was introduced, dedicating $100 million to the city&#x27;s growth—a significant investment for a community of just 54,000. That same year on 1 August, the BTSB was renamed the Brunei Town Municipal Board (BTMB) and administered by the British Resident until 1959. From then on, the Brunei–Muara District Officer took on dual roles as head and chairman of the BTMB.

Brunei&#x27;s population tripled to 83,877 by 1960 as a result of immigration brought on by oilfield finds in Belait. The capital was now competing economically with the burgeoning cities of Seria and Kuala Belait. Although the majority did not hold Bruneian citizenship, the Chinese community, who were extensively involved in local commerce, increased to a quarter of the population by 1960. The Brunei revolt began on 8 December 1962, when the North Kalimantan National Army quickly captured Brunei Town, the oilfields at Seria, and portions of Sarawak and North Borneo. In response, British forces, including Gurkhas and Royal Marines, regained control of most key centres by 11 December, resulting in the capture or surrender of around 2,700.

=== Independence era ===
Together with the expansion of the oil and gas industry, commercialisation began to transform Brunei&#x27;s capital and a large number of public buildings were constructed, along with the development of a central business district in the 1970s and 1980s. Brunei Town was formally renamed Bandar Seri Begawan on 4 October 1970, in honour of the retired Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddien III, with the renaming ceremony held at the capital. On 1 January 1984, at midnight, Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah declared Brunei&#x27;s independence at the Taman Haji Sir Muda Omar &#x27;Ali Saifuddien. The Ministry of Home Affairs has been in charge of the Bandar Seri Begawan Municipal Board since the country&#x27;s independence in 1984. The new town has grown along Jalan Berakas and Jalan Muara in the north and Jalan Tutong and Jalan Gadong in the west. A 1998 &quot;Asia Week&quot; study ranked Bandar Seri Begawan among Asia&#x27;s top capital cities for 1999 and 2000, highlighting its cleanliness and security as key factors in its recognition.

On 1 August 2007, Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah gave consent for the expansion of the city from to .

==Government==
The city is administered by the Bandar Seri Begawan Municipal Board within Bandar Seri Begawan Municipal Department, a government department within the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Municipal Board was established in 1921, originally as a Sanitary Board (&#x27;) which was, and is still, responsible for maintaining the cleanliness to the then Brunei Town. It achieved the status of &#x27; (municipality) in 1935 with the conversion of the Sanitary Board into the current Municipal Board (&quot;&quot;). 

The city is located in Brunei–Muara District, the smallest yet the most populous district in the country, and as of 1 August 2007, the municipal area has been expanded from to . The Bandar Seri Begawan area encompasses several mukims and villages within the district, including Mukim Berakas &#x27;A&#x27;, Mukim Berakas &#x27;B&#x27;, Mukim Burong Pingai Ayer, Mukim Gadong &#x27;A&#x27;, Mukim Gadong &#x27;B&#x27;, Mukim Kianggeh, Mukim Kilanas, Mukim Kota Batu, Mukim Peramu, Mukim Saba, Mukim Sungai Kebun, Mukim Sungai Kedayan, and Mukim Tamoi.

==Geography==
The Brunei–Muara District, encompassing , is the smallest of Brunei’s western districts and is home to Bandar Seri Begawan. The area contrasts sharply with the mountainous Temburong District to the east, featuring low hills, marshy coastal plains, and narrow alluvial valleys along key rivers. Between Tutong and the capital, hills approach the coast, while the coastal plains around Bandar Seri Begawan remain low and marshy, particularly to the south. Brunei&#x27;s territory is divided by the Limbang region of Sarawak, which historically served as the capital&#x27;s natural hinterland until its cession to Sarawak in 1890. The city is easily accessible from Bukit Kota, a 133-meter (436 ft) hill near the eastern boundary of Brunei&#x27;s western area, while TV broadcasts were transmitted from nearby Subok Hill.

The Brunei River, which flows into Brunei Bay, is one of several waterways converging near Bandar Seri Begawan. Key subcatchments—Kedayan River, Sungai Damuan, and Sungai Imang—enter the low-lying, swampy Brunei River basin at various points, with Kedayan River joining close to the city. The area is bordered by ridges and estuarine plains, experiencing significant urban development. The neighboring Tutong and Belait rivers add to the region’s complex estuarine and floodplain systems. A strip of thick coal seams runs along the coastline between Bandar Seri Begawan and Muara.

===Climate===
Brunei has an equatorial, tropical rainforest climate more subject to the Intertropical Convergence Zone than to the trade winds and rare cyclones. The climate is hot and wet. The city sees heavy precipitation throughout the year, with the northeast monsoon blowing from December to March and the southeast monsoon from around June to October. The wettest day on record is 9 July 2020, when of rainfall was reported at the airport.
==Demographics==
The Bruneian Census 2011 Report estimated the population of Bandar Seri Begawan to be approximately 20,000, while the metropolitan area has around 279,924. The majority of Bruneians are Malays, with Chinese being the most significant minority group. Aboriginal groups such as the Bisaya, Belait, Dusun, Kedayan, Lun Bawang, Murut, and Tutong also exist. They are classified as part of the Malay ethnic groups and have been given the Bumiputera privileges. Large numbers of foreign workers are also found within Brunei and the capital city, with the majority being from Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines, Indonesia (mostly Betawi, Batak, Ambon, Minahasa, Aceh, Malay and Minangkabau), and the Indian subcontinent.

== Main sights and tourism ==

Numerous important historical and religious sites may be found in Bandar Seri Begawan. The Ash-Shaliheen Mosque, Jame&#x27; Asr Hassanil Bolkiah Mosque, and Omar Ali Saifuddien Mosque are notable mosques. Another noteworthy house of worship is the Pro-Cathedral of Our Lady of the Assumption. The tombs of Bolkiah and Sharif Ali in Kota Batu are key historical attractions, symbolising Brunei&#x27;s rich legacy. The Lapau, traditionally used for royal ceremonies, and the Old Lapau, now a gallery in the Brunei History Centre, add to the city&#x27;s cultural significance. The city also hosts several museums. The Brunei Museum, situated in the Kota Batu Archaeological Park, is the country’s largest archaeological site. Other notable museums include the Brunei Darussalam Maritime Museum, Brunei Energy Hub, Kampong Ayer Cultural and Tourism Gallery, Malay Technology Museum, Royal Regalia Museum, and Bubungan Dua Belas.Istana Darussalam and Istana Darul Hana are former royal residences of Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddien III, while the Istana Nurul Iman palace currently serves as the residence of Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah. The Secretariat Building, the oldest government structure, holds the seat of government known as &quot;State Secretary.&quot; The Raja Ayang Mausoleum, dating back to the 15th century, is believed to honor a royal who was punished for incest, and it has since become a cultural site where visitors often seek blessings, despite some damage caused by offerings. Royal Mausoleum is the main burial ground for several sultans and royal family members of Brunei, adding to the country&#x27;s historical significance.

The city&#x27;s suburb incorporates nearby Kampong Ayer, in which houses were built on stilts. It stretches about along the Brunei River. Founded 1,000 years ago, the village is considered the largest stilt settlement in the world, with approximately 30,000 residents and 2,000 houses. The term &quot;Venice of the East&quot; was coined by Pigafetta in honour of the water village that he encountered at Kota Batu. Pigafetta was on Ferdinand Magellan&#x27;s last voyages when he visited Brunei in 1521.

Several parks and trails in the city serve as landmarks of historical and cultural significance. Taman Haji Sir Muda Omar &#x27;Ali Saifuddien, for example, was where Brunei&#x27;s declaration of independence was read on 1 January 1984. Taman Mahkota Jubli Emas, inaugurated on 22 October 2017, commemorates the Golden Jubilee of Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah&#x27;s rule, while the Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Silver Jubilee Park, opened in 2004, celebrates the Silver Jubilee of his reign. Tasek Lama Recreational Park is one of the oldest recognised parks in the country. Additionally, Pusat Belia, Brunei&#x27;s youth centre, was established on 20 December 1969 after being commissioned by then-Crown Prince Hassanal Bolkiah in 1967. The centre, costing B$2 million, includes extensive facilities such as a hall for 1,000 people, a gymnastics hall, an Olympic-sized pool, and a gender-separated hostel, and it celebrated its golden jubilee in 2020.

==Transportation==

===Land===
The capital is accessible by bus from Bandar Seri Begawan to the western regions of the country via road. Connectivity to the exclave of Temburong is provided by the Sultan Haji Omar Ali Saifuddien Bridge, which opened in 2020—before its construction, travellers had to pass through Sarawak, Malaysia, via the town of Limbang. Additionally, Edinburgh Bridge links the city centre to the rest of the capital by spanning the Kedayan River. 

The main bus station in the capital is located in Jalan Cator underneath a multi-story car park. There are six bus routes servicing Bandar Seri Begawan area; the Central Line, Circle Line, Eastern Line, Southern Line, Western Line and Northern Line. Buses operate from 6.30 am until 6.00 pm except for bus No. 1 and 20 for which services extend into the night. All bus routes begin and terminate their journey at the main bus terminal. Buses heading to other towns in Brunei such as Tutong, Seria and Kuala Belait also depart from the main bus terminal and taxicab.

===Air===
Brunei International Airport serves the whole country. It is located from the town centre and can be reached in 10 minutes via the Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah Highway. Royal Brunei Airlines, the national airline, has its head office in the RBA Plaza in the city.

===Water===
Ships up to long may dock in the former port of Dermaga Diraja Bandar Seri Begawan, which is located 17 miles upstream from the mouth of the Brunei River. A 124-foot passenger pier, a 730-foot reinforced concrete wharf, and an electrically powered ramp are among the port&#x27;s amenities. Ships may purchase purified fresh water in the capital for $2.00 per 1,000 gallons. The Marine Department keeps track of use and bills the ship&#x27;s agent. The Bandar Seri Begawan Municipal Board is credited with the money received from these water sales. Between the city and Victoria Harbour, a passenger boat that also transports mail runs every day (except for Sundays). On Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays, an outboard motorboat service also carries mail and people between Bandar Seri Begawan to Bangar in Temburong District.

A water taxi service known as &#x27;penambang&#x27; is used for transportation between downtown Bandar Seri Begawan and Kampong Ayer. Water taxis are the most common means of negotiating the waterways of Kampong Ayer. They can be hailed from the numerous &quot;docking parts&quot; along the banks of the Brunei River. Fares are negotiable. Regular water taxi and boat services depart for Temburong between 7:45 am and 4 pm daily, and also serve the Malaysian towns of Limbang, Lawas, Sundar and Labuan. A speedboat is used for passengers travelling to Penambang from Bangar and Limbang.

==Economy==
The economy of Bandar Seri Begawan includes the production of furniture, textiles, handicrafts, and timber. For shopping, the Gadong commercial area is popular, offering a range of shops, restaurants, and cafes. The traditional Kianggeh Market, believed to be Brunei’s oldest market, mainly sells local cuisine, seafood, and fruit. Gadong Night Market is known for its diverse food offerings, from local specialties like roti john, ambuyat, and satay to exotic fruits such as durian and jackfruit.

==Education==
Bandar Seri Begawan is home to several notable schools across various educational levels. Primary and secondary institutions include the historic Raja Isteri Girls High School, established in 1957 as the country&#x27;s first all-girls secondary school, along with private schools such as Jerudong International School and International School Brunei. The city also has government sixth form centers: Duli Pengiran Muda Al-Muhtadee Billah College for general studies and Hassanal Bolkiah Boys&#x27; Arabic Secondary School for students from Arabic secondary religious schools.

In higher education, Bandar Seri Begawan hosts two national universities: Sultan Sharif Ali Islamic University, focused on Islamic studies, and Seri Begawan Religious Teachers University College, which specialises in training teachers for religious education. Technical and vocational education is available at two campuses of the Institute of Brunei Technical Education and the Brunei Polytechnic. Additionally, two private colleges, Cosmopolitan College of Commerce and Technology and Laksamana College of Business, offer bachelor programs.

==International relations==
Several countries have set up their embassies, commissions or consulates in Bandar Seri Begawan, including Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Burkina Faso, Burma (Myanmar), Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Finland, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Japan, Laos, Malaysia, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Korea, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, United Kingdom, United States and Vietnam.

==Sister cities==
* Nanjing, PR China

==Gallery==
== Notes ==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Municipal Department of Bandar Seri Begawan 
* Tourist Map of Bandar Seri Begawan
* Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei – Weather.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9279" start="0" end="19" title="Bandar Seri Begawan" label="Bandar Seri Begawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9279" start="21" end="24" title="Bandar Seri Begawan" label="BSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="33" end="40" title="capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="61" end="67" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041553" start="88" end="102" title="Municipalities of Brunei" label="municipal area"/>
<link wikidata="Q153009" start="187" end="208" title="Brunei–Muara District" label="Brunei–Muara District"/>
<link wikidata="Q9279" start="534" end="545" title="Bandar Seri Begawan" label="Brunei Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q40512" start="588" end="611" title="Omar Ali Saifuddien III" label="Omar Ali Saifuddien III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451936" start="622" end="638" title="Sultan of Brunei" label="Sultan of Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q57327" start="664" end="680" title="Hassanal Bolkiah" label="Hassanal Bolkiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978967" start="763" end="768" title="Bruneian Malay people" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q407792" start="807" end="819" title="Brunei River" label="Brunei River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990199" start="852" end="864" title="Kampong Ayer" label="Kampong Ayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q887803" start="901" end="919" title="Bruneian Sultanate (1368–1888)" label="Bruneian Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1223" end="1235" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243087" start="1253" end="1284" title="Japanese occupation of British Borneo" label="occupied by the Japanese forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303362" start="1442" end="1453" title="Pusat Bandar, Brunei" label="city centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323932" start="1487" end="1504" title="Istana Nurul Iman" label="Istana Nurul Iman"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="1557" end="1579" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q842921" start="1585" end="1611" title="Omar Ali Saifuddien Mosque" label="Omar Ali Saifuddien Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990199" start="1663" end="1675" title="Kampong Ayer" label="Kampong Ayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633505" start="1742" end="1760" title="Venice of the East" label="Venice of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192491" start="1795" end="1821" title="1999 Southeast Asian Games" label="20th Southeast Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="1838" end="1842" title="APEC" label="APEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q40512" start="1911" end="1934" title="Omar Ali Saifuddien III" label="Omar Ali Saifuddien III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451936" start="1945" end="1961" title="Sultan of Brunei" label="Sultan of Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q57327" start="2072" end="2088" title="Hassanal Bolkiah" label="Hassanal Bolkiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="2304" end="2309" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016" start="2511" end="2523" title="17th century" label="17th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q12688931" start="2582" end="2591" title="Kota Batu, Brunei" label="Kota Batu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990199" start="2665" end="2677" title="Kampong Ayer" label="Kampong Ayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q407792" start="2777" end="2789" title="Brunei River" label="Brunei River"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="2803" end="2809" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q31800" start="2892" end="2899" title="Bolkiah" label="Bolkiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932099" start="3130" end="3139" title="Malay–Portuguese conflicts" label="Moro Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q31880" start="3212" end="3225" title="Castilian War" label="Castilian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q422065" start="3366" end="3370" title="Sultanate of Sulu" label="Sulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017" start="3471" end="3475" title="16th century" label="16th"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016" start="3480" end="3494" title="17th centuries" label="17th centuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375966" start="3534" end="3539" title="Endau" label="Endau"/>
<link wikidata="Q860298" start="3544" end="3548" title="Jolo" label="Jolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955" start="3764" end="3776" title="19th century" label="19th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q310922" start="3818" end="3835" title="Antonio Pigafetta" label="Antonio Pigafetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q441276" start="3897" end="3915" title="Rajah James Brooke" label="Rajah James Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q31796" start="3952" end="3960" title="Mudflat" label="mudflats"/>
<link wikidata="Q171529" start="4082" end="4088" title="Canoe" label="canoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27786470" start="5209" end="5225" title="Malcolm Stewart Hannibal McArthur" label="Malcolm McArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430790" start="5435" end="5453" title="List of administrators of British Brunei" label="Residential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q25227131" start="5558" end="5576" title="Bubungan Dua Belas" label="Bubungan Dua Belas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084118" start="5778" end="5790" title="Islam in Brunei" label="Malay Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262236" start="5803" end="5810" title="Kedayan" label="Kedayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181642" start="5929" end="5936" title="Limbang" label="Limbang"/>
<link wikidata="Q40101" start="6030" end="6059" title="Hashim Jalilul Alam Aqamaddin" label="Hashim Jalilul Alam Aqamaddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40110" start="6435" end="6459" title="Muhammad Jamalul Alam II" label="Muhammad Jamalul Alam II"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412196" start="6504" end="6523" title="Kampong Sultan Lama" label="Kampung Sultan Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990199" start="6628" end="6640" title="Kampong Ayer" label="Kampong Ayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303362" start="6798" end="6809" title="Pusat Bandar, Brunei" label="city centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642441" start="6824" end="6833" title="Tungkadeh" label="Tungkadeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12690659" start="6838" end="6852" title="Kumbang Pasang" label="Kumbang Pasang"/>
<link wikidata="Q588045" start="6964" end="6976" title="Kuala Belait" label="Kuala Belait"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="7149" end="7155" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243087" start="7256" end="7275" title="Japanese occupation of Brunei" label="Japanese occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40111" start="7305" end="7319" title="Ahmad Tajuddin" label="Ahmad Tajuddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12689035" start="7338" end="7355" title="Kampong Sumbiling Lama" label="Kampong Sumbiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q575796" start="7372" end="7389" title="Kiyotake Kawaguchi" label="General Tawaguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21078214" start="7570" end="7593" title="Ibrahim Mohammad Jahfar" label="Ibrahim Mohammad Jahfar"/>
<link wikidata="Q665124" start="8007" end="8016" title="Kempeitai" label="Kempeitai"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="9167" end="9178" title="Islamic law" label="Islamic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="9339" end="9374" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159472" start="9576" end="9581" title="Seria" label="Seria"/>
<link wikidata="Q588045" start="9586" end="9598" title="Kuala Belait" label="Kuala Belait"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="9956" end="9967" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q129262213" start="10233" end="10258" title="National Development Plan (Brunei)" label="National Development Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344772" start="10271" end="10273" title="Malayan dollar" label="M$"/>
<link wikidata="Q40512" start="10333" end="10356" title="Omar Ali Saifuddien III" label="Omar Ali Saifuddien III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299246" start="11262" end="11275" title="Brunei revolt" label="Brunei revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721260" start="11311" end="11341" title="North Kalimantan National Army" label="North Kalimantan National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055766" start="11376" end="11394" title="Seria oil field" label="oilfields at Seria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="11412" end="11419" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="11424" end="11436" title="Sabah" label="North Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289772" start="11477" end="11484" title="Royal Gurkha Rifles" label="Gurkhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="11489" end="11502" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q57327" start="12109" end="12125" title="Hassanal Bolkiah" label="Hassanal Bolkiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q61103668" start="12149" end="12161" title="National Day (Brunei)" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q130535609" start="12169" end="12214" title="Taman Haji Sir Muda Omar &amp;#x27;Ali Saifuddien" label="Taman Haji Sir Muda Omar &amp;#x27;Ali Saifuddien"/>
<link wikidata="Q50824964" start="12220" end="12244" title="Ministry of Home Affairs (Brunei)" label="Ministry of Home Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866627" start="12486" end="12495" title="Asia Week" label="Asia Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q153009" start="13309" end="13330" title="Brunei–Muara District" label="Brunei–Muara District"/>
<link wikidata="Q50427" start="13367" end="13375" title="districts of Brunei" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q60047" start="13513" end="13519" title="mukims of Brunei" label="mukims"/>
<link wikidata="Q48731335" start="13524" end="13532" title="villages of Brunei" label="villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952924" start="13564" end="13591" title="Mukim Berakas &amp;#x27;A&amp;#x27;" label="Mukim Berakas &amp;#x27;A&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024412" start="13593" end="13620" title="Mukim Berakas &amp;#x27;B&amp;#x27;" label="Mukim Berakas &amp;#x27;B&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024423" start="13622" end="13646" title="Mukim Burong Pingai Ayer" label="Mukim Burong Pingai Ayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364102" start="13648" end="13674" title="Mukim Gadong &amp;#x27;A&amp;#x27;" label="Mukim Gadong &amp;#x27;A&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866969" start="13676" end="13702" title="Mukim Gadong &amp;#x27;B&amp;#x27;" label="Mukim Gadong &amp;#x27;B&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365664" start="13704" end="13718" title="Mukim Kianggeh" label="Mukim Kianggeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365651" start="13720" end="13733" title="Mukim Kilanas" label="Mukim Kilanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365632" start="13735" end="13750" title="Mukim Kota Batu" label="Mukim Kota Batu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365595" start="13752" end="13764" title="Mukim Peramu" label="Mukim Peramu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490424" start="13766" end="13776" title="Mukim Saba" label="Mukim Saba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490464" start="13778" end="13796" title="Mukim Sungai Kebun" label="Mukim Sungai Kebun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490416" start="13798" end="13818" title="Mukim Sungai Kedayan" label="Mukim Sungai Kedayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490448" start="13824" end="13835" title="Mukim Tamoi" label="Mukim Tamoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q40398" start="14154" end="14160" title="Tutong District" label="Tutong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181642" start="14348" end="14355" title="Limbang" label="Limbang"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="14366" end="14373" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354" start="14431" end="14441" title="hinterland" label="hinterland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12689034" start="14659" end="14669" title="Kampong Subok" label="Subok Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q407792" start="14676" end="14688" title="Brunei River" label="Brunei River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182027" start="14707" end="14717" title="Brunei Bay" label="Brunei Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640230" start="14802" end="14815" title="Kedayan River" label="Kedayan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461828" start="15074" end="15080" title="Tutong River" label="Tutong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443386" start="15085" end="15091" title="Belait River" label="Belait"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="15294" end="15321" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q753858" start="15342" end="15372" title="Intertropical Convergence Zone" label="Intertropical Convergence Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="15385" end="15395" title="trade wind" label="trade wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="15406" end="15413" title="cyclone" label="cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="15518" end="15525" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978967" start="15903" end="15909" title="Bruneian Malay people" label="Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903558" start="15916" end="15923" title="Chinese Bruneian" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q866036" start="15997" end="16003" title="Bisaya (Borneo)" label="Bisaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894202" start="16005" end="16011" title="Belait people" label="Belait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267760" start="16013" end="16018" title="Dusun people" label="Dusun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262236" start="16020" end="16027" title="Kedayan" label="Kedayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60510" start="16029" end="16039" title="Lun Bawang" label="Lun Bawang"/>
<link wikidata="Q476393" start="16041" end="16046" title="Murut people" label="Murut"/>
<link wikidata="Q107618498" start="16052" end="16058" title="Tutong people" label="Tutong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997287" start="16150" end="16160" title="Bumiputera (Brunei)" label="Bumiputera"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="16411" end="16430" title="South Asia" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q29830347" start="16555" end="16575" title="Ash-Shaliheen Mosque" label="Ash-Shaliheen Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q20410627" start="16577" end="16615" title="Jame&amp;#x27; Asr Hassanil Bolkiah Mosque" label="Jame&amp;#x27; Asr Hassanil Bolkiah Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q842921" start="16621" end="16647" title="Omar Ali Saifuddien Mosque" label="Omar Ali Saifuddien Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q24258950" start="16712" end="16755" title="Pro-Cathedral of Our Lady of the Assumption (Brunei)" label="Pro-Cathedral of Our Lady of the Assumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q29089" start="16782" end="16792" title="Sharif Ali" label="Sharif Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488125" start="16881" end="16886" title="Lapau" label="Lapau"/>
<link wikidata="Q111716693" start="16937" end="16946" title="Old Lapau" label="Old Lapau"/>
<link wikidata="Q46190671" start="16969" end="16990" title="Brunei History Centre" label="Brunei History Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756903" start="17079" end="17092" title="Brunei Museum" label="Brunei Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q107711080" start="17110" end="17139" title="Kota Batu Archaeological Park" label="Kota Batu Archaeological Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q28446976" start="17221" end="17254" title="Brunei Darussalam Maritime Museum" label="Brunei Darussalam Maritime Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q115946015" start="17256" end="17273" title="Brunei Energy Hub" label="Brunei Energy Hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q107701832" start="17275" end="17316" title="Kampong Ayer Cultural and Tourism Gallery" label="Kampong Ayer Cultural and Tourism Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755110" start="17318" end="17341" title="Malay Technology Museum" label="Malay Technology Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21787576" start="17343" end="17363" title="Royal Regalia Museum" label="Royal Regalia Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25227131" start="17369" end="17387" title="Bubungan Dua Belas" label="Bubungan Dua Belas"/>
<link wikidata="Q115951068" start="17388" end="17405" title="Istana Darussalam" label="Istana Darussalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q123198403" start="17410" end="17427" title="Istana Darul Hana" label="Istana Darul Hana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323932" start="17501" end="17518" title="Istana Nurul Iman" label="Istana Nurul Iman"/>
<link wikidata="Q115959420" start="17592" end="17612" title="Secretariat Building, Brunei" label="Secretariat Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q130633369" start="17691" end="17706" title="State Secretary of Brunei" label="State Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q131191675" start="17718" end="17738" title="Raja Ayang Mausoleum" label="Raja Ayang Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25053893" start="17949" end="17964" title="Royal Mausoleum (Brunei)" label="Royal Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617340" start="18189" end="18195" title="Stilts (architecture)" label="stilts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="18534" end="18552" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Ferdinand Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130535609" start="18703" end="18748" title="Taman Haji Sir Muda Omar &amp;#x27;Ali Saifuddien" label="Taman Haji Sir Muda Omar &amp;#x27;Ali Saifuddien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464916" start="18787" end="18814" title="declaration of independence" label="declaration of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q48791736" start="18843" end="18867" title="Taman Mahkota Jubli Emas" label="Taman Mahkota Jubli Emas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42322239" start="18918" end="18959" title="Golden Jubilee of Hassanal Bolkiah" label="Golden Jubilee of Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q48791724" start="18983" end="19031" title="Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Silver Jubilee Park" label="Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Silver Jubilee Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550874" start="19064" end="19078" title="Silver Jubilee" label="Silver Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q130382923" start="19093" end="19121" title="Tasek Lama Recreational Park" label="Tasek Lama Recreational Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302299" start="19217" end="19229" title="Youth center" label="youth centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q263285" start="19723" end="19732" title="Temburong District" label="Temburong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14629159" start="19752" end="19790" title="Sultan Haji Omar Ali Saifuddien Bridge" label="Sultan Haji Omar Ali Saifuddien Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="19869" end="19876" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181642" start="19904" end="19911" title="Limbang" label="Limbang"/>
<link wikidata="Q132160132" start="19927" end="19943" title="Edinburgh Bridge" label="Edinburgh Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="20583" end="20590" title="taxicab" label="taxicab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148514" start="20603" end="20631" title="Brunei International Airport" label="Brunei International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050783" start="20767" end="20788" title="Royal Brunei Airlines" label="Royal Brunei Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q131341997" start="20923" end="20957" title="Dermaga Diraja Bandar Seri Begawan" label="Dermaga Diraja Bandar Seri Begawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q214504" start="21444" end="21460" title="Labuan" label="Victoria Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125479" start="21671" end="21677" title="Bangar, Brunei" label="Bangar"/>
<link wikidata="Q263285" start="21681" end="21699" title="Temburong District" label="Temburong District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643" start="21704" end="21714" title="water taxi" label="water taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990199" start="21822" end="21834" title="Kampong Ayer" label="Kampong Ayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q407792" start="22006" end="22018" title="Brunei River" label="Brunei River"/>
<link wikidata="Q263285" start="22090" end="22099" title="Temburong District" label="Temburong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181642" start="22170" end="22177" title="Limbang" label="Limbang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503576" start="22179" end="22184" title="Lawas" label="Lawas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22186" end="22192" title="Sundar, Malaysia" label="Sundar"/>
<link wikidata="Q214504" start="22197" end="22203" title="Labuan Territory" label="Labuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q622416" start="22207" end="22216" title="speedboat" label="speedboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125479" start="22269" end="22275" title="Bangar, Brunei" label="Bangar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14745" start="22364" end="22373" title="furniture" label="furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="22375" end="22382" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q877729" start="22385" end="22395" title="handicraft" label="handicraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="22402" end="22408" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516428" start="22428" end="22434" title="Gadong, Brunei" label="Gadong"/>
<link wikidata="Q20465898" start="22530" end="22545" title="Kianggeh Market" label="Kianggeh Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q20465913" start="22634" end="22653" title="Kampong Kiarong" label="Gadong Night Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q9279" start="22961" end="22990" title="Raja Isteri Girls High School" label="Raja Isteri Girls High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995358" start="23103" end="23132" title="Jerudong International School" label="Jerudong International School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052865" start="23137" end="23164" title="International School Brunei" label="International School Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q30625453" start="23215" end="23260" title="Duli Pengiran Muda Al-Muhtadee Billah College" label="Duli Pengiran Muda Al-Muhtadee Billah College"/>
<link wikidata="Q20462958" start="23285" end="23336" title="Hassanal Bolkiah Boys&amp;#x27; Arabic Secondary School" label="Hassanal Bolkiah Boys&amp;#x27; Arabic Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452888" start="23466" end="23502" title="Sultan Sharif Ali Islamic University" label="Sultan Sharif Ali Islamic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q24915008" start="23536" end="23586" title="Seri Begawan Religious Teachers University College" label="Seri Begawan Religious Teachers University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q24887199" start="23723" end="23762" title="Institute of Brunei Technical Education" label="Institute of Brunei Technical Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205340" start="23771" end="23789" title="Brunei Polytechnic" label="Brunei Polytechnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q129004317" start="23827" end="23874" title="Cosmopolitan College of Commerce and Technology" label="Cosmopolitan College of Commerce and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479779" start="23879" end="23908" title="Laksamana College of Business" label="Laksamana College of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="24082" end="24092" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="24103" end="24108" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="24110" end="24122" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="24124" end="24139" title="Myanmar" label="Burma (Myanmar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="24141" end="24149" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="24159" end="24164" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="24206" end="24215" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="24224" end="24228" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="24230" end="24238" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="24266" end="24277" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="24279" end="24283" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15216581" start="24295" end="24306" title="Embassy of the Philippines, Bandar Seri Begawan" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="24324" end="24336" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="24338" end="24347" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="24349" end="24360" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="24383" end="24389" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="24391" end="24399" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="24435" end="24442" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="24465" end="24472" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56612" wikidata="Q2351915" url="?curid=56612" title="Stopper">
<text>Stopper may refer to:

* Bung, a plug used to stop the opening of a container
** Laboratory rubber stopper, a specific type of bung
* Plug (sanitation), used to stop a drainage outlet
* Defender (association football), in soccer (association football)
* Milkor 37/38mm and 40mm Stopper, a gun
* Alternative name for a whitewater hole, in whitewater kayaking
* A local train that calls at almost every station, including very small ones
* Stopper, in the game of bridge
* Stopper, in baseball, a key starting or relief pitcher
* Slang for stopwatch, a handheld timepiece designed to measure the amount of time
* Stopper knot, a type of a knot at the end of the rope
* Stopper, a common name for some plant species in the genus &quot;Eugenia&quot;

==See also==
* 
* Stop (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2351915" start="0" end="7" title="Stopper" label="Stopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11981837" start="25" end="29" title="Bung" label="Bung"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345665" start="81" end="106" title="Laboratory rubber stopper" label="Laboratory rubber stopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q679186" start="134" end="151" title="Plug (sanitation)" label="Plug (sanitation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="186" end="217" title="Defender (association football)" label="Defender (association football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858115" start="254" end="285" title="Milkor 37/38mm and 40mm Stopper" label="Milkor 37/38mm and 40mm Stopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844833" start="318" end="333" title="whitewater hole" label="whitewater hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q14626453" start="362" end="373" title="local train" label="local train"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="438" end="445" title="Glossary of contract bridge terms#stopper" label="Stopper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="471" end="478" title="Glossary of baseball (S)#stopper" label="Stopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q843994" start="538" end="547" title="stopwatch" label="stopwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623437" start="611" end="623" title="Stopper knot" label="Stopper knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q975998" start="732" end="739" title="Eugenia" label="Eugenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q924703" start="765" end="786" title="Stop (disambiguation)" label="Stop (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
