<doc id="56274" wikidata="Q1800" url="?curid=56274" title="Kochi">
<text>Kochi ( , ), formerly known as Cochin ( ), is a major port city along the Malabar Coast of India bordering the Laccadive Sea. It is part of the district of Ernakulam in the state of Kerala. The city is also commonly referred to as Ernakulam. As of 2011, the Kochi Municipal Corporation had a population of 677,381 over an area of 94.88 km2, and the larger Kochi urban agglomeration had over 2.1 million inhabitants within an area of 440 km2, making it the largest and the most populous metropolitan area in Kerala. Kochi city is also part of the Greater Cochin development region and is classified as a Tier-II city by the Government of India. The civic body that governs the city is the Kochi Municipal Corporation, which was constituted in the year 1967, and the statutory bodies that oversee its development are the Greater Cochin Development Authority (GCDA) and the Goshree Islands Development Authority (GIDA).

Nicknamed the Queen of the Arabian Sea, Kochi was an important spice trading center on the west coast of India from antiquity. The port of Muziris traded with the Romans, Persians, Arabs, and Chinese. From 1503 to 1663, the Portuguese established Fort Kochi (Fort Emmanuel), before it was taken over by the Dutch in 1663. The Dutch then ceded the area to the United Kingdom. Kochi remained under the control of the Kingdom of Cochin, which became a princely state of the British. Today, Kochi is known as the financial, commercial and industrial capital of Kerala. Kochi is the only city in the country to have a water metro system, which has been described as the world&#x27;s largest electric boat metro transportation infrastructure. Kochi also successfully conducted the test flight for Kerala&#x27;s first seaplane service. The Cochin International Airport is the first in the world to operate solely on solar energy. Kochi was one of the 28 Indian cities among the emerging 440 global cities that will contribute 50% of the world GDP by 2025, in a 2011 study done by the McKinsey Global Institute. In July 2018, Kochi was ranked the topmost emerging future megacity in India by global professional services firm JLL.

Kochi&#x27;s rich cultural heritage has made it a popular tourist destination among both domestic and international travellers. It has been hosting India&#x27;s first art biennale, the Kochi-Muziris Biennale, since 2012, which attracts international artists and tourists. The Chinese fishing nets, introduced during the 14th century by the Chinese, are a symbol of the city and a popular tourist attraction in themselves. Other landmarks include Mattanchery Palace, Marine Drive, Venduruthy Bridge, Church of Saint Francis and Mattanchery Bridge. The city ranks first in the total number of international and domestic tourist arrivals in Kerala. The city was ranked the sixth best tourist destination in India according to a survey conducted by the Nielsen Company on behalf of the Outlook Traveller magazine. In October 2019, Kochi was ranked seventh in Lonely Planet&#x27;s list of top 10 cities in the world to visit in 2020. In November 2023, the British Luxury travel magazine Condé Nast Traveller rated Kochi as one of the best places to go in Asia in 2024.

== Etymology ==
Ancient travellers and tradesmen referred to Kochi, variously alluding to it as &quot;Cocym&quot;, &quot;Cochym&quot;, &quot;Cochin&quot;, and &quot;Kochi&quot;. The Cochin Jewish community called Cochin &quot;Kogin&quot; (), which is seen in the seal of the synagogue owned by the community. The Arab merchants called this place &quot;Kashi&quot;, which is seen in the books such as &quot;Tuhfat Ul Mujahideen&quot;. The origin of the name &quot;Kochi&quot; is thought to be the Malayalam word &quot;kochu azhi&quot;, meaning &#x27;small lagoon&#x27;. Accounts by Italian explorers Nicolo Conti (15th century), and Fra Paoline in the 17th century say that it was called &quot;Kochchi&quot;, named after the river connecting the backwaters to the sea. After the arrival of the Portuguese, and later the British, the name &quot;Cochin&quot; stuck as the official appellation. The city reverted to a closer transcription of its original Malayalam name, &quot;Kochi&quot;, in 1996. This change in name was challenged by the city municipal corporation, but the court later dismissed the plea.

== History ==
Muziris, a port somewhere north of Kochi (mostly identified with Kodungallur in Thrissur district), was the centre of Indian spice trade for many centuries, and was known to the Arabs, Yavanas (Greeks and Romans) as well as Jews, Syrians, and Chinese since ancient times. Kochi rose to significance as a trading centre after the port Muziris around Kodungallur (Cranganore) was destroyed by the massive flooding of Periyar in 1341. The earliest documented references to Kochi occur in books written by Chinese voyager Ma Huan during his visit to Kochi in the 15th century as part of Admiral Zheng He&#x27;s treasure fleet. There are also references to Kochi in accounts written by Italian traveller Niccolò Da Conti, who visited Kochi in 1440. The ruler of Perumpadappu (near Ponnani) fled to Kodungallur in the early medieval period, when the Zamorin of Calicut annexed Ponnani region, after Tirunavaya war. They later moved to Kochi and established the Kingdom of Cochin. When Vasco Da Gama landed at Kozhikode and the Zamorin of Calicut fought against the Portuguese with Kunjali Marakkar, the ruler of Cochin aligned with the Portuguese.

On the Malabar coast during the early 15th century, Calicut and Kochi were in an intense rivalry, so the Ming dynasty of China decided to intervene by granting special status to Kochi and its ruler known as &quot;Keyili&quot; (可亦里) to the Chinese. Calicut had been the dominant port-city in the region, but Kochi was emerging as its main rival. For the fifth Ming treasure voyage, Admiral Zheng He was instructed to confer a seal upon &quot;Keyili&quot; of Kochi and enfeoff a mountain in his kingdom as the &quot;Zhenguo Zhi Shan&quot; (鎮國之山, Mountain Which Protects the Country). Zheng He delivered a stone tablet, inscribed with a proclamation composed by the Yongle Emperor himself, to Kochi. As long as Kochi remained under the protection of Ming China, the Zamorin of Calicut was unable to invade Kochi and a military conflict was averted. The cessation of the Ming treasure voyages consequently had negative results for Kochi, as the Zamorin of Calicut would eventually launch an invasion against Kochi. In the late 15th century, the Zamorin occupied Kochi and installed his representative as the king of the port-city.

According to many historians, the precursor state to Kingdom of Kochi came into existence in the early 12th century, after the fall of the Chera Kingdom. The reign of the Kingdom was hereditary, and the family that ruled over the region was known as the &quot;Perumpadappu Swaroopam&quot; in the local vernacular.

The port at Kozhikode held superior economic and political position in medieval Kerala coast, while Kannur, Kollam, and Kochi, were commercially important secondary ports, where the traders from various parts of the world would gather. The Portuguese arrived at Kappad Kozhikode in 1498 during the Age of Discovery, thus opening a direct sea route from Europe to India. Portuguese navigator, Pedro Álvares Cabral founded the first European settlement in India at Kochi in 1500. From 1503 to 1663, Fort Kochi (Fort Emmanuel) was ruled by Portugal. This Portuguese period was a harrowing time for the Saint Thomas Christians, Muslim Mappilas, and the Jews, as the Inquisition was active in Portuguese India. The ruler of the Kingdom of Tanur, who was a vassal to the Zamorin of Calicut, sided with the Portuguese, against his overlord at Kozhikode. As a result, the Kingdom of Tanur (&quot;Vettathunadu&quot;) became one of the earliest Portuguese Colonies in India. The ruler of Tanur also sided with Cochin. Many of the members of the royal family of Cochin in 16th and 17th centuries were selected from Vettom. However, the Tanur forces under the king fought for the Zamorin of Calicut in the Battle of Cochin (1504). However, the allegiance of the Mappila merchants in Tanur region still stayed under the Zamorin of Calicut. Kochi hosted the grave of Vasco da Gama, the first European explorer to set sail for India, who was buried at St. Francis Church until his remains were returned to Portugal in 1539. The Portuguese rule was followed by that of the Dutch who renamed Fort Immanuel as Fort Stormsburg. In meantime, the Royal Family of Kochi relocated the capital of Kochi Kingdom to Thrissur, leaving nominal authority over Islands of Kochi. In 1664, Fort Kochi Municipality was established by Dutch, making it the first municipality in Indian subcontinent, which got dissolved when Dutch authority got weaker in the 18th century. The remaining part of Kochi were governed by governors of Kochi Kingdom. By 1773, the Mysore ruler Hyder Ali extended his conquest in the Malabar region to Kochi forcing it to become a tributary of Mysore. The hereditary Prime Ministership of Kochi held by the Paliath Achans ended during this period.

Meanwhile, the Dutch, fearing an outbreak of war on the United Provinces, signed the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814 with the United Kingdom, under which Kochi was ceded to the United Kingdom in exchange for the island of Bangka, east of Sumatra. However, there are evidences of English habitation in the region even before the signing of the treaty. In 1866, Fort Kochi municipality was reinstalled. Fort Kochi, which was a part of Malabar District until 1956, was made a municipality on 1 November 1866, along with Kannur, Thalassery, Kozhikode, and Palakkad, according to the Madras Act 10 of 1865 (Amendment of the Improvements in Towns act 1850) of the British Indian Empire. Its first Municipal Council seating contest was conducted in 1883. In 1896, H.H. Rama Varma XV, The Maharaja of Cochin, initiated local administration by forming town councils in Mattancherry and Ernakulam. In 1907, the Governor of the Madras Presidency, Sir Arthur Lawley and his brother, Beilby Lawley, 3rd Baron Wenlock, Governor of Madras, 1891 to 1896, left for an official tour of Cochin and Travancore, which lasted from 25 January to 14 February. On 26 January, they were met by His Highness the Rajah of Cochin who gave a State Dinner in their honour at Ernakulam. By the 1870s, the capital of Kochi Kingdom was relocated again to Kochi Suburb of Tripunithura. In 1910, Ernakulam became the administrative capital of Kochi Kingdom with establishment of Royal Secretariat and State Durbar. The offices of the Diwan and High court were soon moved into Ernakulam.

In 1925, Kochi legislative assembly was constituted due to public pressure on the state. Towards the early 20th century, trade at the port had increased substantially, and the need to develop the port was greatly felt. Harbour engineer Robert Bristow was brought to Kochi in 1920 under the direction of Lord Willingdon, then the Governor of Madras. In a span of 21 years, he transformed Kochi as one of the safest harbours in the peninsula, where ships berthed alongside the newly reclaimed inner harbour equipped with a long array of steam cranes.

In 1947, when India gained independence from the British colonial rule, Cochin was the first princely state to join India willingly.
In 1949, Travancore–Cochin state came into being with the merger of Cochin and Travancore. The King of Travancore was the Rajpramukh of the Travancore–Cochin Union from 1949 to 1956. Travancore-Cochin, was in turn merged with the Malabar district of the Madras State. Finally, the Government of India&#x27;s States Reorganisation Act (1956) inaugurated a new state—Kerala—incorporating Travancore-Cochin (excluding the four southern Taluks which were merged with Tamil Nadu), Malabar District, and the taluk of Kasargod, South Kanara. On 9 July 1960 the Mattancherry council passed a resolution—which was forwarded to the government—requesting the formation of a municipal corporation by combining the existing municipalities of Fort Kochi, Mattancherry, and Ernakulam. The government appointed a commission to study the feasibility of the suggested merger. Based on its report, the Kerala Legislative Assembly approved the corporation&#x27;s formation. On 1 November 1967, exactly eleven years since the establishment of the state of Kerala, the Kochi Municipal Corporation came into existence. The merger leading to the establishment of the corporation, was between the municipalities of Ernakulam, Mattancherry and Fort Kochi, along with that of the Willingdon Island, four panchayats (Palluruthy, Vennala, Vyttila and Edappally), and the small islands of Gundu and Ramanthuruth.
The Kochi and Ernakulam districts formed on 1 April 1958 carving areas of the erstwhile Travancore-Kochi-Malabar regions. A major portion of the district is from the Kochi kingdom.

The city&#x27;s economic growth gathered momentum after economic reforms in India introduced by the central government in the early 1990s. Since 2000, the service sector has energised the city&#x27;s economy. The establishment of several industrial parks based on IT and other port based infrastructure triggered a construction and realty boom in the city. Over the years, Kochi has witnessed rapid commercialisation, and has today grown into the commercial hub of Kerala.

== Geography and climate ==

=== Geography ===

Kochi is located on the southwest coast of India at , with a corporation limit area of . Over the years, the city has expanded considerably outside the corporation limit set in 1967, although the official city limits haven&#x27;t been changed. The city straddles the backwaters, encompassing the northern end of a peninsula, several islands and a portion of the mainland. To the west lies the Laccadive Sea, and to the east is the urbanised region in the rest of the mainland area. Much of Kochi lies at sea level, with a coastline of 48 km.

The eastern part of Kochi is mainly known as Ernakulam, while the western part of it after the Venduruthy Bridge is called as Western Kochi. The current metropolitan limits of Kochi include the mainland Ernakulam, Fort Kochi, the suburbs of Edapally, Kalamassery, Aluva, Perumbavoor, Angamaly and Kakkanad to the northeast; Tripunithura to the southeast; and a group of islands closely scattered in the Vembanad Lake. The state government and the GCDA have plans to include Mala and Kodungallur in Thrissur district. Piravom and Kolenchery in Ernakulam district, Thalayolaparambu and Vaikom in Kottayam and Cherthala in Alappuzha district within Kochi metropolitan limits. The newly formed metropolis would be put under the charge of a new authority called Kochi Metropolitan Regional Development Authority. However, &quot;The Hindu&quot; reported that the state government is yet to take any concrete steps in this regard.

Soil consists of sediments such as alluvium, teris, brown sands, etc. Hydromorphic saline soils are also found in the areas surrounding the backwaters.

Predominant rock types found here are Archaean-basic dykes, Charnockites and Gneisses. An ecologically sensitive area, the Mangalavanam Bird Sanctuary is located in the central part of the city. It has a wide range of mangrove species and is a nesting ground for a vast variety of migratory birds.

Kochi&#x27;s water needs are entirely dependent on ground water and the two rivers flowing through the district viz., Periyar and Muvattupuzha. Periyar serves the entire northern part of the city whereas Muvattupuzha river under the JnNurm project covers the western part.

=== Climate ===
Under the Köppen climate classification, Kochi features a tropical monsoon climate (&quot;Am&quot;). Kochi&#x27;s proximity to the equator along with its coastal location results in little seasonal temperature variation, with moderate to high levels of humidity. Annual temperatures range between with the record high being , and record low .
From June to September, the south-west monsoon brings in heavy rains as Kochi lies on the windward side of the Western Ghats. From October to December, Kochi receives lighter (yet significant) rain from the northeast monsoon, as it lies on the leeward side. Average annual rainfall is , with an annual average of 124 rainy days.

== Civic administration ==

The city is governed by the Kochi Corporation, headed by a mayor. For administrative purposes, the city is divided into 74 wards, from which the members of the corporation council are elected for five years. Earlier; Fort Kochi, Mattancherry and Ernakulam were the three Municipalities in Cochin area, which was later merged to form the Cochin Corporation. The corporation has its headquarters in Ernakulam, and zonal offices at Fort Kochi, Mattancherry, Palluruthy, Edappally and Pachalam. The general administration of the city is handled by the Personnel Department and the Council Standing committee Section. Other departments include that of town planning, health, engineering, revenue and accounts. The corporation is also responsible for waste disposal and sewage management. The city produces more than 600 tons of waste per day and a large portion of waste is decomposed at Brahmapuram Solid Waste plant into organic manure. The supply of potable water, sourced from the Periyar River is handled by Kerala Water Authority with support of Water works department of Kochi Corporation. Electricity is provided by the Kerala State Electricity Board.
The GCDA and GIDA are the government agencies initiating and monitoring the development of Greater Cochin area, mainly in developing infrastructure facilities for the city.

=== Law and order ===
Kochi is the seat of High Court of Kerala, the highest judicial body in the state of Kerala. The Kochi City Police is headed by a Police Commissioner, an Indian Police Service (IPS) officer. The city is divided into five zones and each zone under a circle officer. Apart from regular law &amp; order, the city police comprises the Traffic Police, Narcotics Cell, Riot horse, Armed Reserve Camps, District Crime Records Bureau and a Women&#x27;s Police station. It operates 19 police stations functioning under the Home Ministry of Government of Kerala. An anti-corruption branch of the Central Bureau of Investigation also operates out of the city. CISF maintains 3 squadrons for providing security to various central and state heavy industries, airport and seaport zones. Other major central agencies are NIA, DRI and Indian Customs due to the presence of major port. According to National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB), Kochi reported significant increase of 193.7 per cent IPC crimes in 2010 compared to 2009, and reported a crime rate of 1,897.8 compared to the 424.1 in whole Kerala. However, the city police commissioner defended that in major crimes such as murders and kidnapping, the city registered a low crime rate even behind other cities in the state.

=== Politics ===
Kochi is part of the Ernakulam Lok Sabha constituency in Indian Parliament. The current elected Member of Parliament representing the constituency is Hibi Eden of Indian National Congress. The Ernakulam Lok Sabha constituency elects seven members to the state Legislative Assembly, one each from Ernakulam, Kalamassery, Kochi, Paravur, Thrikkakara, Thrippunithura and Vypin.

== Economy ==

Kochi is widely referred to as the financial and commercial capital of Kerala. Federal Bank, the fourth-largest Private-sector bank in India is located in Aluva which is a suburb of Kochi. Being a major online trading centre in the country, Kochi has a newly opened SEBI office.
Availability of electricity, fresh water, long coastline, backwaters, good banking facilities, presence of a major port, container trans-shipment terminal, harbour terminal and an international air terminal are some of the factors which accelerated the industrial growth in the city and its adjoining district. In recent years the city has witnessed heavy investment, thus making it one of the fastest-growing second-tier metro cities in India. Sales tax income generated in the Kochi metropolitan area contributes heavily to state revenue.

The district contributes 15.1% of the state GDP. Construction and manufacturing industries combined contributes 37% of the district&#x27;s total GDP, and trade, tourism and hospitality industries together provides another 20%. Major business sectors include construction, manufacturing, shipbuilding, transportation/shipping, seafood and spices exports, chemical industries, information technology (IT), tourism, health services, and banking. Kochi is recognised as one of the seventeen major industrial cities of India by the World Bank Group. However, in the 2009 rankings of ease to start and operate a business, among the 17 Indian cities selected, Kochi was rated as the second most difficult city to start business and was ranked 16th, above Kolkata.

As in most of Kerala, remittances from non-resident Indians (NRI)s is a major source of income. Eloor, situated north of the city-centre, is the largest industrial belt in Kerala, with more than 250 factories manufacturing a range of products including chemical and petrochemical products, pesticides, rare earth elements, rubber processing chemicals, fertilisers, zinc and chromium compounds, and leather products. Fertilisers and Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT), one of the oldest fertilizers and chemical industry in Kerala is located in Kochi. Kochi Refineries of (BPCL) at Ambalamugal is the largest state owned refinery in India. Petronet India has now almost completed Kochi LNG Terminal, for importing and storing natural gas, for energy and fueling needs. Central Government establishments like the Coconut Development Board, the Coir Board and the Marine Products Export Development Authority (MPEDA) have head offices located in the city.

Kalamassery which is situated around 16.5 km from the City Center is one of the major Industrial areas. Leading factories like FACT, HMT and IT/Biotechnology park like KINFRA Hi-Tech Park are located here. The Cochin University of Science and Technology is located at Kalamassery.
Irimpanam is another major industrial area in Kochi. The Seaport-Airport Road (SPAP Road) passes through this place and oil giants like Indian Oil Corporation, Bharat Petroleum and Hindustan Petroleum have plants here.

Like elsewhere in Kerala, tourism is one of the major contributors of the local economy. Ernakulam district, in which Kochi is situated, ranks first in the total number of domestic tourists visiting Kerala, and thus contributes to the economy of the city. The tourist enclave at Fort Kochi and presence of several historical monuments, museums etc. as well as natural attractions like the Vembanad lake and the backwaters attract large number of tourists to the city. Presence of several leading hospitality brands have been a major source of employment for locals. The Kochi Port is one of the leading ports where international cruisers call on regularly. The city has the first marina facility in the country, Kochi Marina which attracts large number of yacht-totters.
Real Estate industry is also one industry which is contributing a lot to the economy of Kochi. Many players have entered the market and have developed residential properties.
Kochi is the headquarters of the Southern Naval Command, the primary training centre of the Indian Navy. The Cochin Shipyard, contributes to the economy of the city. The fishing harbour at Thoppumpady is a minor fishing port in the state and supplies fish to local and export markets. To further tap the potential of the all-season harbour at Kochi, an international cruise terminal was also constructed.

Exports and allied activities are also important contributors to the city&#x27;s economy. The Cochin Port currently handles export and import of container cargo at its terminal at Willingdon Island. The International Container Transshipment Terminal operating out of Vallarpadam, is India&#x27;s largest transshipment terminal.
Cochin Port Trust also planning to build an Outer Harbour near Puthuvype. Kochi&#x27;s historical reliance on trade continues into modern times, as the city is a major exporter of spices and is home to the International Pepper Exchange, where black pepper is globally traded. The Spices Board of India and World Spice Organisation are headquartered in Kochi.

The IT and ITES related industries are growing up in Kochi. Availability of cheap bandwidth through undersea cables and lower operational costs compared to other major cities in India, has been to its advantage. Various technology and industrial campuses including the government promoted InfoPark, Cochin Special Economic Zone and KINFRA Export Promotion Industrial Park operate in the outskirts of the city. Several new industrial campuses are under construction in the suburbs of the city. SmartCity at Kakkanad is one of the prominent projects. Cyber City at Kalamassery is another integrated IT township SEZ being planned in the private sector.

Kochi has an established electronics hardware industry with companies such as V-Guard Industries, OEN India Limited, FCI OEN Connectors and SFO Technologies. The Government of Kerala has announced a project to build an industrial park named Electronic City spanning an area of , to cater to the electronic hardware industries. The private operator NeST is building a Special Economic Zone specifically for electronics hardware spanning an area of .

The Cochin International Airport is in the process of setting up an aerotropolis at Nedumbassery.

Perumbavoor is a major town in the Kochi metropolitan area. Spread over several panchayats like Rayamangalam, Vazhakulam, Asamannur, Vengola, Kottapadi, Koovappadi and many other places in the Perumbavoor municipality, the town is famous for Asia&#x27;s Largest plywood industries. The plywood sector employs about two lakh people directly and about three and a half lakh indirectly in a sector with over 1,400 units.This industry includes units that manufacture not only plywood but also veneer and sawn or bandsaw. All the units operate within a radius of 15 km. The industry has started growing here over the past two decades. Initially, there were only 10 companies. But later, as more people entered the sector and set up more units, the business picked up. The industry witnessed a major change when rubber wood became available in abundance due to fluctuations in rubber prices. The plywood is also imported from foreign countries like Vietnam, Loas and China. some more Eucalyptus timber is also imported from countries like Brazil. There is no market for plywood in Kerala. Places like Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and parts of North India are the biggest markets for plywood. This industry is now the backbone of Perumbavoor&#x27;s economic potential. Another unique feature of the industry is that 90 percent of the workers in the units are migrants. The crisis that hit the construction industry during the period from 2003 to 2004 led to a large influx of migrant workers into the plywood industry.
== Transport ==

=== Air ===
The air gateway to Kochi is the Cochin International Airport (CIAL) located at Nedumbassery, which is about north of Kochi city, and handles both domestic and international flights. It is the first international airport in India to be built without Central Government funds and is the world&#x27;s first fully solar energy powered airport.

The Cochin airport provides direct connectivity to popular international destinations in the Middle East, Malaysia, Thailand and Singapore and to most major Indian cities apart from tourist destinations like Lakshadweep. Kochi is also the headquarters of the Air India Express service. With a terminal area of , and a passenger capacity of 2200 (international and domestic), it is the largest and busiest airport in the state. It is also the fourth busiest airport in India in terms of international passenger traffic, and seventh busiest overall.

=== Road ===
Kochi is well connected to neighbouring cities and states via several highways. It is a node in the North-South Corridor of the National Highway system. The road infrastructure in Kochi has not been able to meet the growing traffic demand and hence traffic congestion is a major problem in the city.

Kochi is served by National Highway 66, National Highway 544, National Highway 966A and National Highway 966B.

Several state highways also connect Kochi with other parts of Kerala. SH 15, Ettumanoor-Ernakulam Road, connects the city to Kottayam, Pala, Kumily, Changanacherry, Pathanamthitta etc. SH 41, Palarivattom-Thekkady Road, provides a corridor to the eastern parts of the district. SH 63, Vypeen Pallipuram Road and SH 66, Alappuzha – Thoppumpady road are coastal roads that serve the narrow sliver of land between the backwaters and the sea.

The main arterial roads of the city are the Mahatma Gandhi Road and Sahodaran Ayyappan Road in Ernakulam, constructed in 1925 &amp; 1962 respectively which runs parallel &amp; perpendicular to the coast and having the proposed Metro Rail connectivity. The Seaport-Airport Road is another major road and connects the Cochin Seaport to the Cochin International Airport. The Infopark Expressway in Kakkanad is connected to the Seaport-Airport Road and stretches all the way to Infopark. Other major roads include Chittoor Road, Banerji Road, Shanmugham Road, Kochi Bypass, Kaloor-Kadavanthra Road, Park Avenue etc. A new ring road is proposed for Kochi city by the state government for which a project study is being currently undertaken by NATPAC.

=== Public transport ===

==== Road ====
The primary form of public transport within the city is largely dependent on privately owned bus networks. The state-run also operates its services in the city through the Thirukochi service. The major bus terminals in the city are Ernakulam Town, Ernakulam Jetty and the private bus terminal at Kaloor. An integrated transit terminal namely The Mobility Hub at Vytilla is under second phase of construction. The terminal acts as a hub for long-distance bus services away from the city centre, and also a converging point for different modes of public transport, namely bus, metro and ferry.

Kochi is one of the few cities to be granted the new-generation air-conditioned low-floor and non-air-conditioned semi-low-floor buses under the JNNURM city transport development project. KURTC and private buses operate frequent schedules to neighbouring areas of Nedumbassery, Perumbavoor, Aluva, Muvattupuzha, Kothamangalam, Cherthala and Poochakkal. Taxis and auto rickshaws (called &quot;autos&quot;) are available for hire throughout the day.

Development of road infrastructure not keeping pace with the increase in traffic is a major problem faced by Kochi, like most other parts of Kerala.

==== Rail ====
The city has four major railway stations – Ernakulam Junction, Ernakulam Town (locally known as the &quot;South&quot; and &quot;North&quot; railway stations respectively), Aluva, and Tripunithura followed by smaller stations, Edapally and Kalamassery. There is also the Cochin Harbour Terminus providing rail connectivity to the southern segment of the Port of Kochi. The terminus is currently under renovation for the suburban rail networks in the city. The main rail transport system in Kochi is operated by the Southern Railway Zone of Indian Railways, and comes under Thiruvananthapuram Railway division. The South station is one of the busiest railway stations in South India, with more than 128 scheduled train services daily. The North station situated on the northern side of the city, caters mostly to long-distance services that bypass the South station, and also is an additional halt station for many trains.

There is also a historic station named as Ernakulam Terminus(station code:ERG) situated behind the High Court. Great personalities like Mahatma Gandhi and The British Viceroy have visited Cochin through this old railway station. Ernakulam Terminus was the first station to serve the city but had to be abandoned in the early 1960s. Now this station operates as a goods depot of Southern Railway.

==== Metro ====

The Kochi Metro is a metro rapid transit system serving the city of Kochi, intended to considerably ease traffic congestion in the city and its surrounding metropolitan area. It is being set up at an overall estimated cost of . The Phase-1 of the metro system will have 22 stations connecting the suburban towns of Aluva and Pettah while passing through downtown.
The first half of the Phase-1 of Kochi Metro was inaugurated on 17 June 2017 by Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Currently Kochi Metro is operational from Aluva till Maharaja&#x27;s College along the Kalamassery – Edappally – Kaloor – MG Road stretch, covering a total of 18.4 km with 16 operational metro stations.

==== Water ====

Kochi ranks among India&#x27;s major seaports, partly due to being one of the safest harbours in the Indian Ocean. The port, administered by a statutory autonomous body known as the Cochin Port Trust, offers facilities for bunkering, handling cargo and passenger ships and storage accommodation. The port is a complex of three islands, one of which is man-made.

It also operates passenger ships to Colombo and Lakshadweep. Boat services are operated by Kerala Shipping and Inland Navigation Corporation, the State Water Transport Department and private firms from various boat jetties in the city. The &quot;junkar&quot; ferry for the transshipment of vehicles and passengers between the islands are operated between Ernakulam and Vypin, and between Vypin and Fort Kochi. However, with the construction of the Goshree bridges (which links Kochi&#x27;s islands), ferry transport has become less essential. The main boat jetties are Ernakulam Main Boat Jetty near Park Avenue, High Court Jetty in Banerjee Road, Embarkation Jetty in Willingdon Island and Fort Kochi Jetty. In April 2023, Kochi became India&#x27;s first city to have a water metro project. The Kochi Water Metro is the first water metro project in India and the first integrated water transport system of this size in Asia connects 10 islands of Kochi through a network of 15 routes that span 76 km and 38 jetties.

== Demographics ==
Kochi has the highest population density in Kerala with 7139 people per km2. , Kochi had a metropolitan area population of 2,117,990. The female-to-male ratio is 1,028:1,000, significantly higher than the all-India average of 933:1,000. Kochi&#x27;s literacy rate is 97.5%. The female literacy rate lags that of males by 1.1%, among the lowest such gaps in India.
Kochi&#x27;s major religions are Hinduism, Christianity and Islam. Jainism, Judaism, Sikhism and Buddhism, with smaller followings, are also practised in Kochi. Though 44% practice Hinduism, Christianity&#x27;s large following (38%) makes Kochi a city with one of the largest Christian populations in India.
The majority of the city&#x27;s residents are Malayalis. However, there are significant ethnic minority communities including Tamils, Gujaratis, Jews, Anglo-Indians, Sikhs and Konkanis Malayalam is the main language of communication and medium of instruction for primary education, although a number of schools do offer English medium education. The higher education is invariably in English medium, and it is the preferred language in business circles. Tamil and Hindi are widely understood—albeit rarely spoken.

Like other fast-growing cities in the developing world, Kochi suffers from major urbanisation problems. The city was ranked tenth among Indian cities in terms of house-cost and availability, urban household crowding and household incomes.

The government has plans to make the city slum-free by 2016. According to the National Crime Records Bureau, the city holds the fourth position in the number of recorded crimes in India. In 2009, the city recorded an average crime rate of 646.3 against the national average of 181.4. But Kochi City Police Commissioner later clarified that this anomaly was due to higher reporting rates of minor crimes in Kochi than in other Indian cities.
The State Crime Records Bureau (SCRB) report gives further credence to this as it finds that Kochi has the fewest crime against women in the state of Kerala.
According to the 2011 CII/Institute of Competitiveness report on Liveability, Kochi stands first in the state, and sixth in the country. Kochi is ranked seventh in the list of the top ten most affluent cities in India by 2009 study by Nielsen Company. Kochi was ranked the fourth cleanest city in India in the Swachch Bharat rankings for cities. It was selected as one of the hundred Indian cities to be developed as a smart city under Prime Minister Narendra Modi flagship Smart Cities Mission.
== Culture ==


As a result of successive waves of migration over the course of several centuries, the population of the city is a mix of people from all parts of Kerala and most of India. The pan-Indian nature is highlighted by the substantial presence of various ethnic communities from different parts of the country.

Kochi has a diverse, multicultural, and secular community consisting of Malayalis, Konkanis, Gujaratis, Bengalis, Marathis, Punjabis, Tamilians, Kannadigas, Biharis, Anglo Indians and a few families of Jews among other denominations. The city once had a large Jewish community, known as the &quot;Malabar Yehuden&quot;—and now increasingly as Cochin Jews—who figured prominently in Kochi&#x27;s business and economic strata and owned several Synagogues across Kochi and nearby areas such as Chendamangalam, Paravur or Mala.
Kochi was one among the seven diocese of Syrian Orthodox (Jacobite Syrian Christian Church) in Kerala formed in 1876. The seat of the Bishop is at St George Cathedral, Karingachira. Also at Mary&#x27;s Cathedral Elamkulam, seat of bishop of Simhasana churches of Jacobites is in the city. The seat of Roman Catholic Cathedral of Kerala&#x27;s first Archdiocese Archdiocese of Verapoly and the first diocese Diocese of Cochin are located in the city. The Syro-Malabar Church, one of the 22 &quot;sui iuris&quot; Eastern Catholic Churches and a part of the Saint Thomas Christian community, has its seat at Ernakulam. Prominent places of Christian worship include the St. Mary&#x27;s Syro-Malabar Catholic Cathedral Basilica, Ernakulam, St. Francis Assisi Roman Catholic Cathedral, Ernakulam, Basilica of Our Lady of Ransom, Vallarpadam-Ernakulam, Santa Cruz Basilica Roman Catholic Cathedral, Fort Kochi, St. Antony&#x27;s Shrine at Kaloor, St. George Forane Church, Edappally and appropriate to its multi-ethnic composition, Kochi celebrates traditional Kerala festivals like Onam and Vishu along with North Indian Hindu festivals like Holi with great fervour. Christian and Islamic festivals like Christmas, Easter, Eid ul-Fitr and Milad-e-sherif are also celebrated. A merry making fest called the Cochin Carnival is celebrated at Fort Kochi during the last ten days of December.

The residents of Kochi are known as Kochiites; they are an important part of the South Indian culture. However, the city&#x27;s culture is rapidly evolving with Kochiites generally becoming more cosmopolitan in their outlook. The people are also increasingly fashion-conscious, often deviating from the traditional Kerala wear to western clothing.

Kochiites generally partake of Keralite cuisine, which is generally characterised by an abundance of coconut and spices. Other South Indian cuisines, as well as Chinese and North Indian cuisines are popular. Fast food culture is also very prominent. Being a tourist hotspot, Fort Kochi have a number of restaurants that offer international cuisine, like Italian, French, Mexican etc. Being close to the ocean and the backwaters, Kochi has an abundance of seafood, which reflects in the cuisine. Cochin is also called the official food capital of Kerala with largest number of restaurants and cafeterias in Kerala that serves every kind of delicious cuisine. A service known as &quot;You Buy, We Cook&quot; is available at the waterfront of Fort Kochi, where the fresh seafood purchased from the nets is cooked as per the customers needs. Arabian food joints that serve Shawarma and roasted chicken are a new addition to the fast food scene in the city.

Kochi also has a number of shopping malls including Oberon Mall, Gold Souk Grande, Bay Pride Mall, Centre Square Mall, Abad Nucleus Mall and LuLu Mall, which is one of the largest shopping malls in India in terms of total leasable area of . Various shopping malls are expected to open in the city in the near future including Forum Thomsun Mall.

Kochi is the official food capital of Kerala because of the highest number of restaurants and the varieties of foods available. Kochi serves every type of food available in Kerala. Its very famous for varieties of non-vegetarian food. Kochi also has the most five star hotels in the state. These include international brands like Crowne Plaza, Marriott International, Grand Hyatt, Sheraton, Le Méridien, Radisson Blu, Holiday Inn, Ramada, Ibis, Taj Malabar, The Gateway etc.

Kochi was home to some of the most influential figures in Malayalam literature, including Changampuzha Krishna Pillai, Kesari Balakrishna Pillai, G. Sankara Kurup, and Vyloppilli Sreedhara Menon. Prominent social reformers such as Sahodaran Ayyappan and Pandit Karuppan also are from Kochi. The Kochi International Book Festival is an annual event.

The Maharajas of Kochi (then Cochin) were scholars who knew the epics and encouraged the arts. The paintings at the Hill Palace and the Dutch Palace are testimony to their love for arts.

Kochiites are known for their enthusiasm in sports, especially football and cricket.
The Jawaharlal Nehru International Stadium in Kochi is one of the largest stadiums in India with floodlights for Cricket and Football matches. The Regional Sports Centre is an important centre of sporting activity in the city.
Kochi is reportedly the sixth best city in India according to the livability index of 2011.

== Healthcare ==
With many advanced tertiary/quaternary care facilities, Kochi has one of the best healthcare facilities in India. It is the prime destination for people seeking advanced healthcare facilities from across Kerala.

In recent times, it has attracted many patients from India, the Middle East, Africa, Europe and the United States looking for relatively inexpensive advanced medical care. Kochi is the only city from Kerala that have carried out successful heart transplantations. Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre, Sunrise Hospital, Specialist Hospital, Medical Trust Hospital, PVS Memorial Hospital, Renai medicity, Lakeshore Hospital, Lisie Hospital, Aster Medcity, Rajagiri Institute of Medical Sciences are some of the advanced tertiary/quaternary healthcare facilities in Kochi. Other reputed institutions in the city include Ernakulam Medical Centre, KIMS Hospital, Gautham Hospital, Lourdes Hospital and Saraf Hospital. Some of the reputed fertility related treatment centres in India – like Vijaya Hospital, Bourn Hall Clinic and CIMAR – are located in Kochi. General Hospital, Ernakulam and Government Medical College, Ernakulam are the notable medical institutions in the government sector in Kochi.

In August 2019, a home daycare program in the district, Arike has started for extending the service of the home palliative care. Nurses who have undergone training in palliative care will be reaching out to patients at home every day on two-wheelers. The service will be available to those who have registered with the General Hospital&#x27;s home palliative care programme.

== Education ==

=== Secondary education ===
The pattern of primary education is essentially the same all over the state. There are government owned schools and government aided schools, which are affiliated to the Kerala State Education Board. A few privately owned schools are also affiliated to the system. Most of the schools owned by private organisations or individuals are affiliated to the Central Board for Secondary Education (CBSE). Indian Certificate of Secondary Education (ICSE) have some schools affiliated to them as well. The state education board offers both Malayalam and English medium instruction, while the other boards offer English medium alone. There are a few schools that follow international curricula, such as IB and IGCSE.

There 34 government schools, 67 private aided schools and 31 unaided schools affiliated to the Kerala State Education Board in the city and suburbs. There are 62 CBSE Schools, 2 IGCSE and 9 ICSE Schools as well.

The notable schools in the government sector are Sree Rama Varma High School, Edappally High School, Government School-Kochi and Govt Girls Higher Secondary School, Ernakulam. There are Kendriya Vidyalaya, Chinmaya Mission and Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan run several quasi-private charter schools within the city limits, as well as in the suburbs. There are several private schools (both aided &amp; unaided0 that are owned by secular and religious trusts which are of particular renown, such as:St. Albert&#x27;s HSS, Ernakulam, St. Teresa&#x27;s CGHSS, St. Mary&#x27;s CGHSS Ernakulam, St. Antony&#x27;s CGHSS, Model Technical Higher Secondary School, Kaloor The Delta Study, Rajagiri Public School, Campion School, Assisi Vidyaniketan, Cochin Refineries School, Gregorian Public School, Greets Public School, Toc-H Public School, Navy Children School, Global Public School, Choice School, Vidyodaya School, Mar Thoma Public School, Nava Nirman Public School and St. Pauls International School, Kalamassery, The Charter School Kochi.

=== Higher education ===

The Cochin University of Science and Technology (CUSAT) is a major university named after the city. Most of the colleges in Kochi offering tertiary education are affiliated either with the Mahatma Gandhi University or with the Cochin University. Kochi has one of the campuses of the Indian Maritime University at Willingdon Island. Sree Sankaracharya University of Sanskrit in Kalady is a research-oriented university located at the outskirts. Other national educational institutes include the Central Institute of Fisheries Nautical and Engineering Training, the National University of Advanced Legal Studies, the National Institute of Oceanography and the Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute.

Kochi has some of the leading B-Schools in the region. The Indian Institute of Management Kozhikode (IIMK) has set up its first satellite campus at Athulya building in InfoPark, Kochi. Cochin University&#x27;s School of Management Studies (SMS) is the first and oldest managerial education institution in South India. SCMS Cochin is one of the emerging B-Schools in the country. Another major B-School XIME is opening a new campus in Kochi. Other leading managerial institutions include Rajagiri Centre for Business Studies, Kochi Business School, Amrita School of Business, Albertian Institute of Management and Toc-H B school.

The city and outskirts are home to four medical schools—Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre at Ponekkara, Cochin Medical College at Kalamassery, Sree Narayana Institute of Medical Sciences, and M.O.S.C. Medical College, Kolenchery. Some of the prestigious general colleges are Maharaja&#x27;s College, St. Albert&#x27;s College, St. Teresa&#x27;s College, Sacred Hearts College, Bharata Matha College, Aquina&#x27;s College, De Paul Institute of Science &amp; Technology (DIST) and Cochin College. The major Engineering and Technology colleges in the city are School of Engineering CUSAT, SCMS School of Engineering and Technology at Kalamassery, Model Engineering College, Rajagiri School of Engineering &amp; Technology and FISAT (Federal Institute of Science &amp; Technology).

Being the seat of the High Court of Kerala, several top legal education institutes are here. The Government Law College-Ernakulam is one of the oldest law schools in Kerala. The &quot;School of Legal Studies (SLS)&quot;, CUSAT is one of the leading graduate, post-graduate, and research institutes in the country. The National University of Advanced Legal Studies (NUALS) is located in the city, which is a premier law university in India and the only Law college listed in CLAT (Common Law Admission Test) in Kerala.

== Social service organisations ==
Some of the main orphanages and rehabilitation shelters in Cochin City are Palluruthy Relief Settlement in Palluruthy Veli, Don Bosco Sneha Bhavan, Don Bosco Big Boys, Crescent Girls Orphanage, YMCA Boys Home, Bal Bhavan, Valsalya Bhavan.

Palluruthy Relief Settlement is under Kochi Municipal Corporation and managed in association with Peoples Council for Social Justice. There are about 300 inmates and many of them are mentally ill. The night shelter for women run by Kochi Municipal Corporation near Kerala State Road Transport Corporation bus stand provides free and safe accommodation. Peoples Council for Social Justice was found in 1985 under the patronage of Justice V. R. Krishna Iyer with the aim to work for human rights protection, free legal aid and to strive for social justice.

The orphanages for children under Don Bosco Sneha Bhavan Cochi are Sneha Bhavan Annexe, SnehaBhavan, Valsalya Bhavan, Don Bosco and Bosco Nilayam. The Childline India project in Cochin is taken in collaboration with Don Bosco. Children in distress and in need of help can contact in &#x27;1098&#x27; (toll free number). Sneha Bhavan Annexe is the first point of contact with children and children can stay as a safe night shelter. Sneha Bhavan is a home for the children from the streets and for those from unhealthy and risky situations. The Valsalya Bhavan centre is solely for the girls who are rescued from the streets. Runaways, street children, children of sex workers, abused children and child labourers all live here. Along with primary and high school education at a local school, the centre provides shelter, food, clothing and educational support.

There are also people doing independent social services within the city. The Italian Sister Fabiola conducts a home at Fort Kochi known as &quot;Ashwasa Bhavan&quot;, for young orphaned children. Br. Judson run his own &quot;Mobile Bath Service&quot; in his vehicle for the abandoned.

== Media ==

Major Malayalam newspapers published in Kochi include &quot;Malayala Manorama&quot;, &quot;Mathrubhumi&quot;, &quot;Siraj Daily&quot;, &quot;Madhyamam&quot;, &quot;Deshabhimani&quot;, &quot;Deepika&quot;, &quot;Kerala Kaumudi&quot;, &quot;Janmabhumi&quot;, etc. Popular English newspapers include &quot;The Hindu&quot;, &quot;The New Indian Express&quot;, &quot;The Times of India&quot;, &quot;The Pioneer&quot; and &quot;The Deccan Chronicle&quot;. A number of evening papers are also published from the city. Newspapers in other regional languages like Hindi, Kannada, Tamil and Telugu are also available.

A number of financial publications are also published in the city. These include &quot;The Economic Times&quot;, &quot;Business Line&quot;, &quot;The Business Standard&quot; and &quot;The Financial Express&quot;.
Prominent magazines and religious publications like the &quot;Sathyadeepam&quot;, &quot;The Week&quot; and &quot;Vanitha&quot; are also published from the city.

Kochi houses several leading Malayalam television channels like &quot;Asianet Plus&quot;, &quot;Flowers&quot;, &quot;Jeevan TV&quot;, &quot;Mazhavil Manorama&quot;, &quot;Kairali We&quot;, &quot;Manorama News&quot; and &quot;Reporter TV&quot; as well as major news bureaus of &quot;Asianet&quot;, &quot;Kairali TV&quot;, &quot;Amrita TV&quot; and &quot;Doordarshan&quot;. Prasar Bharati maintains its earth station and broadcasting centre in Kakkanad, Kochi. Satellite television services are available through DD Direct+, Dish TV, Airtel digital TV, Reliance DTH, Sun Direct DTH and Tata Sky. FM radio channels broadcast from Kochi are Rainbow FM (AIR) 101.9 MHz, AIR Kochi 102.3 MHz, Club FM 94.3 MHz, Radio Mango 91.9 MHz, Red FM 93.5 MHz, Radio Mirchi 104.0 MHz.

Kochi is considered to be the hub of the vibrant Malayalam movie industry, especially contemporary Malayalam movies. The rise of Kochi to the centre stage of the entertainment industry occurred coinciding with the economic boom of the last couple of decades. Many movies are shot in Kochi every year. Kochi also has a host of state-of-the-art production and post-production facilities.
Due to these reasons, major section of film personalities including of actors, technical experts and other related workers reside in Kochi.
There are over 50 cinema halls that screen movies in Malayalam, Tamil, English and Hindi. The city hosts Kerala&#x27;s first cine multiplex, at the Oberon Mall with four screens. Gold Souk Grande also has a cine multiplex operated by Q cinemas with four screens. PVR with 9 screens is another national multiplex brand that has presence in Kochi and is based out of LuLu International Shopping Mall. Cinepolis at Centre Square Mall with 11 screens is the first international megaplex brand in the state. 16 more multiplex screens are expected in the city in the near future.

The district has the largest number of telephone connections in Kerala. Telephony services are provided by various private sector players like Aircel, Airtel, Idea Cellular, Vodafone, Reliance Infocomm, Tata Docomo, Jio, Tata Indicom and the state owned BSNL. All the private sector telecom companies have their headquarters for Kerala circle located in Kochi.

== Sports ==
Like elsewhere in Kerala, football is arguably the most passionate sport among the locals. In the Indian Super League (ISL), Kerala Blasters represents the city as well as the state of Kerala. The Blasters are one of the most widely supported clubs in the country as well as the fifth most followed football club from Asia in the social media. Kochi was also home to the now defunct football clubs FC Kochin and Chirag United Kerala. FC Kochin is considered as the first fully professional football club from India. Kochi was one of the six cities to host the 2017 FIFA U-17 World Cup held in India.
India&#x27;s fourth largest stadium and third largest cricket stadium, the Jawaharlal Nehru International Stadium located in Kaloor, is a major facility for football and cricket. Kochi was home to the now defunct Indian Premier League cricket team, Kochi Tuskers Kerala which won franchise rights to play in the 2011 edition of IPL.

The Maharaja&#x27;s Stadium located on MG Road in the heart of the city, is the major athletic facility in the state with synthetic tracks and turf grass as per international standards. The Ambedkar stadium, maintained by GCDA, was developed exclusively for football with funds from Government of Kerala and FIFA. Spanish club Real Madrid has proposed to set up a football school in Kochi.

The Rajiv Gandhi Sports Complex at Kadavanthra is a major indoor stadium, mainly used for conducting badminton, tennis and basketball tournaments. The 25 m X 10 m swimming pool at the centre is one of the larger water sports facility in the state, where regular swimming competitions and coaching are conducted.

The FACT Grounds at Udyogamandal, Sacred Heart&#x27;s College Grounds, HMT Grounds at Kalamassery and St. Albert&#x27;s College Grounds are the other major training facilities for various games like volleyball, badminton, cricket etc.

Kochi has two golf courses in the city, and one in the suburbs. The oldest golf club is located at Bolgatty Palace constructed in 1903, which is a nine-hole facility run by Cochin Golf Club society. The Cochin Golf and Country Club located near to Cochin Airport, operated by CIAL, is Kerala&#x27;s first 18-hole golf course with a playing area of over 7,200 yards. The first phase of the all-weather golf course comprising nine holes was opened in May 2010 for members and public. The expansion to an 18-hole course is progressing, which is scheduled to be open in September 2012.

Being surrounded by water bodies, the city is ideal for Yachting. The Kerala Yachting Association and the Cochin Yacht Club are located in the city. Both organisations conduct regular yachting tournaments. Kochi was the only Indian city chosen for stopover during the 2008–09 Volvo Ocean Race.

== Navy ==

The Southern Naval Command, one of the three main formations of the Indian Navy, has its headquarters in Kochi at INS &quot;Venduruthy&quot;. It is commanded by the Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief. The Southern Naval Command consists of Flag Officer Sea Training (FOST), a training squadron, training establishments and bases, and land forces and survey ships. It has a naval air station and a ship repair yard.

Indian Navy Day is also celebrated here. It is a week-long public event showcasing warships, planes, helicopters, and other naval equipment.

The Cochin Shipyard Limited is the largest shipbuilding and maintenance facility in India.
In 2020, it finished building the first indigenous aircraft carrier for the Indian Navy.

== Sister cities ==
Kochi is twinned with:
* Norfolk, Virginia, United States
* Menlo Park, California, United States
* Pyatigorsk, Russia

==Notable people==
* Elijah ha-Adeni
* Soubin Shahir
* Radha Vinod Raju

== See also ==
* Neighbourhoods of Kochi
* List of tallest buildings in Kochi
* Portuguese Cochin
* Cochin Jews
* Largest Indian cities by GDP

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Ma Huan: Ying Yai Sheng Lan, &quot;The Overall Survey of the Ocean&#x27;s Shores&quot;, translated by J.V.G. Mills, 1970 Hakluyt Society, reprint 1997, White Lotus Press, .
* Plunkett, R, Cannon, T, Davis, P, Greenway, P &amp; Harding, P (2001), Lonely Planet South India, Lonely Planet, .
* Manorama Yearbook 2003 (English Edition), .
* Robert Charles Bristow. &quot;Cochin Saga&quot;, Paico Pub. House; 2d ed. edition (1967), .
* &quot;Unemployment in Kerala at the turn of the 20th century Insights from the CDS gulf migration studies&quot; by K. C. Zachariah, S. Irudaya Rajan.
* &quot;Kochi Rajyacharithram&quot; by KP Padmanabha Menon. P (1914)
* &quot;Akhilavijnanakosam&quot;. &quot;Malayalam Encyclopedia&quot;. D C Books Multimedia Series.

== External links ==
* GeoHack – Kochi


* (Government of Kerala)
* (Government of India)
* The Story of India: South India, Cochin, BBC</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1800" start="0" end="5" title="Kochi" label="Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13" end="30" title="List of renamed Indian cities and states#Kerala" label="formerly known as"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800" start="31" end="37" title="Kochi" label="Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q473181" start="74" end="87" title="Malabar Coast" label="Malabar Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q544914" start="111" end="124" title="Laccadive Sea" label="Laccadive Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356097" start="144" end="165" title="Ernakulam district" label="district of Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="182" end="188" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025408" start="231" end="240" title="Ernakulam" label="Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172540" start="258" end="285" title="Kochi Municipal Corporation" label="Kochi Municipal Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424874" start="356" end="381" title="Kochi metropolitan area" label="Kochi urban agglomeration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="472" end="485" title="Demographics of Kerala#Most populous urban agglomerations" label="most populous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424874" start="486" end="503" title="Kochi Metropolitan Area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600511" start="546" end="560" title="Greater Cochin" label="Greater Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="623" end="642" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172540" start="688" end="715" title="Kochi Municipal Corporation" label="Kochi Municipal Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600511" start="819" end="855" title="Greater Cochin Development Authority" label="Greater Cochin Development Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948291" start="871" end="908" title="Goshree Islands Development Authority" label="Goshree Islands Development Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="945" end="956" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974112" start="1057" end="1064" title="Muziris" label="Muziris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595166" start="1165" end="1175" title="Fort Kochi" label="Fort Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355920" start="1177" end="1190" title="Fort Emmanuel" label="Fort Emmanuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317339" start="1225" end="1230" title="Dutch Malabar" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q617263" start="1255" end="1269" title="Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814" label="ceded the area"/>
<link wikidata="Q150056" start="1333" end="1350" title="Kingdom of Cochin" label="Kingdom of Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336152" start="1367" end="1381" title="princely state" label="princely state"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1389" end="1396" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066984" start="1427" end="1436" title="Financial centre" label="financial"/>
<link wikidata="Q28153758" start="1531" end="1549" title="Kochi Water Metro" label="water metro system"/>
<link wikidata="Q592172" start="1751" end="1779" title="Cochin International Airport" label="Cochin International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q40015" start="1827" end="1839" title="solar energy" label="solar energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q310207" start="1995" end="2003" title="McKinsey &amp;amp; Company" label="McKinsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703389" start="2136" end="2139" title="JLL (company)" label="JLL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593970" start="2327" end="2349" title="Kochi-Muziris Biennale" label="Kochi-Muziris Biennale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455212" start="2418" end="2438" title="Chinese fishing nets" label="Chinese fishing nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267941" start="2588" end="2606" title="Mattancherry Palace" label="Mattanchery Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122325" start="2608" end="2620" title="Marine Drive, Kochi" label="Marine Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q116413414" start="2622" end="2639" title="Venduruthy Bridge" label="Venduruthy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595372" start="2641" end="2664" title="Church of Saint Francis, Kochi" label="Church of Saint Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13564489" start="2669" end="2687" title="Mattancherry Bridge" label="Mattanchery Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q540891" start="2891" end="2906" title="Nielsen Holdings" label="Nielsen Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955600" start="2924" end="2950" title="Outlook (Indian magazine)" label="Outlook Traveller magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17957" start="2997" end="3010" title="Lonely Planet" label="Lonely Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159440" start="3124" end="3144" title="Condé Nast Traveller" label="Condé Nast Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105126" start="3389" end="3412" title="Cochin Jews" label="Cochin Jewish community"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="3520" end="3524" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851685" start="3613" end="3633" title="Tuhfat Ul Mujahideen" label="Tuhfat Ul Mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="3703" end="3712" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q442610" start="3806" end="3818" title="Niccolò Da Conti" label="Nicolo Conti"/>
<link wikidata="Q666519" start="3952" end="3962" title="Kerala Backwaters" label="backwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642476" start="4107" end="4115" title="Renaming of cities in India" label="reverted"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="4158" end="4167" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974112" start="4327" end="4334" title="Muziris" label="Muziris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006282" start="4392" end="4403" title="Kodungallur" label="Kodungallur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429655" start="4407" end="4424" title="Thrissur district" label="Thrissur district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778604" start="4452" end="4463" title="spice trade" label="spice trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="4505" end="4509" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642049" start="4512" end="4519" title="Yavanas" label="Yavanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="4521" end="4527" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="4532" end="4538" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="4551" end="4555" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="4584" end="4597" title="Ancient history" label="ancient times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974112" start="4661" end="4668" title="Muziris" label="Muziris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006282" start="4676" end="4687" title="Kodungallur" label="Kodungallur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634049" start="4742" end="4749" title="Periyar River" label="Periyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q702918" start="4845" end="4852" title="Ma Huan" label="Ma Huan"/>
<link wikidata="Q699127" start="4860" end="4898" title="Treasure voyages" label="his visit to Kochi in the 15th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="4918" end="4926" title="Zheng He" label="Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q442610" start="5026" end="5042" title="Niccolò Da Conti" label="Niccolò Da Conti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171068" start="5084" end="5096" title="Perumpadappu, Malappuram" label="Perumpadappu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568315" start="5103" end="5110" title="Ponnani" label="Ponnani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006282" start="5120" end="5131" title="Kodungallur" label="Kodungallur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122988" start="5171" end="5178" title="Zamorin" label="Zamorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568315" start="5198" end="5205" title="Ponnani" label="Ponnani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809362" start="5220" end="5230" title="Tirunavaya" label="Tirunavaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q150056" start="5282" end="5299" title="Kingdom of Cochin" label="Kingdom of Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="5306" end="5319" title="Vasco Da Gama" label="Vasco Da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="5330" end="5339" title="Kozhikode" label="Kozhikode"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444593" start="5402" end="5418" title="Kunjali Marakkar" label="Kunjali Marakkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q473181" start="5477" end="5484" title="Malabar region" label="Malabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="5522" end="5529" title="Kozhikode" label="Calicut"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="5575" end="5587" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q699127" start="5829" end="5849" title="Ming treasure voyage" label="Ming treasure voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="5859" end="5867" title="Zheng He" label="Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q9965" start="6133" end="6147" title="Yongle Emperor" label="Yongle Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122988" start="6233" end="6240" title="Zamorin" label="Zamorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q699127" start="6337" end="6358" title="Ming treasure voyages" label="Ming treasure voyages"/>
<link wikidata="Q150056" start="6651" end="6667" title="Kingdom of Kochi" label="Kingdom of Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q877155" start="6737" end="6750" title="Chera Kingdom" label="Chera Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q150056" start="6858" end="6880" title="Cochin Royal Family" label="Perumpadappu Swaroopam"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="6925" end="6934" title="Kozhikode" label="Kozhikode"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789666" start="7013" end="7019" title="Kannur" label="Kannur"/>
<link wikidata="Q321475" start="7021" end="7027" title="Kollam" label="Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289099" start="7175" end="7181" title="Kappad" label="Kappad"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="7182" end="7191" title="Kozhikode" label="Kozhikode"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="7211" end="7227" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q174432" start="7305" end="7325" title="Pedro Álvares Cabral" label="Pedro Álvares Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595166" start="7410" end="7420" title="Fort Kochi" label="Fort Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355920" start="7422" end="7435" title="Fort Emmanuel" label="Fort Emmanuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="7441" end="7458" title="Portuguese Empire" label="ruled by Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q648601" start="7512" end="7535" title="Saint Thomas Christians" label="Saint Thomas Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="7537" end="7543" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595822" start="7544" end="7551" title="Mappila" label="Mappila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105126" start="7562" end="7566" title="Cochin Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903110" start="7575" end="7586" title="Goa Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="7601" end="7617" title="Portuguese India" label="Portuguese India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985038" start="7636" end="7652" title="Kingdom of Tanur" label="Kingdom of Tanur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122988" start="7678" end="7685" title="Zamorin" label="Zamorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="7749" end="7758" title="Kozhikode" label="Kozhikode"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985038" start="7777" end="7793" title="Kingdom of Tanur" label="Kingdom of Tanur"/>
<link wikidata="Q16137401" start="7801" end="7813" title="Tirur Taluk" label="Vettathunadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595909" start="7891" end="7896" title="Tanur, Malappuram" label="Tanur"/>
<link wikidata="Q150056" start="7913" end="7919" title="Kingdom of Cochin" label="Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923828" start="8017" end="8023" title="Vettom Grama Panchayath" label="Vettom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595909" start="8038" end="8043" title="Tanur, Malappuram" label="Tanur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870768" start="8107" end="8130" title="Battle of Cochin (1504)" label="Battle of Cochin (1504)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595822" start="8163" end="8170" title="Mappila" label="Mappila"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595909" start="8184" end="8189" title="Tanur, Malappuram" label="Tanur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="8266" end="8279" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595372" start="8350" end="8368" title="St. Francis Church, Kochi" label="St. Francis Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q163798" start="8603" end="8611" title="Thrissur" label="Thrissur"/>
<link wikidata="Q266923" start="8937" end="8943" title="Kingdom of Mysore" label="Mysore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569078" start="8950" end="8959" title="Hyder Ali" label="Hyder Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q473181" start="8989" end="9003" title="Malabar region" label="Malabar region"/>
<link wikidata="Q10086" start="9049" end="9055" title="Mysore" label="Mysore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573387" start="9112" end="9125" title="Paliath Achan" label="Paliath Achan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="9210" end="9226" title="Dutch Republic" label="United Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q617263" start="9239" end="9265" title="Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814" label="Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814"/>
<link wikidata="Q188428" start="9371" end="9377" title="Bangka Island" label="Bangka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="9387" end="9394" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595166" start="9509" end="9519" title="Fort Kochi" label="Fort Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595166" start="9550" end="9560" title="Fort Kochi" label="Fort Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q239462" start="9582" end="9598" title="Malabar District" label="Malabar District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789666" start="9666" end="9672" title="Kannur" label="Kannur"/>
<link wikidata="Q367354" start="9674" end="9684" title="Thalassery" label="Thalassery"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="9686" end="9695" title="Kozhikode" label="Kozhikode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006240" start="9701" end="9709" title="Palakkad" label="Palakkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="9807" end="9828" title="British Indian Empire" label="British Indian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="9840" end="9857" title="Municipal Council" label="Municipal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071965" start="9911" end="9924" title="Rama Varma XV" label="Rama Varma XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163330" start="9930" end="9938" title="Maharaja" label="Maharaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595691" start="10009" end="10021" title="Mattancherry" label="Mattancherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025408" start="10026" end="10035" title="Ernakulam" label="Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q710331" start="10089" end="10102" title="Arthur Lawley" label="Arthur Lawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881236" start="10120" end="10152" title="Beilby Lawley, 3rd Baron Wenlock" label="Beilby Lawley, 3rd Baron Wenlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="10228" end="10238" title="Travancore" label="Travancore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025408" start="10393" end="10402" title="Ernakulam" label="Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554855" start="10486" end="10498" title="Tripunithura" label="Tripunithura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342371" start="10937" end="10951" title="Robert Bristow (engineer)" label="Robert Bristow"/>
<link wikidata="Q603107" start="11004" end="11019" title="Freeman Freeman-Thomas, 1st Marquess of Willingdon" label="Lord Willingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772596" start="11042" end="11048" title="Madras Presidency" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="11300" end="11321" title="British colonial rule" label="British colonial rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336152" start="11344" end="11358" title="princely state" label="princely state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538311" start="11393" end="11410" title="Travancore–Cochin" label="Travancore–Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="11463" end="11473" title="Travancore" label="Travancore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378863" start="11506" end="11516" title="Rajpramukh" label="Rajpramukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q239462" start="11614" end="11630" title="Malabar district" label="Malabar district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618458" start="11638" end="11650" title="Madras State" label="Madras State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="11665" end="11684" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305282" start="11692" end="11717" title="States Reorganisation Act" label="States Reorganisation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="11847" end="11857" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q817477" start="11886" end="11891" title="tehsil" label="taluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374028" start="11895" end="11903" title="Kasaragod taluk" label="Kasargod"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566496" start="11905" end="11917" title="South Kanara" label="South Kanara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595691" start="11938" end="11950" title="Mattancherry" label="Mattancherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="12047" end="12068" title="municipal corporation" label="municipal corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595166" start="12113" end="12123" title="Fort Kochi" label="Fort Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595691" start="12125" end="12137" title="Mattancherry" label="Mattancherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025408" start="12143" end="12152" title="Ernakulam" label="Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462542" start="12267" end="12294" title="Kerala Legislative Assembly" label="Kerala Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172540" start="12431" end="12458" title="Kochi Municipal Corporation" label="Kochi Municipal Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="12556" end="12570" title="municipalities" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595166" start="12602" end="12612" title="Fort Kochi" label="Fort Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077892" start="12637" end="12654" title="Willingdon Island" label="Willingdon Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143900" start="12661" end="12671" title="Panchayati raj in India" label="panchayats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127956" start="12673" end="12683" title="Palluruthy" label="Palluruthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920136" start="12685" end="12692" title="Vennala" label="Vennala"/>
<link wikidata="Q12072358" start="12694" end="12701" title="Vyttila" label="Vyttila"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595603" start="12706" end="12715" title="Edappally" label="Edappally"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428930" start="12743" end="12748" title="Gundu Island" label="Gundu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288984" start="12753" end="12765" title="Ramanthuruth" label="Ramanthuruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025408" start="12781" end="12790" title="Ernakulam" label="Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333520" start="13005" end="13030" title="economic reforms in India" label="economic reforms in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="13049" end="13067" title="Government of India" label="central government"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="13104" end="13118" title="Tertiary sector of industry" label="service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="13213" end="13215" title="Information technology" label="IT"/>
<link wikidata="Q544914" start="13864" end="13877" title="Laccadive Sea" label="Laccadive Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025408" start="14059" end="14068" title="Ernakulam" label="Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q116413414" start="14109" end="14126" title="Venduruthy Bridge" label="Venduruthy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595166" start="14228" end="14238" title="Fort Kochi" label="Fort Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595603" start="14255" end="14263" title="Edapally" label="Edapally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475675" start="14265" end="14276" title="Kalamassery" label="Kalamassery"/>
<link wikidata="Q588793" start="14278" end="14283" title="Aluva" label="Aluva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737591" start="14285" end="14296" title="Perumbavoor" label="Perumbavoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q530464" start="14298" end="14306" title="Angamaly" label="Angamaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606027" start="14311" end="14319" title="Kakkanad" label="Kakkanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554855" start="14338" end="14350" title="Tripunithura" label="Tripunithura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641899" start="14417" end="14430" title="Vembanad Lake" label="Vembanad Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6740670" start="14488" end="14492" title="Mala, Kerala" label="Mala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006282" start="14497" end="14508" title="Kodungallur" label="Kodungallur"/>
<link wikidata="Q12065916" start="14531" end="14538" title="Piravom" label="Piravom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6427202" start="14543" end="14553" title="Kolenchery" label="Kolenchery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709595" start="14577" end="14593" title="Thalayolaparambu" label="Thalayolaparambu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477208" start="14598" end="14604" title="Vaikom" label="Vaikom"/>
<link wikidata="Q888665" start="14621" end="14630" title="Cherthala" label="Cherthala"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="14956" end="14964" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="14974" end="14982" title="alluvium" label="alluvium"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="15022" end="15034" title="Soil salinity" label="saline soils"/>
<link wikidata="Q104168" start="15130" end="15138" title="Archean" label="Archaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q662806" start="15145" end="15150" title="Dike (geology)" label="dykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q477421" start="15152" end="15163" title="Charnockite" label="Charnockite"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="15169" end="15175" title="Gneiss" label="Gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748692" start="15215" end="15242" title="Mangalavanam Bird Sanctuary" label="Mangalavanam Bird Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634049" start="15509" end="15516" title="Periyar (river)" label="Periyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341743" start="15521" end="15533" title="Muvattupuzha" label="Muvattupuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341743" start="15595" end="15607" title="Muvattupuzha" label="Muvattupuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="15691" end="15720" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q863882" start="15739" end="15763" title="tropical monsoon climate" label="tropical monsoon climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="16052" end="16070" title="monsoon" label="south-west monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4527" start="16135" end="16148" title="Western Ghats" label="Western Ghats"/>
<link wikidata="Q28153883" start="16394" end="16402" title="Administration of Kochi" label="governed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172540" start="16410" end="16427" title="Corporation of Kochi" label="Kochi Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="16441" end="16446" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="16505" end="16510" title="Ward (country subdivision)" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595166" start="16599" end="16609" title="Fort Cochin" label="Fort Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595166" start="16811" end="16821" title="Fort Kochi" label="Fort Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127956" start="16837" end="16847" title="Palluruthy" label="Palluruthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595603" start="16849" end="16858" title="Edappally" label="Edappally"/>
<link wikidata="Q10608093" start="16863" end="16871" title="Pachalam" label="Pachalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="17029" end="17042" title="Urban planning" label="town planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="17127" end="17141" title="waste disposal" label="waste disposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q117103134" start="17265" end="17294" title="Bhramapuram landfill" label="Brahmapuram Solid Waste plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892" start="17330" end="17343" title="potable water" label="potable water"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634049" start="17362" end="17375" title="Periyar River" label="Periyar River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393422" start="17505" end="17535" title="Kerala State Electricity Board" label="Kerala State Electricity Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600511" start="17541" end="17545" title="Greater Cochin Development Authority" label="GCDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948291" start="17550" end="17554" title="Goshree Islands Development Authority" label="GIDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600511" start="17628" end="17642" title="Greater Cochin" label="Greater Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522623" start="17754" end="17774" title="Kerala High Court" label="High Court of Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q390119" start="17830" end="17847" title="Kochi City Police" label="Kochi City Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101758" start="17863" end="17882" title="Police Commissioner" label="Police Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517917" start="17887" end="17908" title="Indian Police Service" label="Indian Police Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q30926890" start="18165" end="18192" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Police station" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Police station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522885" start="18264" end="18284" title="Government of Kerala" label="Government of Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="18289" end="18304" title="Political corruption" label="anti-corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053734" start="18319" end="18350" title="Central Bureau of Investigation" label="Central Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522926" start="18382" end="18386" title="Central Industrial Security Force" label="CISF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529990" start="18539" end="18542" title="National Investigation Agency" label="NIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280654" start="18544" end="18547" title="Directorate of Revenue Intelligence" label="DRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021410" start="18552" end="18566" title="Indian Revenue Service" label="Indian Customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971999" start="18615" end="18644" title="National Crime Records Bureau" label="National Crime Records Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18838" end="18857" title="Police commissioner#India" label="police commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595497" start="19035" end="19067" title="Ernakulam (Lok Sabha constituency)" label="Ernakulam Lok Sabha constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="19071" end="19088" title="Indian Parliament" label="Indian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q13115267" start="19164" end="19173" title="Hibi Eden" label="Hibi Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="19177" end="19201" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q16135415" start="19310" end="19319" title="Ernakulam (State assembly constituency)" label="Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16134141" start="19321" end="19332" title="Kalamassery (State Assembly constituency)" label="Kalamassery"/>
<link wikidata="Q17372576" start="19334" end="19339" title="Kochi (State Assembly constituency)" label="Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13113120" start="19341" end="19348" title="Paravur (State Assembly constituency)" label="Paravur"/>
<link wikidata="Q16137712" start="19350" end="19361" title="Thrikkakara (State Assembly constituency)" label="Thrikkakara"/>
<link wikidata="Q13112618" start="19363" end="19377" title="Thrippunithura (State Assembly constituency)" label="Thrippunithura"/>
<link wikidata="Q13114876" start="19382" end="19387" title="Vypin (State Assembly constituency)" label="Vypin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044983" start="19484" end="19496" title="Federal Bank" label="Federal Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274446" start="19517" end="19545" title="Private-sector banks in India" label="Private-sector bank in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q588793" start="19560" end="19565" title="Aluva" label="Aluva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615692" start="19671" end="19675" title="SEBI" label="SEBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128401" start="20094" end="20118" title="Status of Indian cities" label="second-tier metro cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="20129" end="20138" title="Sales tax" label="Sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="20513" end="20525" title="shipbuilding" label="shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q757232" start="20639" end="20654" title="Medical tourism" label="health services"/>
<link wikidata="Q925034" start="21023" end="21043" title="Non-resident Indian and person of Indian origin" label="non-resident Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525338" start="21080" end="21085" title="Eloor" label="Eloor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364904" start="21250" end="21263" title="petrochemical" label="petrochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="21274" end="21283" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q190444" start="21286" end="21304" title="rare earth element" label="rare earth element"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="21336" end="21346" title="fertiliser" label="fertiliser"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="21349" end="21353" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="21358" end="21366" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573376" start="21400" end="21444" title="Fertilisers and Chemicals Travancore Limited" label="Fertilisers and Chemicals Travancore Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424868" start="21536" end="21552" title="Kochi Refineries" label="Kochi Refineries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740970" start="21566" end="21577" title="Ambalamugal" label="Ambalamugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="21593" end="21604" title="State ownership" label="state owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353044" start="21605" end="21613" title="Oil refinery" label="refinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179027" start="21624" end="21638" title="Petronet LNG" label="Petronet India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424863" start="21664" end="21682" title="Kochi LNG Terminal" label="Kochi LNG Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139827" start="21796" end="21821" title="Coconut Development Board" label="Coconut Development Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141648" start="21827" end="21837" title="Coir Board of India" label="Coir Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764194" start="21846" end="21890" title="Marine Products Export Development Authority" label="Marine Products Export Development Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475675" start="21939" end="21950" title="Kalamassery" label="Kalamassery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573376" start="22066" end="22070" title="Fertilisers and Chemicals Travancore" label="FACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q356059" start="22072" end="22075" title="HMT Limited" label="HMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393357" start="22107" end="22126" title="Kerala Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation" label="KINFRA Hi-Tech Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530803" start="22149" end="22192" title="Cochin University of Science and Technology" label="Cochin University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6074057" start="22220" end="22229" title="Irumpanam" label="Irimpanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441590" start="22277" end="22297" title="Seaport-Airport Road" label="Seaport-Airport Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289348" start="22356" end="22378" title="Indian Oil Corporation" label="Indian Oil Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q854826" start="22380" end="22396" title="Bharat Petroleum" label="Bharat Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619375" start="22401" end="22420" title="Hindustan Petroleum" label="Hindustan Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356097" start="22529" end="22547" title="Ernakulam district" label="Ernakulam district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595166" start="22719" end="22729" title="Fort Kochi" label="Fort Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424865" start="23152" end="23164" title="Kochi Marina" label="Kochi Marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q356359" start="23419" end="23441" title="Indian Navy" label="Southern Naval Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139314" start="23495" end="23510" title="Cochin Shipyard" label="Cochin Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796022" start="23575" end="23586" title="Thoppumpady" label="Thoppumpady"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="23598" end="23610" title="fishing port" label="fishing port"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139316" start="23886" end="23897" title="Cochin Port Trust" label="Cochin Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077892" start="23972" end="23989" title="Willingdon Island" label="Willingdon Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060758" start="23995" end="24041" title="International Container Transshipment Terminal, Kochi" label="International Container Transshipment Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911835" start="24059" end="24070" title="Vallarpadam" label="Vallarpadam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139316" start="24120" end="24137" title="Port of Cochin" label="Cochin Port Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262280" start="24183" end="24192" title="Puthuvype" label="Puthuvype"/>
<link wikidata="Q9008932" start="24326" end="24355" title="International Pepper Exchange" label="International Pepper Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="24363" end="24375" title="black pepper" label="black pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576944" start="24400" end="24421" title="Spices Board of India" label="Spices Board of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="24484" end="24486" title="Information technology" label="IT"/>
<link wikidata="Q61515" start="24491" end="24495" title="Information technology enabled services" label="ITES"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576430" start="24562" end="24571" title="Bandwidth (computing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="24580" end="24595" title="Submarine communications cable" label="undersea cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003162" start="24769" end="24777" title="InfoPark, Kochi" label="InfoPark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139318" start="24779" end="24807" title="Cochin Special Economic Zone" label="Cochin Special Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393357" start="24812" end="24851" title="Kerala Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation" label="KINFRA Export Promotion Industrial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q13564590" start="24973" end="24982" title="SmartCity, Kochi" label="SmartCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197708" start="25029" end="25039" title="Cyber City, Kochi" label="Cyber City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475675" start="25043" end="25054" title="Kalamassery" label="Kalamassery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358472" start="25498" end="25519" title="Electronics City, Kochi" label="Special Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688498" start="25649" end="25661" title="aerotropolis" label="aerotropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986357" start="25665" end="25677" title="Nedumbassery" label="Nedumbassery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737591" start="25680" end="25691" title="Perumbavoor" label="Perumbavoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q592172" start="27259" end="27287" title="Cochin International Airport" label="Cochin International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986357" start="27306" end="27318" title="Nedumbassery" label="Nedumbassery"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="27674" end="27682" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="27684" end="27692" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="27697" end="27706" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q26927" start="27776" end="27787" title="Lakshadweep" label="Lakshadweep"/>
<link wikidata="Q407343" start="27827" end="27844" title="Air India Express" label="Air India Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797174" start="28230" end="28250" title="North–South and East–West Corridor" label="North-South Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520609" start="28450" end="28469" title="National Highway 66 (India)" label="National Highway 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q765630" start="28471" end="28491" title="National Highway 544 (India)" label="National Highway 544"/>
<link wikidata="Q18627423" start="28493" end="28514" title="National Highway 966A (India)" label="National Highway 966A"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619678" start="28519" end="28540" title="National Highway 966B (India)" label="National Highway 966B"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640541" start="28551" end="28565" title="List of state highways in Kerala" label="state highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603249" start="28613" end="28645" title="State Highway 15 (Kerala)" label="SH 15, Ettumanoor-Ernakulam Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q659887" start="28668" end="28676" title="Kottayam" label="Kottayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127723" start="28678" end="28682" title="Palai" label="Pala"/>
<link wikidata="Q14221516" start="28684" end="28690" title="Kumily" label="Kumily"/>
<link wikidata="Q889300" start="28692" end="28706" title="Changanacherry" label="Changanacherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025266" start="28708" end="28722" title="Pathanamthitta" label="Pathanamthitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603302" start="28728" end="28761" title="State Highway 41 (Kerala)" label="SH 41, Palarivattom-Thekkady Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603336" start="28821" end="28850" title="State Highway 63 (Kerala)" label="SH 63, Vypeen Pallipuram Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603339" start="28855" end="28890" title="State Highway 66 (Kerala)" label="SH 66, Alappuzha – Thoppumpady road"/>
<link wikidata="Q30537" start="29027" end="29046" title="Mahatma Gandhi Road (Kochi)" label="Mahatma Gandhi Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387142" start="29051" end="29074" title="S.A Road" label="Sahodaran Ayyappan Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441590" start="29239" end="29259" title="Seaport-Airport Road" label="Seaport-Airport Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139316" start="29299" end="29313" title="Cochin Port" label="Cochin Seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q592172" start="29321" end="29349" title="Cochin International Airport" label="Cochin International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606027" start="29378" end="29386" title="Kakkanad" label="Kakkanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003162" start="29457" end="29465" title="Infopark, Kochi" label="Infopark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102513" start="29493" end="29506" title="Chittoor Road" label="Chittoor Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854837" start="29508" end="29520" title="Banerji Road" label="Banerji Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488781" start="29522" end="29537" title="Shanmugham Road" label="Shanmugham Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424853" start="29539" end="29551" title="Kochi Bypass" label="Kochi Bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6354263" start="29553" end="29576" title="Kaloor-Kadavanthra Road" label="Kaloor-Kadavanthra Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137611" start="29578" end="29589" title="Park Avenue, Kochi" label="Park Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944049" start="30117" end="30129" title="Vyttila Mobility Hub, Kochi" label="Mobility Hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q12072358" start="30133" end="30140" title="Vytilla" label="Vytilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521210" start="30509" end="30515" title="Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission" label="JNNURM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986357" start="30628" end="30640" title="Nedumbassery" label="Nedumbassery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737591" start="30642" end="30653" title="Perumbavoor" label="Perumbavoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q588793" start="30655" end="30660" title="Aluva" label="Aluva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341743" start="30662" end="30674" title="Muvattupuzha" label="Muvattupuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2244227" start="30676" end="30689" title="Kothamangalam" label="Kothamangalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q888665" start="30691" end="30700" title="Cherthala" label="Cherthala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228497" start="30705" end="30715" title="Poochakkal" label="Poochakkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q59720" start="30727" end="30740" title="auto rickshaw" label="auto rickshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392599" start="31021" end="31039" title="Ernakulam Junction" label="Ernakulam Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392597" start="31041" end="31055" title="Ernakulam Town" label="Ernakulam Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737588" start="31150" end="31155" title="Aluva railway station" label="Aluva"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394844" start="31161" end="31173" title="Tripunithura railway station" label="Tripunithura"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335703" start="31204" end="31212" title="Edappally railway station" label="Edapally"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139311" start="31248" end="31271" title="Cochin Harbour Terminus railway station" label="Cochin Harbour Terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139316" start="31331" end="31344" title="Port of Kochi" label="Port of Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276096" start="31492" end="31513" title="Southern Railway Zone (India)" label="Southern Railway Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q819425" start="31517" end="31532" title="Indian Railways" label="Indian Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785513" start="31550" end="31585" title="Thiruvananthapuram Railway division" label="Thiruvananthapuram Railway division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392599" start="31591" end="31596" title="Ernakulam Junction" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392597" start="31715" end="31720" title="Ernakulam Town" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392599" start="31828" end="31833" title="Ernakulam Junction" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392596" start="31942" end="31960" title="Ernakulam Terminus" label="Ernakulam Terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522623" start="31999" end="32009" title="High court of Kerala" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="32036" end="32050" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="32059" end="32074" title="British Viceroy" label="British Viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522910" start="32318" end="32329" title="Kochi Metro" label="Kochi Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="32335" end="32361" title="Rapid transit" label="metro rapid transit system"/>
<link wikidata="Q588793" start="32629" end="32634" title="Aluva" label="Aluva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522910" start="32711" end="32722" title="Kochi Metro" label="Kochi Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058" start="32780" end="32793" title="Narendra Modi" label="Narendra Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522910" start="32805" end="32816" title="Kochi Metro" label="Kochi Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q588793" start="32837" end="32842" title="Aluva" label="Aluva"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139316" start="33198" end="33215" title="Cochin Port Trust" label="Cochin Port Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064226" start="33239" end="33248" title="Bunker oil" label="bunkering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077892" start="33352" end="33355" title="Willingdon Island" label="one"/>
<link wikidata="Q35381" start="33415" end="33422" title="Colombo" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q26927" start="33427" end="33438" title="Lakshadweep" label="Lakshadweep"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393405" start="33470" end="33519" title="Kerala Shipping and Inland Navigation Corporation" label="Kerala Shipping and Inland Navigation Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393480" start="33525" end="33557" title="Kerala State Water Transport Department" label="State Water Transport Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082251" start="33589" end="33601" title="jetty" label="boat jetties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139226" start="33748" end="33753" title="Vypin" label="Vypin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587317" start="33827" end="33842" title="Goshree bridges" label="Goshree bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q28153758" start="34175" end="34192" title="Kochi Water Metro" label="Kochi Water Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="34813" end="34821" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="34823" end="34835" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="34840" end="34845" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124078" start="34847" end="34854" title="Jainism in Kerala" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="34856" end="34863" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="34865" end="34872" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="34877" end="34885" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267987" start="35134" end="35142" title="Malayali" label="Malayali"/>
<link wikidata="Q173491" start="35214" end="35220" title="Tamils" label="Tamils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282294" start="35222" end="35231" title="Gujaratis" label="Gujaratis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="35233" end="35237" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q368125" start="35239" end="35251" title="Anglo-Indian" label="Anglo-Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="35254" end="35259" title="Sikhs" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249914" start="35264" end="35272" title="Konkani people" label="Konkanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="35542" end="35547" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="35552" end="35557" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="35684" end="35696" title="urbanisation" label="urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971999" start="35921" end="35950" title="NCRB" label="National Crime Records Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q18175130" start="36752" end="36766" title="Swachh Bharat Abhiyan" label="Swachch Bharat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231558" start="36861" end="36871" title="smart city" label="smart city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058" start="36893" end="36906" title="Narendra Modi" label="Narendra Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21099408" start="36916" end="36936" title="Smart Cities Mission" label="Smart Cities Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267987" start="37332" end="37341" title="Malayalis" label="Malayalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249914" start="37343" end="37351" title="Konkani people" label="Konkanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282294" start="37353" end="37362" title="Gujarati people" label="Gujaratis"/>
<link wikidata="Q402913" start="37364" end="37372" title="Bengalis" label="Bengalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404237" start="37374" end="37382" title="Ethnic groups in Kerala" label="Marathis"/>
<link wikidata="Q854323" start="37384" end="37392" title="Punjabis" label="Punjabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q173491" start="37394" end="37403" title="Tamils" label="Tamilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q118281" start="37405" end="37415" title="Kannadigas" label="Kannadigas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529576" start="37417" end="37424" title="Bihari people" label="Biharis"/>
<link wikidata="Q368125" start="37426" end="37439" title="Anglo-Indian people" label="Anglo Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105126" start="37603" end="37614" title="Cochin Jews" label="Cochin Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q28873738" start="37694" end="37712" title="List of Synagogues in Kerala" label="several Synagogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q886578" start="37751" end="37765" title="Chendamangalam" label="Chendamangalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939468" start="37767" end="37774" title="Paravur, Kollam" label="Paravur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6740670" start="37778" end="37782" title="Mala, Kerala" label="Mala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077454" start="37842" end="37874" title="Jacobite Syrian Christian Church" label="Jacobite Syrian Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="38085" end="38099" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q497939" start="38145" end="38168" title="Archdiocese of Verapoly" label="Archdiocese of Verapoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q868084" start="38191" end="38208" title="Diocese of Cochin" label="Diocese of Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q64871" start="38238" end="38257" title="Syro-Malabar Church" label="Syro-Malabar Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q685333" start="38279" end="38288" title="sui iuris" label="sui iuris"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="38295" end="38320" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="Eastern Catholic Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q648601" start="38339" end="38361" title="Saint Thomas Christians" label="Saint Thomas Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595668" start="38450" end="38517" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Syro-Malabar Catholic Cathedral Basilica, Ernakulam" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Syro-Malabar Catholic Cathedral Basilica, Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595669" start="38575" end="38628" title="Vallarpadam Church" label="Basilica of Our Lady of Ransom, Vallarpadam-Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942478" start="38630" end="38649" title="Santa Cruz Basilica" label="Santa Cruz Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595166" start="38676" end="38686" title="Fort Kochi" label="Fort Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060941" start="38688" end="38712" title="St. Antony&amp;#x27;s Shrine, Kaloor" label="St. Antony&amp;#x27;s Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060941" start="38716" end="38722" title="Kaloor" label="Kaloor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595603" start="38750" end="38759" title="Edappally" label="Edappally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969250" start="38860" end="38864" title="Onam" label="Onam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587220" start="38869" end="38874" title="Vishu" label="Vishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="38886" end="38897" title="North India" label="North India"/>
<link wikidata="Q10259" start="38920" end="38924" title="Holi" label="Holi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="38982" end="38991" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="38993" end="38999" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q464458" start="39001" end="39012" title="Eid ul-Fitr" label="Eid ul-Fitr"/>
<link wikidata="Q193027" start="39017" end="39031" title="Milad-e-sherif" label="Milad-e-sherif"/>
<link wikidata="Q24893434" start="39084" end="39099" title="Cochin Carnival" label="Cochin Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567543" start="39248" end="39268" title="South Indian culture" label="South Indian culture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39470" end="39493" title="South Indian culture#Traditional clothing" label="traditional Kerala wear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595259" start="39547" end="39563" title="Kerala cuisine" label="Keralite cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="39617" end="39624" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q42527" start="39629" end="39635" title="spices" label="spices"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39643" end="39655" title="South Indian culture#Cuisine" label="South Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="39677" end="39684" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q192087" start="39689" end="39701" title="Indian cuisine" label="North Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412448" start="40385" end="40393" title="Shawarma" label="Shawarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074799" start="40522" end="40533" title="Oberon Mall" label="Oberon Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663194" start="40589" end="40606" title="Abad Nucleus Mall" label="Abad Nucleus Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644430" start="40611" end="40620" title="Lulu International Shopping Mall, Kochi" label="LuLu Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473084" start="40796" end="40814" title="Forum Thomsun Mall" label="Forum Thomsun Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976556" start="41076" end="41091" title="five star hotel" label="five star hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746220" start="41147" end="41159" title="Crowne Plaza" label="Crowne Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141173" start="41161" end="41183" title="Marriott International" label="Marriott International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425063" start="41185" end="41196" title="Grand Hyatt" label="Grand Hyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q634831" start="41198" end="41206" title="Sheraton Hotels and Resorts" label="Sheraton"/>
<link wikidata="Q261077" start="41208" end="41219" title="Le Méridien" label="Le Méridien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281341" start="41221" end="41233" title="Radisson Blu" label="Radisson Blu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717882" start="41235" end="41246" title="Holiday Inn" label="Holiday Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502859" start="41248" end="41254" title="Ramada" label="Ramada"/>
<link wikidata="Q920166" start="41256" end="41260" title="Ibis (hotel)" label="Ibis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521893" start="41262" end="41273" title="Taj Hotels Resorts and Palaces" label="Taj Malabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595905" start="41351" end="41371" title="Malayalam literature" label="Malayalam literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956035" start="41383" end="41410" title="Changampuzha Krishna Pillai" label="Changampuzha Krishna Pillai"/>
<link wikidata="Q60881" start="41412" end="41437" title="Kesari Balakrishna Pillai" label="Kesari Balakrishna Pillai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979882" start="41439" end="41455" title="G. Sankara Kurup" label="G. Sankara Kurup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587165" start="41461" end="41487" title="Vyloppilli Sreedhara Menon" label="Vyloppilli Sreedhara Menon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399712" start="41524" end="41542" title="Sahodaran Ayyappan" label="Sahodaran Ayyappan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130660" start="41547" end="41562" title="Pandit Karuppan" label="Pandit Karuppan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424859" start="41588" end="41621" title="Kochi International Book Festival" label="Kochi International Book Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762228" start="41759" end="41770" title="Hill Palace" label="Hill Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267941" start="41779" end="41791" title="Dutch Palace" label="Dutch Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="41894" end="41902" title="soccer" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="41907" end="41914" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684271" start="41920" end="41958" title="Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, Kochi" label="Jawaharlal Nehru International Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309158" start="42063" end="42085" title="Regional Sports Centre, Kochi" label="Regional Sports Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="42666" end="42672" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748675" start="42730" end="42786" title="Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre" label="Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q24944513" start="42788" end="42804" title="Sunrise Hospital Kochi" label="Sunrise Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="42806" end="42825" title="Specialist Hospital" label="Specialist Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806442" start="42827" end="42849" title="Medical Trust Hospital" label="Medical Trust Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q28153734" start="42874" end="42888" title="Renai medicity" label="Renai medicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479031" start="42890" end="42908" title="Lakeshore Hospital" label="Lakeshore Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754374" start="42910" end="42924" title="Lisie Hospital, Kochi" label="Lisie Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q20646894" start="42926" end="42939" title="Aster Medcity" label="Aster Medcity"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340054" start="42941" end="42979" title="Rajagiri Hospital" label="Rajagiri Institute of Medical Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q24887213" start="43130" end="43143" title="KIMS Hospital" label="KIMS Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q16916004" start="43184" end="43198" title="Saraf Hospital" label="Saraf Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531947" start="43341" end="43368" title="General Hospital, Ernakulam" label="General Hospital, Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137473" start="43373" end="43410" title="Government Medical College, Ernakulam" label="Government Medical College, Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393418" start="44075" end="44103" title="Kerala State Education Board" label="Kerala State Education Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347350" start="44258" end="44295" title="Central Board of Secondary Education" label="Central Board for Secondary Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350855" start="44304" end="44345" title="Indian Certificate of Secondary Education" label="Indian Certificate of Secondary Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585674" start="44876" end="44903" title="Sree Rama Varma High School" label="Sree Rama Varma High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156653" start="45013" end="45031" title="Kendriya Vidyalaya" label="Kendriya Vidyalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522629" start="45033" end="45049" title="Chinmaya Mission" label="Chinmaya Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635018" start="45054" end="45076" title="Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan" label="Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38251017" start="45318" end="45350" title="St. Albert&amp;#x27;s HSS, Ernakulam" label="St. Albert&amp;#x27;s HSS, Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888286" start="45435" end="45482" title="Model Technical Higher Secondary School, Kaloor" label="Model Technical Higher Secondary School, Kaloor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729685" start="45483" end="45498" title="The Delta Study" label="The Delta Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808933" start="45540" end="45559" title="Assisi Vidyaniketan" label="Assisi Vidyaniketan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139315" start="45561" end="45585" title="Cochin Refineries School" label="Cochin Refineries School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928342" start="45655" end="45675" title="Navy Children School Kochi" label="Navy Children School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104026" start="45699" end="45712" title="Choice School" label="Choice School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928237" start="45714" end="45730" title="Vidyodaya School" label="Vidyodaya School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530803" start="45889" end="45932" title="Cochin University of Science and Technology" label="Cochin University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733535" start="46074" end="46099" title="Mahatma Gandhi University, Kerala" label="Mahatma Gandhi University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530803" start="46112" end="46129" title="Cochin University" label="Cochin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020923" start="46168" end="46194" title="Indian Maritime University" label="Indian Maritime University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077892" start="46198" end="46215" title="Willingdon Island" label="Willingdon Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585673" start="46217" end="46258" title="Sree Sankaracharya University of Sanskrit" label="Sree Sankaracharya University of Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595324" start="46262" end="46268" title="Kalady" label="Kalady"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061257" start="46379" end="46443" title="Central Institute of Fisheries Nautical and Engineering Training" label="Central Institute of Fisheries Nautical and Engineering Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979223" start="46449" end="46494" title="National University of Advanced Legal Studies" label="National University of Advanced Legal Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520770" start="46500" end="46534" title="National Institute of Oceanography, India" label="National Institute of Oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061399" start="46543" end="46586" title="Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute" label="Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020637" start="46648" end="46688" title="Indian Institute of Management Kozhikode" label="Indian Institute of Management Kozhikode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003162" start="46757" end="46772" title="InfoPark, Kochi" label="InfoPark, Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46799" end="46827" title="Cochin University of Science and Technology#School of Management Studies" label="School of Management Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432407" start="46907" end="46918" title="School of Communication and Management Studies" label="SCMS Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043260" start="46991" end="46995" title="Xavier Institute of Management and Entrepreneurship" label="XIME"/>
<link wikidata="Q13114341" start="47076" end="47112" title="Rajagiri Centre for Business Studies" label="Rajagiri Centre for Business Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711875" start="47164" end="47197" title="Albertian Institute of Management" label="Albertian Institute of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748675" start="47275" end="47331" title="Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre" label="Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475675" start="47372" end="47383" title="Kalamassery" label="Kalamassery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6427202" start="47460" end="47470" title="Kolenchery" label="Kolenchery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733207" start="47517" end="47540" title="Maharaja&amp;#x27;s College, Ernakulam" label="Maharaja&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586753" start="47542" end="47567" title="St. Albert&amp;#x27;s College" label="St. Albert&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591817" start="47569" end="47594" title="St. Teresa&amp;#x27;s College" label="St. Teresa&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397182" start="47596" end="47617" title="Sacred Hearts College" label="Sacred Hearts College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244679" start="47665" end="47717" title="De Paul Institute of Science &amp;amp; Technology (DIST)" label="De Paul Institute of Science &amp;amp; Technology (DIST)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139306" start="47722" end="47736" title="Cochin College" label="Cochin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432438" start="47800" end="47827" title="School of Engineering, CUSAT" label="School of Engineering CUSAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389179" start="47829" end="47870" title="SCMS School of Engineering and Technology" label="SCMS School of Engineering and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475675" start="47874" end="47885" title="Kalamassery" label="Kalamassery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888240" start="47887" end="47912" title="Model Engineering College" label="Model Engineering College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285616" start="47914" end="47961" title="Rajagiri School of Engineering &amp;amp; Technology" label="Rajagiri School of Engineering &amp;amp; Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522623" start="48044" end="48064" title="High Court of Kerala" label="High Court of Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588949" start="48119" end="48151" title="Government Law College, Ernakulam" label="Government Law College-Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530803" start="48243" end="48248" title="CUSAT" label="CUSAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979223" start="48340" end="48385" title="National University of Advanced Legal Studies" label="National University of Advanced Legal Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127954" start="48651" end="48679" title="Palluruthy Relief Settlement" label="Palluruthy Relief Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="48770" end="48774" title="YMCA" label="YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127954" start="48816" end="48844" title="Palluruthy Relief Settlement" label="Palluruthy Relief Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172540" start="48854" end="48881" title="Kochi Municipal Corporation" label="Kochi Municipal Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q679587" start="49081" end="49120" title="Kerala State Road Transport Corporation" label="Kerala State Road Transport Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595254" start="49253" end="49271" title="V. R. Krishna Iyer" label="V. R. Krishna Iyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q146183" start="49406" end="49415" title="John Bosco" label="Don Bosco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097997" start="49523" end="49538" title="Childline India" label="Childline India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595166" start="50352" end="50362" title="Fort Kochi" label="Fort Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732186" start="50592" end="50609" title="Malayala Manorama" label="Malayala Manorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q734491" start="50623" end="50634" title="Mathrubhumi" label="Mathrubhumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052218" start="50648" end="50659" title="Siraj Daily" label="Siraj Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119691" start="50673" end="50682" title="Madhyamam" label="Madhyamam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119047" start="50696" end="50708" title="Deshabhimani" label="Deshabhimani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041666" start="50722" end="50729" title="Deepika (newspaper)" label="Deepika"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846588" start="50743" end="50757" title="Kerala Kaumudi" label="Kerala Kaumudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801701" start="50771" end="50781" title="Janmabhumi" label="Janmabhumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q926175" start="50835" end="50844" title="The Hindu" label="The Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955025" start="50858" end="50880" title="The New Indian Express" label="The New Indian Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q46807" start="50894" end="50912" title="The Times of India" label="The Times of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285256" start="50926" end="50937" title="The Pioneer (daily)" label="The Pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975835" start="50954" end="50974" title="The Deccan Chronicle" label="The Deccan Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q33673" start="51094" end="51101" title="Kannada language" label="Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8097" start="51113" end="51119" title="Telugu language" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954757" start="51228" end="51246" title="The Economic Times" label="The Economic Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q279739" start="51260" end="51273" title="Business Line" label="Business Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q113456448" start="51287" end="51308" title="The Business Standard" label="The Business Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332561" start="51325" end="51346" title="The Financial Express (India)" label="The Financial Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426176" start="51416" end="51428" title="Sathyadeepam" label="Sathyadeepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523335" start="51442" end="51450" title="The Week (Indian magazine)" label="The Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914991" start="51467" end="51474" title="Vanitha" label="Vanitha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595710" start="51586" end="51598" title="Asianet Plus" label="Asianet Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29060289" start="51612" end="51619" title="Flowers (TV channel)" label="Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13564498" start="51633" end="51642" title="Jeevan TV" label="Jeevan TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6798513" start="51656" end="51673" title="Mazhavil Manorama" label="Mazhavil Manorama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51687" end="51697" title="We TV (Indian TV channel)" label="Kairali We"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751419" start="51711" end="51724" title="Manorama News" label="Manorama News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314157" start="51741" end="51752" title="Reporter TV" label="Reporter TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595710" start="51798" end="51805" title="Asianet (TV channel)" label="Asianet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6348241" start="51819" end="51829" title="Kairali TV" label="Kairali TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595655" start="51843" end="51852" title="Amrita TV" label="Amrita TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763315" start="51869" end="51880" title="Doordarshan" label="Doordarshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735284" start="51888" end="51902" title="Prasar Bharati" label="Prasar Bharati"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259843" start="52027" end="52037" title="DD Direct+" label="DD Direct+"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519770" start="52039" end="52046" title="Dish TV" label="Dish TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525208" start="52048" end="52065" title="Airtel digital TV" label="Airtel digital TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194685" start="52067" end="52079" title="Reliance Digital TV" label="Reliance DTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523702" start="52081" end="52095" title="Sun Direct DTH" label="Sun Direct DTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518953" start="52100" end="52108" title="Tata Sky" label="Tata Sky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52153" end="52163" title="All India Radio#South regional service" label="Rainbow FM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52181" end="52190" title="All India Radio#South regional service" label="AIR Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645930" start="52202" end="52214" title="Club FM 94.3" label="Club FM 94.3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280900" start="52220" end="52236" title="Radio Mango 91.9" label="Radio Mango 91.9"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595280" start="52242" end="52253" title="Red FM 93.5" label="Red FM 93.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519827" start="52259" end="52271" title="Radio Mirchi" label="Radio Mirchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744006" start="52333" end="52348" title="Malayalam movie" label="Malayalam movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q41253" start="52828" end="52840" title="movie theater" label="cinema halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074799" start="52958" end="52969" title="Oberon Mall" label="Oberon Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q131561640" start="53073" end="53076" title="PVR Cinemas" label="PVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644430" start="53175" end="53207" title="Lulu International Shopping Mall, Kochi" label="LuLu International Shopping Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686673" start="53209" end="53218" title="Cinepolis" label="Cinepolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q944584" start="53457" end="53466" title="Telephony" label="Telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533647" start="53528" end="53534" title="Aircel" label="Aircel"/>
<link wikidata="Q854867" start="53536" end="53542" title="Bharti Airtel" label="Airtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q96381927" start="53544" end="53557" title="Idea Cellular" label="Idea Cellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719715" start="53559" end="53567" title="Hutch (Indian cellular company)" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q729342" start="53569" end="53586" title="Reliance Infocomm" label="Reliance Infocomm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518849" start="53588" end="53599" title="Tata Docomo" label="Tata Docomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18643672" start="53601" end="53604" title="Jio" label="Jio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151534" start="53606" end="53618" title="Tata Indicom" label="Tata Indicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q278834" start="53639" end="53643" title="Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited" label="BSNL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="53786" end="53794" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056350" start="53858" end="53877" title="Indian Super League" label="Indian Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842784" start="53885" end="53900" title="Kerala Blasters" label="Kerala Blasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="54078" end="54082" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387253" start="54158" end="54167" title="FC Kochin" label="FC Kochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974599" start="54172" end="54192" title="Chirag United Club Kerala" label="Chirag United Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q8350658" start="54320" end="54344" title="2017 FIFA U-17 World Cup" label="2017 FIFA U-17 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684271" start="54435" end="54473" title="Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, Kochi" label="Jawaharlal Nehru International Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q396412" start="54573" end="54594" title="Indian Premier League" label="Indian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140364" start="54609" end="54629" title="Kochi Tuskers Kerala" label="Kochi Tuskers Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600511" start="54916" end="54920" title="Greater Cochin Development Authority" label="GCDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522885" start="54977" end="54997" title="Government of Kerala" label="Government of Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="55002" end="55006" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="55021" end="55032" title="Real Madrid" label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309158" start="55089" end="55116" title="Regional Sports Centre, Kochi" label="Rajiv Gandhi Sports Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6345229" start="55120" end="55131" title="Kadavanthra" label="Kadavanthra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475675" start="55484" end="55495" title="Kalamassery" label="Kalamassery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048525" start="55648" end="55660" title="golf courses" label="golf courses"/>
<link wikidata="Q482798" start="55993" end="55998" title="yards" label="yards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337306" start="56273" end="56281" title="Yachting" label="Yachting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992599" start="56485" end="56509" title="2008–09 Volvo Ocean Race" label="2008–09 Volvo Ocean Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q356359" start="56592" end="56603" title="Indian Navy" label="Indian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972734" start="56638" end="56664" title="INS Venduruthy" label="INS &amp;quot;Venduruthy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139314" start="57084" end="57099" title="Cochin Shipyard" label="Cochin Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="57222" end="57238" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="57290" end="57297" title="twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="57306" end="57323" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q74195" start="57341" end="57363" title="Menlo Park, California" label="Menlo Park, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q41970" start="57381" end="57391" title="Pyatigorsk" label="Pyatigorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q130417148" start="57422" end="57437" title="Elijah ha-Adeni" label="Elijah ha-Adeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q23681162" start="57440" end="57453" title="Soubin Shahir" label="Soubin Shahir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280200" start="57456" end="57472" title="Radha Vinod Raju" label="Radha Vinod Raju"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988187" start="57491" end="57514" title="Neighbourhoods of Kochi" label="Neighbourhoods of Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069745" start="57517" end="57551" title="List of tallest buildings in Kochi" label="List of tallest buildings in Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q150056" start="57554" end="57571" title="Portuguese Cochin" label="Portuguese Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105126" start="57574" end="57585" title="Cochin Jews" label="Cochin Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q130724612" start="57588" end="57616" title="Largest Indian cities by GDP" label="Largest Indian cities by GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q702918" start="57659" end="57666" title="Ma Huan" label="Ma Huan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56275" wikidata="Q237020" url="?curid=56275" title="Cochin (disambiguation)">
<text>Cochin is the former name of [[Kochi]], a port city in India.

Cochin may also refer to:

==Geography==
* Kingdom of Cochin, a former feudal city-state on Malabar Coast, India
* Travancore–Cochin, Indian state from 1949 to 1956
* Cochinchina, former name used by Europeans for Vietnam, especially its Southern part
* Cochin, Saskatchewan, Canada, a Resort Village in Saskatchewan, Canada

==People with the surname==
* Charles-Nicolas Cochin the Elder (1688–1754), French engraver
* Charles Nicolas Cochin (1715–1790), French engraver, designer, writer, and painter; son of the prior
* Pierre-Suzanne-Augustin Cochin (1823–1872), French politician and writer
* Denys Cochin, French politician and writer
* Augustin Cochin (politician) (1823–1872), French politician and writer
* Augustin Cochin (historian) (1876–1916), French historian and grandson of the prior
* Jean-Denis Cochin (1726–1783), French Catholic priest

==Other uses==
* Cochin (chicken), a breed of chicken known for its thick plumage
* Hôpital Cochin, a famous hospital in Paris, France
* Cochin (typeface), a typeface designed in 1912
* Cochin ware, a type of Chinese pottery
* Cochin Jews, Indian Jews from Cochin

==See also==
*Kochi (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q237020" start="0" end="6" title="Cochin (disambiguation)" label="Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q237020" start="29" end="38" title="Cochin (disambiguation)" label="[[Kochi]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q237020" start="63" end="69" title="Cochin (disambiguation)" label="Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150056" start="106" end="123" title="Kingdom of Cochin" label="Kingdom of Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538311" start="178" end="195" title="Travancore–Cochin" label="Travancore–Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q505503" start="230" end="241" title="Cochinchina" label="Cochinchina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139302" start="317" end="337" title="Cochin, Saskatchewan" label="Cochin, Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958262" start="419" end="451" title="Charles-Nicolas Cochin the Elder" label="Charles-Nicolas Cochin the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408093" start="483" end="505" title="Charles Nicolas Cochin" label="Charles Nicolas Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871551" start="586" end="616" title="Pierre-Suzanne-Augustin Cochin" label="Pierre-Suzanne-Augustin Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023401" start="661" end="673" title="Denys Cochin" label="Denys Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871551" start="706" end="734" title="Augustin Cochin (politician)" label="Augustin Cochin (politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q568626" start="779" end="806" title="Augustin Cochin (historian)" label="Augustin Cochin (historian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65444" start="865" end="882" title="Jean-Denis Cochin" label="Jean-Denis Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094864" start="937" end="953" title="Cochin (chicken)" label="Cochin (chicken)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131080" start="1004" end="1018" title="Hôpital Cochin" label="Hôpital Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139303" start="1057" end="1074" title="Cochin (typeface)" label="Cochin (typeface)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010297" start="1106" end="1117" title="Cochin ware" label="Cochin ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105126" start="1147" end="1158" title="Cochin Jews" label="Cochin Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q242151" start="1199" end="1221" title="Kochi (disambiguation)" label="Kochi (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56276" wikidata="Q35409" url="?curid=56276" title="Family (biology)">
<text>Family (, : ) is one of the eight major hierarchical taxonomic ranks in Linnaean taxonomy. It is classified between order and genus. A family may be divided into subfamilies, which are intermediate ranks between the ranks of family and genus. The official family names are Latin in origin; however, popular names are often used: for example, walnut trees and hickory trees belong to the family Juglandaceae, but that family is commonly referred to as the &quot;walnut family&quot;.

The delineation of what constitutes a family—or whether a described family should be acknowledged—is established and decided upon by active taxonomists. There are not strict regulations for outlining or acknowledging a family, yet in the realm of plants, these classifications often rely on both the vegetative and reproductive characteristics of plant species. Taxonomists frequently hold varying perspectives on these descriptions, leading to a lack of widespread consensus within the scientific community for extended periods. The continual publication of new data and diverse opinions plays a crucial role in facilitating adjustments and ultimately reaching a consensus over time.

==Nomenclature==
The naming of families is codified by various international bodies using the following suffixes:
*In fungal, algal, and botanical nomenclature, the family names of plants, fungi, and algae end with the suffix &quot;-aceae&quot;, except for a small number of historic but widely used names including Compositae and Gramineae.
*In zoological nomenclature, the family names of animals end with the suffix &quot;-idae&quot;.
Name changes at the family level are regulated by the codes of nomenclature. For botanical families, some traditional names like Palmae (Arecaceae), Cruciferae (Brassicaceae), and Leguminosae (Fabaceae) are conserved alongside their standardized -aceae forms due to their historical significance and widespread use in the literature.
Family names are typically formed from the stem of a type genus within the family. In zoology, when a valid family name is based on a genus that is later found to be a junior synonym, the family name may be maintained for stability if it was established before 1960. In botany, some family names that were found to be junior synonyms have been conserved due to their widespread use in the scientific literature.

The family-group in zoological nomenclature includes several ranks: superfamily (-oidea), family (-idae), subfamily (-inae), and tribe (-ini). Under the principle of coordination, a name established at any of these ranks can be moved to another rank while retaining its original authorship and date, requiring only a change in suffix to reflect its new rank.

New family descriptions are relatively rare in taxonomy, occurring in fewer than one in a hundred taxonomic publications. Such descriptions typically result from either the discovery of organisms with unique combinations of characters that do not fit existing families, or from phylogenetic analyses that reveal the need for reclassification.

==History==
The taxonomic term &#x27; was first used by French botanist Pierre Magnol in his &#x27; (1689) where he called the seventy-six groups of plants he recognised in his tables families (&#x27;). The concept of rank at that time was not yet settled, and in the preface to the &#x27; Magnol spoke of uniting his families into larger &quot;&quot;, which is far from how the term is used today.

In his work &quot;Philosophia Botanica&quot; published in 1751, Carl Linnaeus employed the term &quot;familia&quot; to categorize significant plant groups such as trees, herbs, ferns, palms, and so on. Notably, he restricted the use of this term solely within the book&#x27;s morphological section, where he delved into discussions regarding the vegetative and generative aspects of plants. Subsequently, in French botanical publications, from Michel Adanson&#x27;s &#x27; (1763) and until the end of the 19th century, the word &#x27; was used as a French equivalent of the Latin &#x27; (or &#x27;).

The family concept in botany was further developed by the French botanists Antoine Laurent de Jussieu and Michel Adanson. Jussieu&#x27;s 1789 &quot;Genera Plantarum&quot; divided plants into 100 &#x27;natural orders,&#x27; many of which correspond to modern plant families. However, the term &#x27;family&#x27; did not become standardized in botanical usage until after the mid-nineteenth century.

In zoology, the family as a rank intermediate between order and genus was introduced by Pierre André Latreille in his &quot;&quot; (1796). He used families (some of them were not named) in some but not in all his orders of &quot;insects&quot; (which then included all arthropods).

The standardization of zoological family names began in the early nineteenth century. A significant development came in 1813 when William Kirby introduced the -idae suffix for animal family names, derived from the Greek &#x27;eidos&#x27; meaning &#x27;resemblance&#x27; or &#x27;like&#x27;. The adoption of this naming convention helped establish families as an important taxonomic rank. By the mid-1800s, many of Linnaeus&#x27;s broad genera were being elevated to family status to accommodate the rapidly growing number of newly discovered species.

In nineteenth-century works such as the &#x27; of Augustin Pyramus de Candolle and the &#x27; of George Bentham and Joseph Dalton Hooker this word &quot;&quot; was used for what now is given the rank of family.

==Uses==
Families serve as valuable units for evolutionary, paleontological, and genetic studies due to their relatively greater stability compared to lower taxonomic levels like genera and species.
Families play a significant practical role in biological education and research. They provide an efficient framework for teaching taxonomy, as they group organisms with general similarities while remaining specific enough to be useful for identification purposes. For example, in botany, learning the characteristics of major plant families helps students identify related species across different geographic regions, since families often have worldwide distribution patterns. In many groups of organisms, families serve as the primary level for taxonomic identification keys, making them particularly valuable for field guides and systematic work as they often represent readily recognizable groups of related organisms with shared characteristics.

In ecological and biodiversity research, families frequently serve as the foundational level for identification in survey work and environmental studies. This is particularly useful because families often share life history traits or occupy similar ecological niches. Some families show strong correlations between their taxonomic grouping and ecological functions, though this relationship varies among different groups of organisms.

The stability of family names has practical importance for applied biological work, though this stability faces ongoing challenges from new scientific findings. Modern molecular studies and phylogenetic analyses continue to refine the understanding of family relationships, sometimes leading to reclassification. The impact of these changes varies among different groups of organisms – while some families remain well-defined and easily recognizable, others require revision as new evidence emerges about evolutionary relationships. This balance between maintaining nomenclatural stability and incorporating new scientific discoveries remains an active area of taxonomic practice.

== See also ==
* Systematics, the study of the diversity of living organisms
* Cladistics, the classification of organisms by their order of branching in an evolutionary tree
* Virus classification
* List of Anuran families
* List of Testudines families
* List of fish families
* List of families of spiders

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="0" end="6" title="Family (biology)" label="Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="12" end="12" title="Family (biology)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="40" end="52" title="Hierarchy" label="hierarchical"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="53" end="67" title="taxonomic rank" label="taxonomic rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q10372154" start="72" end="89" title="Linnaean taxonomy" label="Linnaean taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="116" end="121" title="order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="126" end="131" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q164280" start="162" end="173" title="subfamily" label="subfamilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="273" end="278" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453469" start="342" end="354" title="Juglans" label="walnut trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q142788" start="359" end="372" title="Hickory" label="hickory trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q216944" start="394" end="406" title="Juglandaceae" label="Juglandaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="623" end="633" title="taxonomist" label="taxonomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188577" start="949" end="958" title="Consensus decision-making" label="consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310776" start="1306" end="1328" title="botanical nomenclature" label="botanical nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1401" end="1407" title=":wikt:-aceae#Suffix" label="-aceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25400" start="1485" end="1495" title="Compositae" label="Compositae"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="1500" end="1509" title="Gramineae" label="Gramineae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13011" start="1515" end="1538" title="zoological nomenclature" label="zoological nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1594" end="1599" title=":wikt:-idae#Suffix" label="-idae"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="1744" end="1753" title="Arecaceae" label="Arecaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156888" start="1768" end="1780" title="Brassicaceae" label="Brassicaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q44448" start="1800" end="1808" title="Fabaceae" label="Fabaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q842832" start="1994" end="2004" title="type genus" label="type genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="2109" end="2123" title="junior synonym" label="junior synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q941227" start="2285" end="2294" title="conserved name" label="conserved"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="2422" end="2433" title="superfamily (taxonomy)" label="superfamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q164280" start="2460" end="2469" title="subfamily" label="subfamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q227936" start="2483" end="2488" title="tribe (biology)" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="2992" end="3004" title="phylogenetic" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q522664" start="3130" end="3143" title="Pierre Magnol" label="Pierre Magnol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="3522" end="3535" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="3621" end="3626" title="Tree" label="trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="3628" end="3632" title="herb" label="herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q80005" start="3635" end="3639" title="fern" label="fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="3642" end="3647" title="Palmae" label="palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q315861" start="3902" end="3916" title="Michel Adanson" label="Michel Adanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q223963" start="4134" end="4160" title="Antoine Laurent de Jussieu" label="Antoine Laurent de Jussieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q315861" start="4165" end="4179" title="Michel Adanson" label="Michel Adanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="4461" end="4468" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q312771" start="4546" end="4568" title="Pierre André Latreille" label="Pierre André Latreille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="4726" end="4735" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q544651" start="4870" end="4883" title="William Kirby (entomologist)" label="William Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q123057" start="5342" end="5370" title="Augustin Pyramus de Candolle" label="Augustin Pyramus de Candolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q731808" start="5389" end="5403" title="George Bentham" label="George Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q157501" start="5408" end="5428" title="Joseph Dalton Hooker" label="Joseph Dalton Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q830588" start="6318" end="6329" title="field guide" label="field guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="6472" end="6484" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="6703" end="6719" title="ecological niche" label="ecological niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="7058" end="7067" title="molecular phylogenetics" label="molecular"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="7080" end="7092" title="phylogenetic" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516404" start="7589" end="7600" title="Systematics" label="Systematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="7651" end="7661" title="Cladistics" label="Cladistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q478216" start="7749" end="7769" title="Virus classification" label="Virus classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905141" start="7772" end="7795" title="List of Anuran families" label="List of Anuran families"/>
<link wikidata="Q194582" start="7798" end="7825" title="List of Testudines families" label="List of Testudines families"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788863" start="7828" end="7849" title="List of fish families" label="List of fish families"/>
<link wikidata="Q470912" start="7852" end="7879" title="List of families of spiders" label="List of families of spiders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56277" wikidata="Q7535" url="?curid=56277" title="Rhubarb">
<text>Rhubarb is the fleshy, edible stalks (petioles) of species and hybrids (culinary rhubarb) of &quot;Rheum&quot; in the family Polygonaceae, which are cooked and used for food. The plant is a herbaceous perennial that grows from short, thick rhizomes. Historically, different plants have been called &quot;rhubarb&quot; in English. The large, triangular leaves contain high levels of oxalic acid and anthrone glycosides, making them inedible. The small flowers are grouped in large compound leafy greenish-white to rose-red inflorescences.

The precise origin of culinary rhubarb is unknown. The species &quot;Rheum rhabarbarum&quot; (syn. &quot;R. undulatum&quot;) and &quot;R. rhaponticum&quot; were grown in Europe before the 18th century and used for medicinal purposes. By the early 18th century, these two species and a possible hybrid of unknown origin, &quot;R.&quot; × &quot;hybridum&quot;, were grown as vegetable crops in England and Scandinavia. They readily hybridize, and culinary rhubarb was developed by selecting open-pollinated seed, so its precise origin is almost impossible to determine. In appearance, samples of culinary rhubarb vary on a continuum between &quot;R. rhaponticum&quot; and &quot;R. rhabarbarum&quot;. However, modern rhubarb cultivars are tetraploids with 2&quot;n&quot; = 44, in contrast to 2&quot;n&quot; = 22 for the wild species.

Rhubarb is a vegetable and is often put to the same culinary uses as fruits. The leaf stalks can be used raw while they have a crisp texture, but are most commonly cooked with sugar and used in pies, crumbles, and other desserts. They have a strong, tart taste. Many cultivars have been developed for human consumption, most of which are recognised as &quot;Rheum&quot; × &quot;hybridum&quot; by the Royal Horticultural Society.

== Etymology ==

The word &quot;rhubarb&quot; is likely to have derived in the 14th century from the Old French , which came from the Latin and Greek , meaning &#x27;foreign rhubarb&#x27;. The Greek physician Dioscorides used the Greek word (), whereas Galen later used (), Latin . These in turn derive from a Persian name for species of &quot;Rheum&quot;. The specific epithet &quot;rhaponticum&quot;, applying to one of the presumed parents of the cultivated plant, means &#x27;rha from the region of the Black Sea&#x27; or the river Volga, Rha being its ancient name.

==Cultivation==

Rhubarb is grown widely, and with greenhouse production it is available throughout much of the year. It needs rainfall and an annual cold period of up to 7–9 weeks at 3 °C (37 °F), known as &#x27;cold units&#x27;, to grow well. The plant develops a substantial underground storage organ (rhubarb crowns) and this can be used for early production by transferring field-grown crowns to warm conditions. Rhubarb grown in hothouses (heated greenhouses) is called &quot;hothouse rhubarb&quot;, and is typically made available at consumer markets in early spring, before outdoor cultivated rhubarb is available. Hothouse rhubarb is usually brighter red, tenderer and sweeter-tasting than outdoor rhubarb. After forcing for commercial production, the crowns are usually discarded. In temperate climates, rhubarb is one of the first food plants harvested, usually in mid- to late spring (April or May in the Northern Hemisphere, October or November in the Southern Hemisphere), and the season for field-grown plants lasts until the end of summer.

In the United Kingdom, the first rhubarb of the year is harvested by candlelight in forcing sheds where all other light is excluded, a practice that produces a sweeter, more tender stalk. These sheds are dotted around the &quot;Rhubarb Triangle&quot; in Yorkshire between Wakefield, Leeds, and Morley.

In the United States rhubarb is primarily produced in the states of Oregon, Washington, and Wisconsin with approximately 1,200 acres in production, of which 175 are covered in hothouses. In the northwestern US states of Oregon and Washington, there are typically two harvests, from late April to May and from late June into July; half of all US commercial production is in Pierce County, Washington. Rhubarb is ready to consume as soon as harvested, and freshly cut stalks are firm and glossy.

Rhubarb damaged by severe cold should not be eaten, as it may be high in oxalic acid, which migrates from the leaves and can cause illness.

The colour of rhubarb stalks can vary from the commonly associated crimson red, through speckled light pink, to simply light green. Rhubarb stalks are poetically described as &quot;crimson stalks&quot;. The colour results from the presence of anthocyanins, and varies according to both rhubarb variety and production technique. The colour is not related to its suitability for cooking.

===Historical cultivation===

The Chinese call rhubarb &quot;the great yellow&quot; ( ), and have used rhubarb root for medicinal purposes. It appears in &quot;The Divine Farmer&#x27;s Herb-Root Classic&quot;, which is thought to have been compiled about 1,800 years ago. Though Dioscurides&#x27; description of or indicates that a medicinal root brought to Greece from beyond the Bosphorus may have been rhubarb, commerce in the plant did not become securely established until Islamic times. During Islamic times, it was imported along the Silk Road, reaching Europe in the 14th century through the ports of Aleppo and Smyrna, where it became known as &quot;Turkish rhubarb&quot;. Later, it began to arrive via new maritime routes and overland through Russia. The &quot;Russian rhubarb&quot; was the most valued, probably because of the rhubarb-specific quality control system maintained by the Russian Empire. The 2020 edition of Pharmacopoeia of the People&#x27;s Republic of China lists the following species as medicinally acceptable: &quot;Rheum officinale&quot;, &quot;Rheum palmatum&quot;, and &quot;Rheum tanguticum&quot;. Grieve describes &quot;Turkish rhubarb&quot; as a mixture of &quot;R. palmatum&quot; and &quot;R. rhaponticum&quot;.

The cost of transportation across Asia made rhubarb expensive in medieval Europe. It was several times the price of other valuable herbs and spices such as cinnamon, opium, and saffron. The merchant explorer Marco Polo therefore searched for the place where the plant was grown and harvested, discovering that it was cultivated in the mountains of Tangut province. The value of rhubarb can be seen in Ruy Gonzáles de Clavijo&#x27;s report of his embassy in 1403–1405 to Timur in Samarkand: &quot;The best of all merchandise coming to Samarkand was from China: especially silks, satins, musk, rubies, diamonds, pearls, and rhubarb...&quot;

The high price, as well as the increasing demand from apothecaries, stimulated efforts to cultivate the different species of rhubarb on European soil. &quot;R. rhaponticum&quot; × &quot;R. officinale&quot; came to be grown in England to produce the roots. &quot;R. alpinus&quot; was also allowed to grow wild. The local availability of the plants grown for medicinal purposes, together with the increasing abundance and decreasing price of sugar in the 18th century, galvanised its culinary adoption. Grieve claims a date of 1820 in England. Rhubarb was harvested in Scotland from at least 1786, having been introduced to the Botanical Garden in Edinburgh by the traveller Bruce of Kinnaird in 1774. He brought the seeds from Abyssinia and they produced 3,000 plants.

Though it is often asserted that rhubarb first came to the United States in the 1820s, John Bartram was growing medicinal and culinary rhubarbs in Philadelphia from the 1730s, planting seeds sent to him by Peter Collinson. From the first, the familiar garden rhubarb was not the only &quot;Rheum&quot; in American gardens: Thomas Jefferson planted &quot;R. undulatum&quot; at Monticello in 1809 and 1811, observing that it was &quot;Esculent rhubarb, the leaves excellent as Spinach.&quot;

==Cultivars==
The advocate of organic gardening Lawrence D. Hills listed his favourite rhubarb varieties for flavour as &#x27;Hawke&#x27;s Champagne&#x27;, &#x27;Victoria&#x27;, &#x27;Timperley Early&#x27;, and &#x27;Early Albert&#x27;, also recommending &#x27;Gaskin&#x27;s Perpetual&#x27; for having the lowest level of oxalic acid, allowing it to be harvested over a much longer period of the growing season without developing excessive sourness.

The Royal Horticultural Society has the UK&#x27;s national collection of rhubarb that comprises 103 varieties. In 2021–2022 this was moved from southern England to the more northern garden RHS Bridgewater where winter cold and rainfall are better suited for rhubarb. The following cultivars have gained the Royal Horticultural Society&#x27;s Award of Garden Merit: 
*&#x27;Grandad&#x27;s Favourite&#x27; 
*&#x27;Reed&#x27;s Early Superb&#x27; 
*&#x27;Stein&#x27;s Champagne&#x27; 
*&#x27;Timperley Early&#x27;

==Uses==

Rhubarb is grown primarily for its fleshy leafstalks, technically known as petioles. The use of rhubarb stalks as food is a relatively recent innovation. This usage was first recorded in 18th- to 19th-century England after affordable sugar became more widely available.

Commonly, it is stewed with sugar or used in pies and desserts, but it can also be put into savoury dishes or pickled. Rhubarb can be dehydrated and infused with fruit juice. In the United States, it is usually infused with strawberry juice to mimic the popular strawberry rhubarb pie.

===Food===
The species &quot;Rheum ribes&quot; has been eaten in the Islamic world since the 10th century.

In Northern Europe and North America, the stalks are commonly cut into pieces and stewed with added sugar until soft. The resulting compote, sometimes thickened with corn starch, can then be used in pies, tarts and crumbles. Alternatively, greater quantities of sugar can be added with pectin to make jams. A paired spice used is ginger, although cinnamon and nutmeg are also common additions.

In the United Kingdom, as well as being used in the typical pies, tarts and crumbles, rhubarb compote is also combined with whipped cream or custard to make rhubarb fool. In the United States, the common usage of rhubarb in pies has led to it being nicknamed &quot;pie plant&quot;, by which it is referred to in 19th-century cookbooks. Rhubarb in the US is also often paired with strawberries to make strawberry-rhubarb pie, though some rhubarb purists jokingly consider this &quot;a rather unhappy marriage&quot;.

Rhubarb can also be used to make alcoholic drinks, such as fruit wines or Finnish rhubarb sima (mead). It is also used to make Kompot.

===Nutrition===
Raw rhubarb is 94% water, 5% carbohydrates, 1% protein, and contains negligible fat (table). In a reference amount, raw rhubarb supplies of food energy, and is a rich source of vitamin K (28% of the Daily Value, DV), a moderate source of vitamin C (10% DV), and contains no other micronutrients in significant amounts (table).

===Traditional Chinese medicine===
In traditional Chinese medicine, rhubarb roots of several species were used as a laxative for several millennia, although there is no clinical evidence to indicate such use is effective.

==Phytochemistry and potential toxicity==
The roots and stems contain anthraquinones, such as emodin and rhein. Emodin &quot;represents a genotoxic risk for humans&quot; while rhein is &quot;a compound devoid of genotoxic capabilities&quot;. The anthraquinones have been separated from powdered rhubarb root for purposes in traditional medicine, although long-term consumption of anthraquinones has been associated with acute kidney failure.

The rhizomes contain stilbenoid compounds (including rhaponticin), and the flavanol glucosides (+)-catechin-5-&quot;O&quot;-glucoside and (−)-catechin-7-&quot;O&quot;-glucoside.

===Oxalic acid===

Rhubarb leaves contain poisonous substances, including oxalic acid, a nephrotoxin. The long term consumption of oxalic acid leads to kidney stone formation in humans. Humans have been poisoned after ingesting the leaves, a particular problem during World War I when the leaves were mistakenly recommended as a food source in Britain. The toxic rhubarb leaves have been used in flavouring extracts, after the oxalic acid is removed by treatment with precipitated chalk (i.e., calcium carbonate).

The (median lethal dose) for pure oxalic acid in rats is about 375 mg/kg body weight, or about 25 grams for a human. Other sources give a much higher oral LDLo (lowest published lethal dose) of 600 mg/kg. While the oxalic acid content of rhubarb leaves can vary, a typical value is about 0.5%, meaning a 65 kg adult would need to eat 4 to 8 kg (9 to 18 lbs) to obtain a lethal dose, depending on which lethal dose is assumed. Cooking the leaves with baking soda can make them more poisonous by producing soluble oxalates. The leaves are believed to also contain an additional, unidentified toxin, which might be an anthraquinone glycoside (also known as senna glycosides).

In the petioles (leaf stalks), the proportion of oxalic acid is about 10% of the total 2–2.5% acidity, which derives mainly from malic acid. Serious cases of rhubarb poisoning are not well documented. Both fatal and non-fatal cases of rhubarb poisoning may be caused not by oxalates, but rather by toxic anthraquinone glycosides.

== Pests ==
Rhubarb is a host to the rhubarb curculio, &quot;Lixus concavus&quot;, which is a weevil. Damage is mainly visible on leaves and stalks, with gummosis and oval or circular feeding and egg-laying sites.

Hungry wildlife may dig up and eat rhubarb roots in the spring, as stored starches are turned to sugars for new foliage growth.

== Cookbook ==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Gallery==
==References==
==Further reading==
*Thompson, Fed S. Rhubarb or Pie Plant Culture, 1894. 
*Morse, J. E. The New Rhubarb Culture, 1901. 
*Bland, Reginald. Winter rhubarb, culture and marketing, 1915.

==External links==
*
* Rhubarb Info from the Rhubarb Compendium</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7535" start="0" end="7" title="Rhubarb" label="Rhubarb"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289985" start="38" end="46" title="petiole (botany)" label="petioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7217716" start="99" end="104" title="Rheum (plant)" label="Rheum"/>
<link wikidata="Q156117" start="125" end="137" title="Polygonaceae" label="Polygonaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="201" end="210" title="perennial plant" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q184208" start="240" end="247" title="rhizome" label="rhizome"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="352" end="358" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q184832" start="382" end="393" title="oxalic acid" label="oxalic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q411768" start="398" end="406" title="anthrone" label="anthrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192639" start="407" end="416" title="glycoside" label="glycoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="451" end="457" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="522" end="535" title="inflorescence" label="inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q720108" start="608" end="625" title="Rheum rhabarbarum" label="Rheum rhabarbarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7218332" start="674" end="688" title="Rheum rhaponticum" label="R. rhaponticum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="833" end="839" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535" start="984" end="1000" title="Rhubarb" label="culinary rhubarb"/>
<link wikidata="Q213410" start="1275" end="1285" title="tetraploid" label="tetraploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="1384" end="1393" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="1440" end="1445" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360264" start="1565" end="1568" title="pie" label="pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006073" start="1571" end="1578" title="crumble" label="crumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q182940" start="1591" end="1598" title="dessert" label="dessert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1621" end="1631" title="Taste#Sourness" label="tart taste"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="1638" end="1646" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032739" start="1771" end="1798" title="Royal Horticultural Society" label="Royal Horticultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="1902" end="1912" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1945" end="1950" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q297776" start="2010" end="2021" title="Pedanius Dioscorides" label="Dioscorides"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="2054" end="2059" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="2111" end="2118" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7217716" start="2139" end="2156" title="Rheum (plant)" label="&amp;quot;Rheum&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q621672" start="2294" end="2317" title="Pontus (region)" label="region of the Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="2337" end="2342" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="2424" end="2434" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="3167" end="3184" title="Temperateness" label="temperate climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q213753" start="3227" end="3234" title="harvest" label="harvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="3290" end="3309" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="3338" end="3357" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321534" start="3514" end="3527" title="Rhubarb forcer" label="forcing sheds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321532" start="3658" end="3674" title="Rhubarb Triangle" label="Rhubarb Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="3684" end="3693" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q216638" start="3702" end="3711" title="Wakefield" label="Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="3713" end="3718" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021179" start="3724" end="3730" title="Morley, West Yorkshire" label="Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="3801" end="3807" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="3809" end="3819" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="3825" end="3834" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156459" start="4106" end="4131" title="Pierce County, Washington" label="Pierce County, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q184832" start="4301" end="4312" title="oxalic acid" label="oxalic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19847189" start="4472" end="4476" title="Variations of pink" label="pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q262547" start="4612" end="4623" title="anthocyanin" label="anthocyanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933270" start="4916" end="4958" title="Shennong Ben Cao Jing" label="The Divine Farmer&amp;#x27;s Herb-Root Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q297776" start="5035" end="5046" title="Dioscurides" label="Dioscurides"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="5137" end="5146" title="Bosphorus" label="Bosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="5234" end="5247" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic times"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="5297" end="5306" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="5365" end="5371" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379299" start="5376" end="5382" title="Smyrna" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180805" start="5688" end="5740" title="Pharmacopoeia of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Pharmacopoeia of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q312527" start="5802" end="5818" title="Rheum officinale" label="Rheum officinale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109580" start="5832" end="5846" title="Rheum palmatum" label="Rheum palmatum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5864" end="5880" title="Rheum tanguticum" label="Rheum tanguticum"/>
<link wikidata="Q28165" start="6162" end="6170" title="cinnamon" label="cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="6172" end="6177" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="6183" end="6190" title="saffron" label="saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="6214" end="6224" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q756608" start="6354" end="6360" title="Tangut people" label="Tangut"/>
<link wikidata="Q725872" start="6407" end="6430" title="Ruy Gonzáles de Clavijo" label="Ruy Gonzáles de Clavijo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="6476" end="6481" title="Timur" label="Timur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753" start="6485" end="6494" title="Samarkand" label="Samarkand"/>
<link wikidata="Q43088" start="6598" end="6604" title="ruby" label="rubies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="6606" end="6613" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q43436" start="6616" end="6621" title="pearl" label="pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="7213" end="7221" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="7292" end="7301" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q348489" start="7319" end="7336" title="Bruce of Kinnaird" label="Bruce of Kinnaird"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702431" start="7372" end="7381" title="Abyssinia" label="Abyssinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q528476" start="7502" end="7514" title="John Bartram" label="John Bartram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="7562" end="7574" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350818" start="7621" end="7636" title="Peter Collinson (botanist)" label="Peter Collinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="7738" end="7754" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q720108" start="7769" end="7781" title="Rheum undulatum" label="R. undulatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503971" start="7954" end="7971" title="Lawrence D. Hills" label="Lawrence D. Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090129" start="8546" end="8561" title="RHS Garden Bridgewater" label="RHS Bridgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032739" start="8664" end="8691" title="Royal Horticultural Society" label="Royal Horticultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501416" start="8699" end="8720" title="Award of Garden Merit" label="Award of Garden Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289985" start="8953" end="8961" title="petiole (botany)" label="petioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="9112" end="9117" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256427" start="9411" end="9433" title="strawberry rhubarb pie" label="strawberry rhubarb pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376178" start="9465" end="9476" title="Rheum ribes" label="Rheum ribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="9505" end="9518" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q635999" start="9676" end="9683" title="compote" label="compote"/>
<link wikidata="Q188154" start="9830" end="9836" title="pectin" label="pectin"/>
<link wikidata="Q74048276" start="9845" end="9849" title="Fruit preserves" label="jams"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="9874" end="9880" title="ginger" label="ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q28165" start="9891" end="9899" title="cinnamon" label="cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83165" start="9904" end="9910" title="nutmeg" label="nutmeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q971054" start="10104" end="10108" title="Fruit fool" label="fool"/>
<link wikidata="Q633625" start="10514" end="10524" title="fruit wine" label="fruit wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q443687" start="10545" end="10556" title="sima (mead)" label="sima (mead)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650718" start="10582" end="10588" title="Kompot" label="Kompot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="10636" end="10648" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q21296145" start="10654" end="10661" title="protein (nutrient)" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q186205" start="10747" end="10758" title="food energy" label="food energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182338" start="10784" end="10793" title="vitamin K" label="vitamin K"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366307" start="10806" end="10817" title="Daily Value" label="Daily Value"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="10845" end="10854" title="vitamin C" label="vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q531507" start="10887" end="10900" title="micronutrient" label="micronutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="10973" end="11001" title="traditional Chinese medicine" label="traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q217972" start="11051" end="11059" title="laxative" label="laxative"/>
<link wikidata="Q691640" start="11104" end="11121" title="evidence-based medicine" label="clinical evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q574302" start="11228" end="11242" title="natural anthraquinone" label="anthraquinones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348178" start="11252" end="11258" title="emodin" label="emodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q720356" start="11263" end="11268" title="Rhein (molecule)" label="rhein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348178" start="11270" end="11276" title="Emodin" label="Emodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009245" start="11296" end="11305" title="Genotoxicity" label="genotoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q720356" start="11334" end="11339" title="Rhein (molecule)" label="rhein"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="11482" end="11502" title="traditional medicine" label="traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q574302" start="11538" end="11552" title="natural anthraquinone" label="anthraquinones"/>
<link wikidata="Q424337" start="11578" end="11598" title="acute kidney failure" label="acute kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q526360" start="11622" end="11632" title="stilbenoid" label="stilbenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320229" start="11654" end="11665" title="rhaponticin" label="rhaponticin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20898120" start="11676" end="11684" title="flavanol" label="flavanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q137173" start="11685" end="11694" title="glucoside" label="glucoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113241" start="11700" end="11734" title="catechin-5-O-glucoside" label="catechin-5-&amp;quot;O&amp;quot;-glucoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051792" start="11743" end="11777" title="catechin-7-O-glucoside" label="catechin-7-&amp;quot;O&amp;quot;-glucoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="11822" end="11828" title="poison" label="poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q184832" start="11854" end="11865" title="oxalic acid" label="oxalic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468324" start="11869" end="11880" title="nephrotoxin" label="nephrotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="12048" end="12059" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="12274" end="12291" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q620876" start="12368" end="12379" title="body weight" label="body weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q21136" start="12450" end="12454" title="Lowest published lethal dose" label="LDLo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179731" start="12745" end="12756" title="Sodium bicarbonate" label="baking soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q417351" start="12807" end="12814" title="oxalate" label="oxalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q192639" start="12924" end="12933" title="glycoside" label="glycoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q502327" start="12949" end="12964" title="senna glycoside" label="senna glycoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289985" start="12976" end="12984" title="petiole (botany)" label="petioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q190143" start="13098" end="13108" title="malic acid" label="malic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q423174" start="13273" end="13286" title="anthraquinone" label="anthraquinone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659968" start="13361" end="13375" title="Lixus concavus" label="Lixus concavus"/>
<link wikidata="Q383963" start="13394" end="13400" title="weevil" label="weevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q652668" start="13454" end="13462" title="gummosis" label="gummosis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56280" wikidata="Q83099" url="?curid=56280" title="Jana Gana Mana">
<text> () is the national anthem of the Republic of India. It was originally composed as &quot;Bharoto Bhagyo Bidhata&quot; in Bengali by writer and activist Rabindranath Tagore on 11 December 1911. The first stanza of the song &quot;Bharoto Bhagyo Bidhata&quot; was adopted by the Constituent Assembly of India as the National Anthem on 24 January 1950. A formal rendition of the national anthem takes approximately 52 seconds. A shortened version consisting of the first and last lines (and taking about 20 seconds to play) is also staged occasionally. It was first publicly sung on 27 December 1911 at the Calcutta (present-day Kolkata) Session of the Indian National Congress.

==History==
The National Anthem of India is titled &quot;Jana Gana Mana&quot;. The song was originally composed in Bengali by India&#x27;s first Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore on 11 December 1911. The parent song, &#x27;Bharoto Bhagyo Bidhata&#x27; is a Brahmo hymn that has five verses of which only the first verse was adopted as the national anthem.

The lyrics of the song first appeared in 5 stanzas in Bengali magazine in an issue of &quot;Tatwabodhini Patrika&quot;. The melody of the song, in raga &quot;Alhaiya Bilaval&quot;, was composed as a Brahmo Hymn by Tagore himself with possibly some help from his musician grand-nephew Dinendranath Tagore. The final form of the song before the first public performance was set on 11 December 1911.

The song was first publicly sung on the second day of the annual session of the Indian National Congress in Calcutta (Kolkata) on 27 December 1911 by Rabindranath Tagore&#x27;s niece in her school assembly. Then, it was followed in January 1912 at the annual event of the Adi Brahmo Samaj, However, it was largely unknown except to the readers of the Adi Brahmo Samaj journal, &quot;Tattwabodhini Patrika&quot;. The poem was published in January 1912, under the title &quot;Bharat Bhagya Bidhata&quot; in the Tatwabodhini Patrika, which was the official publication of the Brahmo Samaj with Tagore then the Editor.

In 1917, the song was again performed at the Congress conference and this time in aid of instrumental music by the Mahraja Bahadur of Nattore.

Outside of Calcutta, the song was first sung by the bard himself at a session in Besant Theosophical College in Madanapalle, Andhra Pradesh on 28 February 1919 when Tagore visited the college and sang the song. The song enthralled the college students and Margaret Cousins, then vice-principal of the college (also an expert in European music and wife of Irish poet James Cousins). Based on the notes provided by Tagore himself, the song was preserved in 1919 in Western notation at Madanapalle of Andhra Pradesh by Margaret Cousins and her students. The whole episode was recorded by James Cousins in his autobiography &quot;We Two Together&quot;:
&quot;In a voice surprisingly light for so large a man, he sang something like a piece of geography giving a list of countries, mountains and rivers; and in the second verse, a list of the religions in India. The refrain to the first made us pick up our ears. The refrain to the second verse made us clear our throats. We asked for it again and again, and before long we were singing it with gusto: Jaya hai, Jaya hai, Jaya hai, Jaya JayaJayaJaya hai (Victory, victory, victory to thee). We had no idea who or what was to have the victory. The next day Rabindranath gave the swarams(notes) of &quot;Jana gana&quot; to Mrs.Cousins so that the melody should have accurate permanent record. He also made the translation of the song into English as &#x27;The Morning Song of India&#x27;.&quot;

Thus, Margaret Cousins became probably the first person to transcribe and preserve Tagore&#x27;s composition in Western sheet music notation at Madanapalle based on the notes provided by Tagore himself. And soon it took its place in the &quot;daily deciation&quot; of the combined school and college of Besant Hall in Madanapalle and is still sung to this date. It was also here that the song was first translated into English by Tagore as &quot;The Morning Song of India&quot;.

The song was selected as the national anthem by Subhas Chandra Bose while he was in Germany. On the occasion of the founding meeting of the German-Indian Society on 11 September 1942 in the Hotel Atlantic in Hamburg, &quot;Jana Gana Mana&quot; was played for the first time by the Hamburg Radio Symphony Orchestra as the national anthem of India. The musical notations for this interpretation of the song were prepared by B.L. Mukherjee and Ambik Majumdar.

Before it officially became the national anthem of India in 1950, &quot;Jana Gana Mana&quot; was heard in the 1945 film &quot;Hamrahi&quot;. It was also adopted as a school song of The Doon School, Dehradun in 1935.

On the occasion of India attaining freedom, the Indian Constituent Assembly assembled for the first time as a sovereign body at midnight on 14 August 1947; the session closed with a unanimous performance of &quot;Jana Gana Mana&quot;.

The members of the Indian delegation to the General Assembly of the United Nations held in New York in 1947 gave a recording of &quot;Jana Gana Mana&quot; as the country&#x27;s national anthem. The song was played by the house orchestra in front of a gathering consisting of representatives from all over the world.

==Code of conduct==
The National Anthem of India is played or sung on various occasions. Instructions have been issued from time to time about the correct versions of the anthem, the occasions on which these are to be played or sung and the need for paying respect to the anthem by observance of proper decorum on such occasions. The substance of these instructions has been embodied in the information sheet issued by the government of India for general information and guidance. The approximate duration of the full version of the National Anthem of India is 52 seconds; the shorter version is approximately 20 seconds.

==Lyrics==
=== Original Bengali lyrics ===
The poem was composed in a literary register of the Bengali language called Sadhu Bhasha, which is heavily Sanskritised.

===Official lyrics in Devanagari===
===Original English Transcreation===
Along with Bengali, Rabindranath Tagore himself later transcreated the full poem into English. 
===Modern Translations===
===Abridged version===
A short version consisting of the first and last lines of the National Anthem is also played on certain occasions.

===Raga===

&quot;Jana Gana Mana&quot; is sung in the raga Alhaiya Bilaval. In the national anthem, the Madhyama svara is employed.

==Gallery==
==Controversies==
===Historical significance===
The composition was first sung during a convention of the Indian National Congress in Calcutta on 27 December 1911. It was sung on the second day of the convention. The event was reported as such in the British Indian press:

&quot;The Bengali poet Rabindranath Tagore sang a song composed by him specially to welcome the Emperor.&quot; (&quot;Statesman&quot;, 28 December 1911)&quot;The proceedings began with the singing by Rabindranath Tagore of a song specially composed by him in honour of the Emperor.&quot; (&quot;Englishman&quot;, 28 December 1911)&quot;When the proceedings of the Indian National Congress began on Wednesday 27 December 1911, a Bengali song in welcome of the Emperor was sung. A resolution welcoming the Emperor and Empress was also adopted unanimously.&quot; (&quot;Indian&quot;, 29 December 1911)
Many historians aver that the newspaper reports cited above were misguided. The confusion arose in the Indian press since a different song, &quot;Badshah Humara&quot; written in Hindi by Rambhuj Chaudhary, was sung on the same occasion in praise of George V. The nationalist press in India stated this difference of events clearly:

&quot;The proceedings of the Congress party session started with a prayer in Bengali to praise God (song of benediction). This was followed by a resolution expressing loyalty to King George V. Then another song was sung welcoming King George V.&quot; (&quot;Amrita Bazar Patrika&quot;, 28 December 1911)&quot;The annual session of Congress began by singing a song composed by the great Bengali poet Rabindranath Tagore. Then a resolution expressing loyalty to King George V was passed. A song paying a heartfelt homage to King George V was then sung by a group of boys and girls.&quot; (&quot;The Bengalee&quot;, 28 December 1911)
Even the report of the annual session of the Indian National Congress of December 1911 stated this difference:

&quot;On the first day of 28th annual session of the Congress, proceedings started after singing Vande Mataram. On the second day the work began after singing a patriotic song by Babu Rabindranath Tagore. Messages from well-wishers were then read and a resolution was passed expressing loyalty to King George V. Afterwards the song composed for welcoming King George V and Queen Mary was sung.&quot;
On 10 November 1937, Tagore wrote a letter to Pulin Bihari Sen about the controversy. That letter in Bengali can be found in Tagore&#x27;s biography&quot; Rabindrajibani, volume II page 339&quot; by &quot;Prabhatkumar Mukherjee&quot;.
 &quot;A certain high official in His Majesty&#x27;s service, who was also my friend, had requested that I write a song of felicitation towards the Emperor. The request simply amazed me. It caused a great stir in my heart. In response to that great mental turmoil, I pronounced the victory in Jana Gana Mana of that Bhagya Bidhata [ed. God of Destiny] of India who has from age after age held steadfast the reins of India&#x27;s chariot through rise and fall, through the straight path and the curved. That Lord of Destiny, that Reader of the Collective Mind of India, that Perennial Guide, could never be George V, George VI, or any other George. Even my official friend understood this about the song. After all, even if his admiration for the crown was excessive, he was not lacking in simple common sense.&quot;

Again in his letter of 19 March 1939, Tagore writes:

&quot;I should only insult myself if I cared to answer those who consider me capable of such unbounded stupidity as to sing in praise of George the Fourth or George the Fifth as the Eternal Charioteer leading the pilgrims on their journey through countless ages of the timeless history of mankind.&quot; &quot;(Purvasa, Phalgun, 1354, p. 738.)&quot;
These clarifications by Tagore regarding the controversy occurred only after the death of King George V in 1936. Earlier, in 1915, after Tagore was awarded the Nobel Literature Prize, George V had conferred a knighthood on him, which he renounced in 1919 in protest over the Jallianwala Bagh massacre; writing a letter addressed to the viceroy of India Lord Chelmsford: &quot;The time has come when badges of honour make our shame glaring in their incongruous context of humiliation, and I for my part wish to stand, shorn of all special distinctions, by the side of my country men.&quot;

===Singing===

In Kerala, students belonging to the Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses religious denomination were expelled by school authorities for their refusal to sing the national anthem on religious grounds, although they stood up when the anthem was sung. The Kerala High Court concluded that there was nothing in it which could offend anyone&#x27;s religious susceptibilities, and upheld their expulsion. On 11 August 1986, the Supreme Court reversed the High Court and ruled that the High Court had misdirected itself because the question is not whether a particular religious belief or practice appeals to our reason or sentiment but whether the belief is genuinely and conscientiously held as part of the profession or practice of religion. &quot;Our personal views and reactions are irrelevant.&quot; The Supreme Court affirmed the principle that it is not for a secular judge to sit in judgment on the correctness of a religious belief.

The Supreme Court observed in its ruling that:
In some states, the anthem must be played before films are played at cinemas. On 30 November 2016, to instil &quot;committed patriotism and nationalism&quot;, the Supreme Court ordered that all cinemas nationwide must play the national anthem, accompanied by an image of the flag of India, before all films. Patrons were expected to stand in respect of the anthem, and doors to a cinema hall were expected to be locked during the anthem to minimise disruption. The order was controversial, as it was argued that patrons who chose not to participate would be targeted and singled out, as was the case in an incident publicised in 2015 which purported to show a group of patrons (alleged by the YouTube uploader to be Muslims) being heckled by others. On 10 February 2017, two Kashmiris (which included an employee of the state government) were arrested under the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act for not standing during the anthem at a cinema, in the first such arrest of its kind made by a state government. On 3 July 2023, an executive magistrate in Srinagar sent 11 men to jail for a week, allegedly not rising for the anthem at a 25 June event in the presence of J&amp;K Lt Governor Manoj Sinha. Other incidents of violent outbreaks associated with the policy were also reported.

A cinema club in Kerala (whose film festival was required to comply with the order, leading to several arrests) challenged the order as an infringement of their fundamental rights, arguing that cinemas were &quot;singularly unsuited for the gravitas and sobriety that must accompany the playing of the national anthem&quot;, and that the films screened would often &quot;be at odds with sentiments of national respect&quot;. In October 2017, Justice Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud questioned the intent of the order, arguing that citizens &quot;don&#x27;t have to wear patriotism on our sleeve&quot;, and that it should not be assumed that people who do not stand for the anthem were any less patriotic than those who did. In January 2018, the order was lifted, pending further government discussion.

In October 2019, a video of a Bengaluru couple being bullied for not standing up during the national anthem in a movie hall went viral. They were questioned &quot;Are you Pakistani?&quot;. There was a debate on the issue; some lawyers recalled Article 21, some people called it a way to gain media attention and some recommended attending the movie after the national anthem is played to avoid any problems. But after the debate, the Supreme Court reversed its earlier order making it mandatory for cinema halls to play the National Anthem.

===Regional aspects===

Another controversy is that only those provinces that were under direct British rule, i.e. Punjab, Sindh, Gujarat, Maratha, Dravida (South India), Utkal (Odisha) and Bengal, were mentioned. None of the princely states – Jammu and Kashmir, Rajputana, Hyderabad, Mysore or the states in Northeast India, which are now parts of India, were mentioned. However, opponents of this proposition claim that Tagore mentioned only the border states of India to include complete India. Whether the princely states would form a part of an independent Indian republic was a matter of debate even until Indian independence.

In 2005, there were calls to delete the word &quot;Sind&quot; and substitute it with the word Kashmir. The argument was that Sindh was no longer a part of India, having become part of Pakistan as a result of the Partition of 1947. Opponents of this proposal hold that the word &quot;Sind&quot; refers to the Indus River and Sindhi culture and that Sindhi people are a part of India&#x27;s cultural fabric. The Supreme Court of India declined to change the national anthem and the wording remains unchanged.

On 17 December 2013, MLA of Assam, Phani Bhushan Choudhury cited an article in &quot;The Times of India&quot; published on 26 January 1950, stating that originally the word &quot;Kamarup&quot; was included in the song, but was later changed to &quot;Sindhu&quot; and claimed that Kamarup should be re-included. To this, the then minister Rockybul Hussain replied that the state government would initiate steps in this regard after a response from the newspaper. The debate was further joined by the then minister Ardhendu Dey, mentioning &quot;Sanchayita&quot; (edited by Tagore himself) etc. where he said Kamarup was not mentioned.

In 2017 the state government of Jharkhand under the Bharatiya Janata Party proposed making the singing of the national anthem compulsory in Madrasas. This was met with opposition from a section of Muslim clerics because it violated the basic principles of the Islamic centres of learning.

==See also==
*&quot;Vande Mataram&quot;, the National Song of India
*&quot;Saare Jahan Se Achcha&quot; written by Allama Muhammad Iqbal
*&quot;Amar Shonar Bangla&quot;, the National Anthem of Bangladesh, also written by Rabindranath Tagore
* National Pledge
* Qaumi Taranah (National Anthem of Pakistan)

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

*THE NATIONAL ANTHEM - FULL AND SHORT VERSIONS
*Know India: National anthem, Government of India website
*English translation of the hymn &quot;Jana Gana Mana&quot; in Tagore&#x27;s handwriting</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q83099" start="0" end="0" title="Jana Gana Mana" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="11" end="26" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="34" end="51" title="Republic of India" label="Republic of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q22936248" start="89" end="111" title="Bharoto Bhagyo Bidhata" label="Bharoto Bhagyo Bidhata"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="121" end="128" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="152" end="171" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756348" start="203" end="209" title="stanza" label="stanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q22936248" start="228" end="250" title="Bharoto Bhagyo Bidhata" label="Bharoto Bhagyo Bidhata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340149" start="276" end="305" title="Constituent Assembly of India" label="Constituent Assembly of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="313" end="328" title="National anthem" label="National Anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="603" end="611" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="625" end="632" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="649" end="673" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="791" end="798" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q339619" start="821" end="835" title="List of Nobel laureates" label="Nobel laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="836" end="855" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q22936248" start="900" end="922" title="Bharoto Bhagyo Bidhata" label="Bharoto Bhagyo Bidhata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955623" start="934" end="945" title="Brahmo" label="Brahmo hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q216926" start="1181" end="1185" title="raga" label="raga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="1540" end="1548" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682594" start="1704" end="1720" title="Adi Brahmo Samaj" label="Adi Brahmo Samaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688485" start="1815" end="1836" title="Tattwabodhini Patrika" label="Tattwabodhini Patrika"/>
<link wikidata="Q22936248" start="1906" end="1927" title="Bharoto Bhagyo Bidhata" label="Bharat Bhagya Bidhata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896180" start="2273" end="2300" title="Besant Theosophical College" label="Besant Theosophical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017723" start="2304" end="2315" title="Madanapalle" label="Madanapalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153" start="4160" end="4179" title="Subhas Chandra Bose" label="Subhas Chandra Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q873918" start="4302" end="4316" title="Hotel Atlantic Kempinski" label="Hotel Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="4320" end="4327" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q27981624" start="4696" end="4703" title="Hamrahi (1945 film)" label="Hamrahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087343" start="4751" end="4776" title="The Doon School, Dehradun" label="The Doon School, Dehradun"/>
<link wikidata="Q286576" start="6042" end="6050" title="register (sociolinguistics)" label="register"/>
<link wikidata="Q20613396" start="6082" end="6094" title="Sadhu bhasha" label="Sadhu Bhasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449323" start="6255" end="6267" title="Transcreation" label="transcreated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724406" start="6521" end="6536" title="Alhaiya Bilaval" label="Alhaiya Bilaval"/>
<link wikidata="Q12445215" start="6566" end="6574" title="Madhyama (music)" label="Madhyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="6713" end="6737" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="6741" end="6749" title="Kolkata" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="6904" end="6923" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="7081" end="7100" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="7658" end="7663" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="7729" end="7737" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q203382" start="8071" end="8091" title="Amrita Bazar Patrika" label="Amrita Bazar Patrika"/>
<link wikidata="Q279417" start="8653" end="8666" title="Vande Mataram" label="Vande Mataram"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="10502" end="10515" title="George V" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="10572" end="10594" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Literature Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="10621" end="10627" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q208855" start="10687" end="10712" title="Jallianwala Bagh massacre" label="Jallianwala Bagh massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="10748" end="10764" title="Governor-General of India" label="viceroy of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q336268" start="10765" end="10780" title="Frederic Thesiger, 1st Viscount Chelmsford" label="Lord Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="11020" end="11026" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="11054" end="11078" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522623" start="11259" end="11276" title="Kerala High Court" label="Kerala High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="11428" end="11441" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="12683" end="12690" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242376" start="12852" end="12896" title="Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971" label="Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751189" start="13188" end="13199" title="Manoj Sinha" label="Manoj Sinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268914" start="13736" end="13761" title="Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud" label="Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629708" start="14740" end="14746" title="Punjab Province, British India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522091" start="14748" end="14753" title="Sind Province (1936–55)" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="14755" end="14762" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="14764" end="14771" title="Maharashtra" label="Maratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q69798" start="14773" end="14780" title="Dravidian peoples" label="Dravida"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="14782" end="14793" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765271" start="14796" end="14801" title="Utkal" label="Utkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="14803" end="14809" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="14815" end="14821" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336152" start="14851" end="14865" title="princely state" label="princely state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571484" start="14869" end="14886" title="Jammu and Kashmir (princely state)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929733" start="14888" end="14897" title="Rajputana" label="Rajputana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240096" start="14899" end="14908" title="Hyderabad State" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q266923" start="14910" end="14916" title="Kingdom of Mysore" label="Mysore"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="14934" end="14949" title="Northeast India" label="Northeast India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661579" start="15237" end="15256" title="Indian Independence Act 1947" label="Indian independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="15353" end="15360" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="15384" end="15389" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="15443" end="15451" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="15471" end="15488" title="Partition of India" label="Partition of 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="15567" end="15578" title="Indus River" label="Indus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522224" start="15607" end="15620" title="Sindhis in India" label="Sindhi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="15669" end="15691" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="15795" end="15800" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q46807" start="15852" end="15870" title="The Times of India" label="The Times of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184" start="16434" end="16443" title="Jharkhand" label="Jharkhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="16454" end="16476" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q132834" start="16542" end="16549" title="Madrasa" label="Madrasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q279417" start="16712" end="16725" title="Vande Mataram" label="Vande Mataram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241743" start="16767" end="16788" title="Saare Jahan Se Achcha" label="Saare Jahan Se Achcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q199739" start="16835" end="16853" title="Amar Shonar Bangla" label="Amar Shonar Bangla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723717" start="16934" end="16949" title="National Pledge (India)" label="National Pledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q213267" start="16952" end="16965" title="Qaumi Taranah" label="Qaumi Taranah"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56282" wikidata="Q468135" url="?curid=56282" title="The Salmon of Doubt">
<text>The Salmon of Doubt: Hitchhiking the Galaxy One Last Time is a collection of previously published and unpublished material by Douglas Adams. It consists largely of essays, interviews, and newspaper/magazine columns about technology and life experiences, but its major selling point is the inclusion of the incomplete novel on which Adams was working at the time of his death, &quot;The Salmon of Doubt&quot; (from which the collection gets its title, a reference to the Irish myth of the Salmon of Knowledge). English editions of the book were published in the United States and UK on 11 May 2002, exactly one year after the author&#x27;s death.

==Original intention==
&quot;The Salmon of Doubt&quot; was originally intended to be a Dirk Gently novel. The plot, set a few weeks after the events in &quot;The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul&quot;, involves Dirk Gently refusing to help find the missing half of a cat, receiving large amounts of money from an unknown client, and then flying to the United States. Dirk pays a visit to Kate Schechter (who had first appeared in &quot;The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul&quot;) and tells her that prior to the potential client, he had been so bored that he had started a habit of dialling his own phone number and discovered he&#x27;d answered his own calls.
A faxed summary reprinted before the text mentions travelling &quot;through the nasal membranes of a rhinoceros, to a distant future dominated by estate agents and heavily armed kangaroos.&quot;

The version in the published book was described as the strongest content from several unfinished drafts that were written.

===Later intention===
Adams said that while he originally planned on writing a third Dirk Gently book, the ideas which he had for it would have fitted better into another Hitchhiker&#x27;s book: &quot;A lot of the stuff which was originally in &quot;The Salmon of Doubt&quot; really wasn&#x27;t working&quot;, and he planned on &quot;salvaging some of the ideas that I couldn&#x27;t make work in a Dirk Gently framework and putting them in a Hitchhiker framework... and for old time&#x27;s sake I may call it &quot;The Salmon of Doubt&quot;.&quot; He had expressed dissatisfaction with the fifth &quot;Hitchhiker&quot; book, &quot;Mostly Harmless&quot;, saying &quot;People have said, quite rightly, that &quot;Mostly Harmless&quot; is a very bleak book. And it was a bleak book. I would love to finish &quot;Hitchhiker&quot; on a slightly more upbeat note, so five seems to be a wrong kind of number; six is a better kind of number.&quot;

==Published version==
The book as published is divided into two main sections: &quot;Life, the Universe and Everything&quot;, which utilizes fiction, essays and interviews with Adams, and &quot;The Salmon of Doubt&quot;, which presents the most complete version of the novel as Adams left it.

The first section is further subdivided into three portions. &quot;Life&quot; touches upon Adams&#x27; own life, &quot;The Universe&quot; covers Adams&#x27; views of reality, and &quot;Everything&quot; deals with a wider variety of topics. &quot;Everything&quot; also includes the short story &quot;The Private Life of Genghis Khan&quot; and the original version of the Hitchhiker&#x27;s companion story &quot;Young Zaphod Plays It Safe&quot;.

The book ends with the order of events for the memorial service that was held for Adams in September 2001, at St Martin-in-the-Fields church in London.

==Editions==
The UK edition includes an introduction by Stephen Fry, while the US edition includes one by Christopher Cerf. The audiobook edition consists of seven CDs, mostly read by Simon Jones, but also includes both of the introductions, read by their respective authors, as well as the tributes written and read by Richard Dawkins. US paperback editions have yet another introduction, written by Terry Jones, and omit some material due to issues with copyright.

The fourteenth printing of the UK/Canadian paperback, , differs in content from the ninth printing of the US hardcover edition, , in the following ways. The paperback contains a foreword written by Stephen Fry; the hardcover contains an introduction by Christopher Cerf. Adams&#x27;s letter to David Vogel on page 168 has Adams&#x27;s London address at the top in the hardcover, but it is missing from the paperback. &quot;The Private Life of Genghis Khan&quot; has been omitted from the paperback.

The US mass market paperback edition contains everything in the US hardcover edition, and adds &quot;An Introduction to the Introduction to the New Edition&quot; and an &quot;Introduction to the New Edition&quot;, both by Terry Jones. The material that was omitted from the UK/Canadian paperback edition is intact in the US mass market paperback edition.

===List of editions===
* US Hardcover edition, published by Harmony: 
* UK Hardcover edition, published by Macmillan: 
* US audiobook edition (CD), published by New Millennium Audio: 
* US trade paperback edition, published by Ballantine: 
* US mass paperback edition, published by Del Rey: 
* UK paperback edition, published by Pan: 
* Canadian paperback edition, published by Pan: 
* US audiobook edition (CD), published by Phoenix Audio: 

==Adaptation==
BBC Radio 4 commissioned Above the Title Productions to produce a third Dirk Gently six-part radio series scheduled for broadcast in Autumn 2009, based on the uncompleted chapters of &quot;The Salmon of Doubt&quot; and written by Dirk Maggs, who intended to utilise early notes left behind by Adams to inform his script. In December 2008, Maggs left the project to form his own audio production company, Perfectly Normal Productions.

In May 2009, it was reported that &quot;Spice World&quot; writer Kim Fuller, who had originally been hired by Adams in 1998 to write a shelved Dirk Gently TV pilot, had been hired to replace Maggs on &quot;The Salmon of Doubt&quot;. Fuller has subsequently denied ever having worked on the project.

These plans were then dropped in favour of creating a television adaption for BBC Four.

==See also==

* List of works published posthumously

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42" start="126" end="139" title="Douglas Adams" label="Douglas Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471505" start="470" end="480" title="Irish mythology" label="Irish myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447830" start="488" end="507" title="Salmon of Knowledge" label="Salmon of Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="561" end="574" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="579" end="581" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754997" start="734" end="745" title="Dirk Gently" label="Dirk Gently"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199348" start="805" end="839" title="The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul" label="The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="1405" end="1415" title="rhinoceros" label="rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q187655" start="2255" end="2270" title="Mostly Harmless" label="Mostly Harmless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758404" start="3158" end="3190" title="The Private Life of Genghis Khan" label="The Private Life of Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25169" start="3229" end="3246" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy" label="Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198969" start="3269" end="3295" title="Young Zaphod Plays It Safe" label="Young Zaphod Plays It Safe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335201" start="3414" end="3437" title="St Martin-in-the-Fields" label="St Martin-in-the-Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3448" end="3454" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="3513" end="3524" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112078" start="3563" end="3579" title="Christopher Cerf (musician and television producer)" label="Christopher Cerf"/>
<link wikidata="Q325070" start="3641" end="3652" title="Simon Jones (actor)" label="Simon Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q44461" start="3777" end="3792" title="Richard Dawkins" label="Richard Dawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q166159" start="3858" end="3869" title="Terry Jones" label="Terry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="5239" end="5250" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q270077" start="5264" end="5291" title="Above the Title Productions" label="Above the Title Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280844" start="5469" end="5479" title="Dirk Maggs" label="Dirk Maggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280844" start="5643" end="5671" title="Perfectly Normal Productions" label="Perfectly Normal Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137856" start="5714" end="5725" title="Spice World (film)" label="Spice World"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408632" start="5739" end="5749" title="Kim Fuller" label="Kim Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029691" start="6028" end="6047" title="Dirk Gently (TV series)" label="television adaption"/>
<link wikidata="Q787211" start="6052" end="6060" title="BBC Four" label="BBC Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645791" start="6079" end="6115" title="List of works published posthumously" label="List of works published posthumously"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56283" wikidata="Q1066311" url="?curid=56283" title="Complex regional pain syndrome">
<text>Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS type 1 and type 2), sometimes referred to by the hyponyms reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD) or reflex neurovascular dystrophy (RND), is a rare and severe form of neuroinflammatory and dysautonomic disorder causing chronic pain, , and neuropathic symptoms. Although it can vary widely, the classic presentation occurs when severe pain from a physical trauma or neurotropic viral infection outlasts the expected recovery time, and may subsequently spread to uninjured areas. The symptoms of types 1 and 2 are the same except type 2 is associated with nerve injury.

Usually starting in a single limb, CRPS often first manifests as pain, swelling, limited range of motion or partial paralysis, and/or changes to the skin and bones. It may initially affect one limb and then spread throughout the body; 35% of affected individuals report symptoms throughout the body. Two types are thought to exist: CRPS type 1 (previously referred to as &quot;reflex sympathetic dystrophy&quot;) and CRPS type 2 (previously referred to as &quot;causalgia&quot;). It is possible to have both types.

Amplified musculoskeletal pain syndrome, a condition that is similar to CRPS, primarily affects pediatric patients, falls under rheumatology and pediatrics, and is generally considered a subset of CRPS type I.

== Classification ==
The classification system in use by the International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) divides CRPS into two types based on the presence or absence of measurable nerve pathophysiology.
==Signs and symptoms==
Clinical features of CRPS have been found to be inflammation resulting from the release of certain pro-inflammatory chemical signals from surrounding nerve cells; hypersensitization of pain receptors; dysfunction of local vasoconstriction and vasodilation; and maladaptive neuroplasticity.

The signs and symptoms of CRPS usually manifest near the injury site. The most common symptoms are extreme pain, including burning, stabbing, grinding, and throbbing. The pain is out of proportion to the severity of the initial injury. Moving or touching the limb is disproportionately painful (allodynia). Other findings are aspects of disuse including swelling, stiffness (limited range of motion), and disuse related changes to the skin (temperature, color, sweating, texture) and bones (disuse osteoporosis).

A prior concept of CRPS having three stages is no longer in wide use. The trend is now to consider distinct sub-types of CRPS.

==Cause==
Complex regional pain syndrome is uncommon, and its cause is not clearly understood. CRPS typically develops after an injury, surgery, heart attack, or stroke. Investigators estimate that 2–5% of those with peripheral nerve injury, and 13–70% of those with hemiplegia (paralysis of one side of the body) will develop CRPS. In addition, some studies have indicated that cigarette smoking was strikingly present in patients and is statistically linked to CRPS. This may be involved in its pathology by enhancing sympathetic activity, vasoconstriction, or by some other unknown neurotransmitter-related mechanism. This hypothesis was based on a retrospective analysis of 53 patients with RSD, which showed that 68% of patients were smokers, compared to only 37% of the control population. The results are preliminary and are limited by their retrospective nature. 7% of people who have CRPS in one limb later develop it in another limb.

==Pathophysiology==

Inflammation and alteration of pain perception in the central nervous system are proposed to play important roles. The persistent pain and the perception of nonpainful stimuli as painful are thought to be caused by inflammatory molecules (IL-1, IL-2, TNF-alpha) and neuropeptides (substance P) released from peripheral nerves. This release may be caused by inappropriate cross-talk between sensory and motor fibers at the affected site. CRPS is not a psychological illness, yet pain can cause psychological problems, such as anxiety and depression. Often, impaired social and occupational function occur.

Complex regional pain syndrome is a multifactorial disorder with clinical features of neurogenic inflammation (inflammation mediated by nerve cells), nociceptive sensitisation (which causes extreme sensitivity or allodynia), vasomotor dysfunction (blood flow problems which cause swelling and discolouration) and maladaptive neuroplasticity (where the brain changes and adapts with constant pain signals); CRPS is the result of an &quot;aberrant [inappropriate] response to tissue injury&quot;. The &quot;underlying neuronal matrix&quot; of CRPS is seen to involve cognitive and motor as well as nociceptive processing; pinprick stimulation of a CRPS affected limb was painful (mechanical hyperalgesia) and showed a &quot;significantly increased activation&quot; of not just the S1 cortex (contralateral), S2 (bilateral) areas, and insula (bilateral) but also the associative-somatosensory cortices (contralateral), frontal cortices, and parts of the anterior cingulate cortex. In contrast to previous thoughts reflected in the name RSD, it appears that there is reduced sympathetic nervous system outflow, at least in the affected region (although there may be sympatho-afferent coupling). Wind-up (the increased sensation of pain with time) and central nervous system (CNS) sensitization are key neurologic processes that appear to be involved in the induction and maintenance of CRPS.

Compelling evidence shows that the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor has significant involvement in the CNS sensitization process. It is also hypothesized that elevated CNS glutamate levels promote wind-up and CNS sensitization. In addition, there exists experimental evidence demonstrating the presence of NMDA receptors in peripheral nerves. Because immunological functions can modulate CNS physiology, a variety of immune processes have also been hypothesized to contribute to the initial development and maintenance of peripheral and central sensitization. Furthermore, trauma-related cytokine release, exaggerated neurogenic inflammation, sympathetic afferent coupling, adrenoreceptor pathology, glial cell activation, cortical reorganisation, and oxidative damage (e.g., by free radicals) are all factors which have been implicated in the pathophysiology of CRPS. In addition, autoantibodies are present in a wide number of CRPS patients and IgG has been recognized as one of the causes of hypersensitivity that stimulates A and C nociceptors, attributing to the inflammation.

The mechanisms leading to reduced bone mineral density (up to overt osteoporosis) are still unknown. Potential explanations include a dysbalance of the activities of sympathetic and parasympathetic autonomic nervous system and mild secondary hyperparathyroidism. However, the trigger of secondary hyperparathyroidism has not yet been identified.

In summary, the pathophysiology of complex regional pain syndrome has not yet been defined; CRPS, with its variable manifestations, could be the result of multiple pathophysiological processes.

==Diagnosis==
Diagnosis is primarily based on clinical findings. The original diagnostic criteria for CRPS adopted by the International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) in 1994 have now been superseded in both clinical practice and research by the &quot;Budapest Criteria&quot; which were created in 2003 and have been found to be more sensitive and specific. They have since been adopted by the IASP. The criteria require there to be pain as well as a history and clinical evidence of sensory, vasomotor, sudomotor, and motor or trophic changes. It is also stated that it is a diagnosis of exclusion.

To make a clinical diagnosis all four of the following criteria must be met:

# Continuing pain, which is disproportionate to any inciting event
# Must report at least one symptom in &quot;three of the four&quot; following categories.
#* Sensory: Reports of hyperesthesia
#* Vasomotor: Reports of temperature asymmetry and/or skin color changes and/or skin color asymmetry
#* Sudomotor/Edema: Reports of edema and/or sweating changes and/or sweating asymmetry
#* Motor/Trophic: Reports of decreased range of motion and/or motor dysfunction (weakness, tremor, dystonia) and/or trophic changes (hair, nail, skin)
# Must display at least one sign at time of evaluation in two or more of the following categories
#* Sensory: Evidence of hyperalgesia (to pinprick) and/or allodynia (to light touch and/or temperature sensation and/or deep somatic pressure and/or joint movement)
#* Vasomotor: Evidence of temperature asymmetry (&gt;1 °C) and/or skin color changes and/or asymmetry
#* Sudomotor/Edema: Evidence of edema and/or sweating changes and/or sweating asymmetry
#* Motor/Trophic: Evidence of decreased range of motion and/or motor dysfunction (weakness, tremor, dystonia) and/or trophic changes (hair, nail, skin)
# There is no other diagnosis that better explains the signs and symptoms

=== Diagnostic adjuncts ===
No specific test is available for CRPS, which is diagnosed primarily through observation of the symptoms. However, thermography, sweat testing, X-rays, electrodiagnostics, and sympathetic blocks can be used to build up a picture of the disorder. Diagnosis is complicated by the fact that some patients improve without treatment. A delay in diagnosis and/or treatment for this syndrome can result in severe physical and psychological problems. Early recognition and prompt treatment provide the greatest opportunity for recovery.

====Thermography====
Presently, established empirical evidence suggests against thermography&#x27;s efficacy as a reliable tool for diagnosing CRPS. Although CRPS may, in some cases, lead to measurably altered blood flow throughout an affected region, many other factors can also contribute to an altered thermographic reading, including the patient&#x27;s smoking habits, use of certain skin lotions, recent physical activity, and prior history of trauma to the region. Also, not all patients diagnosed with CRPS demonstrate such &quot;vasomotor instability&quot;—particularly those in the later stages of the disease. Thus, thermography alone cannot be used as conclusive evidence for—or against—a diagnosis of CRPS and must be interpreted in light of the patient&#x27;s larger medical history and prior diagnostic studies.

In order to minimise the confounding influence of external factors, patients undergoing infrared thermographic testing must conform to special restrictions regarding the use of certain vasoconstrictors (namely, nicotine and caffeine), skin lotions, physical therapy, and other diagnostic procedures in the days prior to testing. Patients may also be required to discontinue certain pain medications and sympathetic blockers. After a patient arrives at a thermographic laboratory, he or she is allowed to reach thermal equilibrium in a 16–20 °C, draft-free, steady-state room wearing a loose fitting cotton hospital gown for approximately twenty minutes. A technician then takes infrared images of both the patient&#x27;s affected and unaffected limbs, as well as reference images of other parts of the patient&#x27;s body, including his or her face, upper back, and lower back. After capturing a set of baseline images, some labs further require the patient to undergo cold-water autonomic-functional-stress-testing to evaluate the function of their autonomic nervous system&#x27;s peripheral vasoconstrictor reflex. This is performed by placing a patient&#x27;s unaffected limb in a cold water bath (approximately 20 °C) for five minutes while collecting images. In a normal, intact, functioning autonomic nervous system, a patient&#x27;s affected extremity will become colder. Conversely, warming of an affected extremity may indicate a disruption of the body&#x27;s normal thermoregulatory vasoconstrictor function, which may sometimes indicate underlying CRPS.

====Radiography====

Scintigraphy, plain radiographs, and magnetic resonance imaging may all be useful diagnostically. Patchy osteoporosis (post-traumatic osteoporosis), which may be due to disuse of the affected extremity, can be detected through X-ray imagery as early as two weeks after the onset of CRPS. A bone scan of the affected limb may detect these changes even sooner and can almost confirm the disease. Bone densitometry can also be used to detect changes in bone mineral density. It can also be used to monitor the results of treatment since bone densitometry parameters improve with treatment.

====Ultrasound====
Ultrasound-based osteodensitometry (ultrasonometry) may be potential future radiation-free technique to identify reduced bone mineral density in CRPS. Additionally, this method promises to quantify the bone architecture in the periphery of affected limbs. This method is still under experimental development.

====Electrodiagnostic testing====
Electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction studies (NCS) are important ancillary tests in CRPS because they are among the most reliable methods of detecting nerve injury. They can be used as one of the primary methods to distinguish between CRPS types I and II, which differ based on evidence of actual nerve damage. EMG and NCS are also among the best tests for ruling in or out alternative diagnoses. CRPS is a &quot;diagnosis of exclusion&quot;, which requires that no other diagnosis can explain the patient&#x27;s symptoms. This is very important to emphasise because patients otherwise can be given a wrong diagnosis of CRPS when they actually have a treatable condition that better accounts for their symptoms. An example is severe carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS), which can often present in a very similar way to CRPS. Unlike CRPS, CTS can often be corrected with surgery to alleviate the pain and avoid permanent nerve damage and malformation.

Both EMG and NCS involve some measure of discomfort. EMG involves the use of a tiny needle inserted into specific muscles to test the associated muscle and nerve function. Both EMG and NCS involve very mild shocks that in normal patients are comparable to a rubber band snapping on the skin. Although these tests can be very useful in CRPS, thorough informed consent must be obtained prior to the procedure, particularly in patients experiencing severe allodynia. In spite of the utility of the test, these patients may wish to decline the procedure to avoid discomfort.

====Classification====
* Type I, formerly known as reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD), Sudeck&#x27;s atrophy, or algoneurodystrophy, does not exhibit demonstrable nerve lesions. As the vast majority of patients diagnosed with CRPS have this type, it is most commonly referred to in medical literature as type I.
* Type II, formerly known as causalgia, has evidence of obvious nerve damage. Despite evidence of nerve injury, the cause or the mechanisms of CRPS type II are as unknown, as the mechanisms of type I.

Patients are frequently classified into two groups based upon temperature: &quot;warm&quot; or &quot;hot&quot; CRPS in one group and &quot;cold&quot; CRPS in the other group. The majority of patients (about 70%) have the &quot;hot&quot; type, which is said to be an acute form of CRPS. Cold CRPS is said to be indicative of a more chronic CRPS and is associated with poorer McGill Pain Questionnaire scores, increased central nervous system reorganisation, and a higher prevalence of dystonia. Prognosis is not favourable for cold CRPS patients; longitudinal studies suggest these patients have &quot;poorer clinical pain outcomes and show persistent signs of central sensitisation correlating with disease progression&quot;.

==Prevention==
Vitamin C supplementation may be useful in prevention of the syndrome following fracture of the forearm, foot, or ankle.

==Treatment==
Treatment of CRPS often involves a number of modalities.

===Therapy===
Physical and occupational therapy have low-quality evidence to support their use. Physical therapy interventions may include transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, progressive weight bearing, graded tactile desensitization, massage, and contrast bath therapy. In a retrospective cohort (unblinded, non-randomised and with intention-to-treat) of fifty patients diagnosed with CRPS, the subjective pain and body perception scores of patients decreased after engagement with a two-week multidisciplinary rehabilitation programme. The authors call for randomised controlled trials to probe the true value of multidisciplinary programs for CRPS patients.

====Mirror box therapy====
Mirror box therapy uses a mirror box, or a stand-alone mirror, to create a reflection of the normal limb such that the patient thinks they are looking at the affected limb. Movement of this reflected normal limb is then performed so that it looks to the patient as though they are performing movement with the affected limb. Mirror box therapy appears to be beneficial at least in early CRPS. However, beneficial effects of mirror therapy in the long term is still unproven.

====Graded motor imagery====
Graded motor imagery appears to be useful for people with CRPS-1. Graded motor imagery is a sequential process that consists of (a) laterality reconstruction, (b) motor imagery, and (c) mirror therapy.

Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation (TENS)

Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation (TENS) is a therapy that uses low-voltage electrical signals to provide pain relief through electrodes that are placed on the surface of the skin. Evidence supports its use in treating pain and edema associated with CRPS, but it does not seem to increase functional ability in CRPS patients.

===Medications===
Tentative evidence supports the use of bisphosphonates, calcitonin, and ketamine. Nerve blocks with guanethidine appear to be harmful. Evidence for sympathetic nerve blocks generally is insufficient to support their use. Intramuscular botulinum injections may benefit people with symptoms localized to one extremity.

====Ketamine====
Ketamine, a dissociative anesthetic, appears promising as a treatment for CRPS. It may be used in low doses if other treatments have not worked. No benefit on either function or depression, however, has been seen.

====Bisphosphonate treatment====
As of 2013, high-quality evidence supports the use of bisphosphonates (either orally or via IV infusion) in the treatment of CRPS. Bisphosphonates inhibit osteoclasts: cells involved in the resorption of bone. Bone remodeling (via osteoclast activity in resorption of bone) is thought to sometimes be hyperactive in CRPS. It is hypothesized that bone resorption causes acidification of the intercellular milieu which, in turn, activates nerves involved in nociception that densely innervate bone and causes pain. Therefore, inhibiting bone resorption and remodeling is thought to help with regard to CRPS pain. CRPS involving high levels of bone resorption, as seen on bone scan, is more likely to respond to bisphosphonate therapy.

====Opioids====
Opioids such as oxycodone, morphine, hydrocodone, and fentanyl have a controversial place in treatment of CRPS. These drugs must be prescribed and monitored under close supervision of a physician as they can quickly lead to physical dependence and addiction. To date so far, no long-term studies of oral opioid use in treating neuropathic pain, including CRPS, have been performed. The consensus among experts is that opioids should not be a first-line therapy and should be considered only after all other modalities (e.g., non-opioid medications, physical therapy, and procedures) have been trialed.

===Surgery===

====Spinal cord stimulators====
Spinal cord stimulation appears to be an effective therapy in the management of patients with CRPS type I (level A evidence) and type II (level D evidence). Although they improve patient pain and quality of life, evidence is unclear regarding effects on mental health and general functioning.

Dorsal root ganglion stimulation is a type of neurostimulation that is effective in the management of focal neuropathic pain. The FDA approved its use in February 2016. The ACCURATE Study demonstrated superiority of dorsal root ganglion stimulation over spinal (dorsal column) stimulation in the management of CRPS and causalgia.

====Sympathectomy====
Surgical, chemical, or radiofrequency sympathectomy—interruption of the affected portion of the sympathetic nervous system—can be used as a last resort in patients with impending tissue loss, edema, recurrent infection, or ischemic necrosis. However, little evidence supports these permanent interventions to alter the pain symptoms of the affected patients, and in addition to the normal risks of surgery, such as bleeding and infection, sympathectomy has several specific risks, such as adverse changes in how nerves function.

====Amputation====
No randomized study in medical literature has studied the response with amputation of patients who have failed the above-mentioned therapies and who continue to be in pain. Nonetheless, on average, about half of the patients will have resolution of their pain, while half will develop phantom limb pain and/or pain at the amputation site. As in any other chronic pain syndrome, the brain likely becomes chronically stimulated with pain, and late amputation may not work as well as it might be expected. In a survey of 15 patients with CRPS type 1, 11 responded that their lives were better after amputation.

=== Other ===
Cannabidiol (CBD), despite evidence of very low quality, is proposed to relieve pain.

==Prognosis==
The prognosis of CRPS is improved with early and aggressive treatment, with the risk of chronic, debilitating pain being reduced with the early treatment. If treatment is delayed, however, the disorder can quickly spread to the entire limb, and changes in bone, nerve, and muscle may become irreversible. The prognosis worsens with the chronic &quot;cold&quot; form of CRPS and CRPS affecting the upper extremities. Inactivity of the limb following an injury, whether due to pain or recovery or, in some instances, psychological distress after the injury, can lead to deconditioning. The absence of movement contributes to muscle atrophy, swelling, joint stiffness and pain, and reduced circulation, among other processes. This sequence of physiological changes not only intensifies the symptoms of CRPS but is also associated with a less favorable prognosis. Some cases of CRPS may resolve spontaneously, with 74% of patients in a Minnesota study experiencing complete symptom resolution, while others may have chronic or relapsing-and-remitting disease. Once one is diagnosed with CRPS, should it go into remission, the likelihood of it resurfacing after remission is considerable. Taking precautions and seeking immediate treatment upon any injury is important.

== Epidemiology ==
CRPS can occur at any age, with the average age at diagnosis being 42. It affects both men and women; however, CRPS is three times more frequent in females than males.

CRPS affects both adults and children, and the number of reported CRPS cases among adolescents and young adults has been increasing, with a recent observational study finding an incidence of 1.16/100,000 among children in Scotland.

==History==
The condition currently known as CRPS was originally described by Ambroise Paré, who treated a severe and persistent pain syndrome suffered by Charles IX of France after a limb phlebotomy. Silas Weir Mitchell is sometimes credited with inventing the name &quot;causalgia&quot; during the American Civil War. However, the term was actually coined by Mitchell&#x27;s friend Robley Dunglison from the Greek words for &quot;heat&quot; and &quot;pain&quot;. Causalgia, linked to neurological lesions, is significantly influenced by vasomotor and sudomotor symptoms. In the 1940s, the term &quot;reflex sympathetic dystrophy&quot; was introduced, highlighting the role of sympathetic hyperactivity in its pathophysiology. In 1959, Noordenbos observed in causalgia patients that &quot;the damage of the nerve is always partial.&quot; Misuse of the terms, as well as doubts about the underlying pathophysiology, led to calls for better nomenclature. In 1993, a special consensus workshop held in Orlando, Florida, provided the umbrella term &quot;complex regional pain syndrome&quot;, with causalgia and reflex sympathetic dystrophy as subtypes.

==Research==
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), a part of the National Institutes of Health, supports and conducts research on the brain and central nervous system, including research relevant to RSDS, through grants to major medical institutions across the country. NINDS-supported scientists are working to develop effective treatments for neurological conditions and ultimately, to find ways of preventing them. Investigators are studying new approaches to treat CRPS and intervene more aggressively after traumatic injury to lower the patient&#x27;s chances of developing the disorder. In addition, NINDS-supported scientists are studying how signals of the sympathetic nervous system cause pain in CRPS patients. Using a technique called microneurography, these investigators are able to record and measure neural activity in single nerve fibers of affected patients. By testing various hypotheses, these researchers hope to discover the unique mechanism that causes the spontaneous pain of CRPS, and that discovery may lead to new ways of blocking pain. Other studies to overcome chronic pain syndromes are discussed in the pamphlet &quot;Chronic Pain: Hope Through Research&quot;, published by the NINDS.

Research into treating the condition with mirror visual feedback is being undertaken at the Royal National Hospital for Rheumatic Disease in Bath. Patients are taught how to desensitize in the most effective way, then progress to using mirrors to rewrite the faulty signals in the brain that appear responsible for this condition. However, while CRPS can go into remission, the chance of it reoccurring is significant.

The Netherlands has the most comprehensive program of research into CRPS, as part of a multimillion-Euro initiative called TREND. German and Australian research teams are also pursuing better understanding and treatments for CRPS.

==In other animal species==
CRPS has also been described in non-human animals, such as cattle.

==Notable cases==
* Paula Abdul, singer, actor, TV personality
* Jill Kinmont Boothe, US ski slalom champion
* Danielle Brown, British paralympic archer
* Gemma Collis-McCann, British paralympic fencer
* Radene Marie Cook, former Los Angeles radio broadcaster, artist, and advocate
* Shin Dong-wook, South Korean actor and model
* Howard Hughes, American business tycoon, aviator, inventor, filmmaker, and philanthropist
* Maya Kowalski, subject of the 2023 documentary film &quot;Take Care of Maya&quot;
* Rachel Morris, British paralympic cyclist
* Cynthia Toussaint, author and media personality
* Marieke Vervoort, Belgian Paralympic athlete

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1066311" start="0" end="30" title="Complex regional pain syndrome" label="Complex regional pain syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066311" start="32" end="54" title="Complex regional pain syndrome" label="CRPS type 1 and type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066311" start="95" end="123" title="Complex regional pain syndrome" label="reflex sympathetic dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066311" start="125" end="128" title="Complex regional pain syndrome" label="RSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066311" start="133" end="163" title="Complex regional pain syndrome" label="reflex neurovascular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066311" start="165" end="168" title="Complex regional pain syndrome" label="RND"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157137" start="200" end="217" title="Neuroinflammation" label="neuroinflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q620639" start="222" end="234" title="Dysautonomia" label="dysautonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088113" start="252" end="264" title="chronic pain" label="chronic pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798704" start="272" end="283" title="Neuropathic pain" label="neuropathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12421818" start="379" end="394" title="physical trauma" label="physical trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560951" start="398" end="425" title="Neurotropic virus" label="neurotropic viral infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q81938" start="667" end="671" title="pain" label="pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="673" end="681" title="edema" label="swelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q494478" start="691" end="706" title="range of motion" label="range of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16964213" start="1118" end="1157" title="Amplified musculoskeletal pain syndrome" label="Amplified musculoskeletal pain syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q327657" start="1246" end="1258" title="rheumatology" label="rheumatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660414" start="1390" end="1437" title="International Association for the Study of Pain" label="International Association for the Study of Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002244" start="1614" end="1626" title="Neurogenic inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q412542" start="1751" end="1765" title="Nociceptor" label="pain receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067506" start="1788" end="1804" title="vasoconstriction" label="vasoconstriction"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859627" start="1809" end="1821" title="vasodilation" label="vasodilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q849491" start="1839" end="1854" title="neuroplasticity" label="neuroplasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888634" start="2152" end="2161" title="allodynia" label="allodynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="2211" end="2219" title="Edema" label="swelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q494478" start="2240" end="2255" title="range of motion" label="range of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291130" start="2766" end="2776" title="hemiplegia" label="hemiplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="2878" end="2895" title="Tobacco smoking" label="cigarette smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="3519" end="3541" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706141" start="3704" end="3708" title="Interleukin-1" label="IL-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q410130" start="3710" end="3714" title="Interleukin-2" label="IL-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q21173843" start="3716" end="3725" title="TNF-alpha" label="TNF-alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q419968" start="3731" end="3743" title="neuropeptide" label="neuropeptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q411041" start="3746" end="3757" title="substance P" label="substance P"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="4002" end="4012" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002244" start="4157" end="4180" title="neurogenic inflammation" label="neurogenic inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888634" start="4284" end="4293" title="allodynia" label="allodynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430227" start="4296" end="4305" title="vasomotor" label="vasomotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q849491" start="4396" end="4411" title="neuroplasticity" label="neuroplasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587611" start="4850" end="4859" title="S1 cortex" label="S1 cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q13217355" start="4877" end="4879" title="Secondary somatosensory cortex" label="S2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422654" start="4903" end="4909" title="Insular cortex" label="insula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121931" start="5022" end="5047" title="anterior cingulate cortex" label="anterior cingulate cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="5318" end="5340" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q632856" start="5517" end="5521" title="NMDA" label="NMDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="6216" end="6225" title="oxidative" label="oxidative"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="6243" end="6256" title="free radicals" label="free radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q785022" start="6346" end="6360" title="autoantibodies" label="autoantibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304401" start="6581" end="6601" title="bone mineral density" label="bone mineral density"/>
<link wikidata="Q165328" start="6615" end="6627" title="osteoporosis" label="osteoporosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187215" start="6713" end="6724" title="Sympathetic nervous system" label="sympathetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185589" start="6729" end="6744" title="Parasympathetic nervous system" label="parasympathetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="6745" end="6769" title="autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622611" start="6779" end="6808" title="secondary hyperparathyroidism" label="secondary hyperparathyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135939" start="6910" end="6925" title="pathophysiology" label="pathophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808900" start="7433" end="7442" title="Sensitivity and specificity" label="sensitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808900" start="7447" end="7455" title="Sensitivity and specificity" label="specific"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430227" start="7592" end="7601" title="vasomotor" label="vasomotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633918" start="7603" end="7612" title="sudomotor" label="sudomotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q780017" start="7675" end="7697" title="diagnosis of exclusion" label="diagnosis of exclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638131" start="7958" end="7971" title="hyperesthesia" label="hyperesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="8104" end="8109" title="edema" label="edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="8251" end="8257" title="tremor" label="tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q906492" start="8259" end="8267" title="dystonia" label="dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633866" start="8433" end="8445" title="hyperalgesia" label="hyperalgesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888634" start="8467" end="8476" title="allodynia" label="allodynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q624587" start="9629" end="9641" title="thermography" label="thermography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067506" start="10561" end="10577" title="vasoconstriction" label="vasoconstrictors"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="10587" end="10595" title="nicotine" label="nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="10600" end="10608" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="11426" end="11450" title="autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066311" start="12082" end="12109" title="post-traumatic osteoporosis" label="post-traumatic osteoporosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928938" start="12253" end="12262" title="bone scan" label="bone scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q444351" start="12357" end="12374" title="Dual energy X-ray absorptiometry" label="Bone densitometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="12570" end="12580" title="Ultrasound" label="Ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304401" start="12691" end="12711" title="bone mineral density" label="bone mineral density"/>
<link wikidata="Q507369" start="12914" end="12930" title="Electromyography" label="Electromyography"/>
<link wikidata="Q906492" start="15436" end="15444" title="dystonia" label="dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="15694" end="15703" title="Vitamin C" label="Vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120022" start="15774" end="15782" title="fracture" label="fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q142091" start="16027" end="16070" title="transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation" label="transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179415" start="16132" end="16139" title="massage" label="massage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553674" start="16145" end="16166" title="contrast bath therapy" label="contrast bath therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657279" start="16586" end="16596" title="Mirror box" label="Mirror box"/>
<link wikidata="Q10927834" start="17223" end="17233" title="laterality" label="laterality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918191" start="17254" end="17267" title="motor imagery" label="motor imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657279" start="17277" end="17291" title="mirror therapy" label="mirror therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q142091" start="17346" end="17396" title="Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation" label="Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation (TENS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q412205" start="17740" end="17755" title="bisphosphonates" label="bisphosphonates"/>
<link wikidata="Q315860" start="17757" end="17767" title="calcitonin" label="calcitonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q243547" start="17773" end="17781" title="ketamine" label="ketamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q420673" start="17801" end="17813" title="guanethidine" label="guanethidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="17936" end="17945" title="Botulinum toxin" label="botulinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q900394" start="18048" end="18060" title="dissociative" label="dissociative"/>
<link wikidata="Q412205" start="18338" end="18352" title="bisphosphonate" label="bisphosphonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q828410" start="18439" end="18450" title="osteoclasts" label="osteoclasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734305" start="18740" end="18751" title="nociception" label="nociception"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928938" start="18953" end="18962" title="bone scan" label="bone scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q407535" start="19050" end="19059" title="oxycodone" label="oxycodone"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="19061" end="19069" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q411441" start="19071" end="19082" title="hydrocodone" label="hydrocodone"/>
<link wikidata="Q407541" start="19088" end="19096" title="fentanyl" label="fentanyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668448" start="19684" end="19707" title="Spinal cord stimulator" label="Spinal cord stimulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724687" start="20024" end="20040" title="neurostimulation" label="neurostimulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="20108" end="20111" title="FDA" label="FDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128790" start="20369" end="20382" title="sympathectomy" label="sympathectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q422917" start="21503" end="21520" title="Cannabidiol" label="Cannabidiol (CBD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249582" start="22172" end="22186" title="deconditioning" label="deconditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557686" start="22227" end="22241" title="muscle atrophy" label="muscle atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="22243" end="22251" title="Edema" label="swelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q559210" start="22253" end="22268" title="joint stiffness" label="joint stiffness"/>
<link wikidata="Q683498" start="22273" end="22277" title="Arthralgia" label="pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q276480" start="23369" end="23382" title="Ambroise Paré" label="Ambroise Paré"/>
<link wikidata="Q134309" start="23446" end="23466" title="Charles IX of France" label="Charles IX of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q356405" start="23480" end="23490" title="Bloodletting" label="phlebotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283916" start="23492" end="23511" title="Silas Weir Mitchell (physician)" label="Silas Weir Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="23591" end="23609" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353209" start="23675" end="23691" title="Robley Dunglison" label="Robley Dunglison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430227" start="23830" end="23839" title="vasomotor" label="vasomotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633918" start="23844" end="23853" title="sudomotor" label="sudomotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49233" start="24291" end="24307" title="Orlando, Florida" label="Orlando, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q645285" start="24459" end="24514" title="National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke" label="National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312240" start="25219" end="25235" title="microneurography" label="microneurography"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="25314" end="25325" title="nerve fiber" label="nerve fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q185465" start="26457" end="26468" title="Paula Abdul" label="Paula Abdul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688993" start="26502" end="26521" title="Jill Kinmont Boothe" label="Jill Kinmont Boothe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369931" start="26548" end="26562" title="Danielle Brown" label="Danielle Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q107363992" start="26592" end="26611" title="Gemma Collis-McCann" label="Gemma Collis-McCann"/>
<link wikidata="Q626064" start="26721" end="26735" title="Shin Dong-wook" label="Shin Dong-wook"/>
<link wikidata="Q189081" start="26768" end="26781" title="Howard Hughes" label="Howard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q122850633" start="26918" end="26935" title="Take Care of Maya" label="Take Care of Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288514" start="26944" end="26957" title="Rachel Morris (cyclist)" label="Rachel Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719376" start="27038" end="27054" title="Marieke Vervoort" label="Marieke Vervoort"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56284" wikidata="Q342149" url="?curid=56284" title="Acorn Computers">
<text>Acorn Computers Ltd. was a British computer company established in Cambridge, England in 1978 by Hermann Hauser, Chris Curry and Andy Hopper. The company produced a number of computers during the 1980s with associated software that were highly popular in the domestic market, and they have been historically influential in the development of computer technology like processors.

The company&#x27;s Acorn Electron, released in 1983, and the later Acorn Archimedes, were highly popular in Britain, while Acorn&#x27;s computer dominated the educational computer market during the 1980s. Acorn also developed the reduced instruction set computing (RISC) architecture set in 1985 and an operating system, , for the hardware. The company also designed the ARM architecture; this part of the business was spun-off as Advanced RISC Machines under a joint venture with Apple and VLSI in 1990, now known as Arm Holdings, which is dominant in the mobile phone and personal digital assistant (PDA) microprocessor market today.

Acorn in the 1990s released the Risc PC line and the Acorn Network Computer, and also had a stint in the set-top box and educational markets. However, financial troubles led to the company closing down its workstation division in September 1998, effectively halting its home computer business and cancelling development of RISC OS and the Phoebe computer. The company was acquired and largely dismantled in early 1999. In retrospect, Acorn is sometimes referred to as the &quot;British Apple&quot; and has been compared to Fairchild Semiconductor for being a catalyst for start-ups. 

==History==

===Early history===

On 25 July 1961, Clive Sinclair founded Sinclair Radionics to develop and sell electronic devices such as calculators. The failure of the &quot;Black Watch&quot; wristwatch and the calculator market&#x27;s move from LEDs to LCDs led to financial problems, and Sinclair approached government body the National Enterprise Board (NEB) for help. After losing control of the company to the NEB, Sinclair encouraged Chris Curry to leave Radionics and get Science of Cambridge (SoC—an early name for Sinclair Research) up and running. In June 1978, SoC launched a microcomputer kit, the MK14, that Curry wanted to develop further, but Sinclair could not be persuaded so Curry resigned. During the development of the MK14, Hermann Hauser, a friend of Curry&#x27;s, had been visiting SoC&#x27;s offices and had grown interested in the product.

====CPU Ltd. (1978–1983)====

Curry and Hauser decided to pursue their joint interest in microcomputers and, on 5 December 1978, they set up Cambridge Processor Unit Ltd. (CPU) as the vehicle with which to do this. CPU soon obtained a consultancy contract to develop a microprocessor-based controller for a fruit machine for Ace Coin Equipment (ACE) of Wales. The ACE project was started at office space obtained at 4a Market Hill in Cambridge. Initially, the ACE controller was based on a National Semiconductor SC/MP microprocessor, but soon the switch to a MOS Technology 6502 was made.

====The microcomputer systems====

CPU had financed the development of a SC/MP based microcomputer system using the income from its design-and-build consultancy. 

This system was launched in January 1979 as the first product of Acorn Computer Ltd., a trading name used by CPU to keep the risks of the two different lines of business separate. 

The microcomputer kit was named as Acorn System 75. Acorn was chosen because the microcomputer system was to be expandable and growth-oriented. It also had the attraction of appearing before &quot;Apple Computer&quot; in a telephone directory.
Around this time, CPU and Andy Hopper set up &quot;Orbis Ltd.&quot; to commercialise the Cambridge Ring networking system Hopper had worked on for his PhD, but it was soon decided to bring him into CPU as a director because he could promote CPU&#x27;s interests at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory. 

CPU purchased Orbis, and Hopper&#x27;s Orbis shares were exchanged for shares in CPU Ltd. CPU&#x27;s role gradually changed as its Acorn brand grew, and soon CPU was simply the holding company and Acorn was responsible for development work. 

At some point, Curry had a disagreement with Sinclair and formally left Science of Cambridge, but did not join the other Acorn employees at Market Hill until a little while later.
The Acorn Microcomputer, later renamed the Acorn System 1, was designed by Sophie Wilson (then Roger Wilson). It was a semi-professional system aimed at engineering and laboratory users, but its price was low enough, at around £80 (), to appeal to the more serious enthusiast as well. It was a very small machine built on two cards, one with an LED display, keypad, and cassette interface (the circuitry to the left of the keypad), and the other with the rest of the computer (including the CPU). Almost all CPU signals were accessible via a Eurocard connector.

The System 2 made it easier to expand the system by putting the CPU card from the System 1 in a Eurocard rack that allowed a number of optional additions. The System 2 typically shipped with keyboard controller, external keyboard, a text display interface, and a cassette operating system with built-in BASIC interpreter.

The System 3 moved on by adding floppy disk support, and the System 4 by including a larger case with a second drive. The System 5 was largely similar to the System 4, but included a newer 2 MHz version of the 6502.

====The Atom====

Development of the Sinclair ZX80 started at Science of Cambridge in May 1979. Learning of this probably prompted Curry to conceive the Atom project to target the consumer market. Curry and another designer, Nick Toop, worked from Curry&#x27;s home in the Fens on the development of this machine. It was at this time that Acorn Computers Ltd. was incorporated and Curry moved to Acorn full-time.

It was Curry who wanted to target the consumer market. Other factions within Acorn, including the engineers, were happy to be out of that market, considering a home computer to be a rather frivolous product for a company operating in the laboratory equipment market. 

To keep costs down and not give the doubters reason to object to the Atom, Curry asked industrial designer Allen Boothroyd to design a case that could also function as an external keyboard for the microcomputer systems.

The internals of the System 3 were placed inside the keyboard, creating a quite typical set-up for an inexpensive home computer of the early 1980s: the relatively successful Acorn Atom.

To facilitate software development, a proprietary local area network had been installed at Market Hill. It was decided to include this, the Econet, in the Atom, and at its launch at a computer show in March 1980, eight networked Atoms were demonstrated with functions that allowed files to be shared, screens to be remotely viewed and keyboards to be remotely slaved.

====BBC Micro and the Electron====
After the Atom had been released into the market, Acorn contemplated building modern 16-bit processors to replace the Atom. After a great deal of discussion, Hauser suggested a compromise—an improved 6502-based machine with far greater expansion capabilities: the Proton. Acorn&#x27;s technical staff had not wanted to do the Atom and they now saw the Proton as their opportunity to &quot;do it right&quot;.

One of the developments proposed for the Proton was the &quot;Tube&quot;, a proprietary interface allowing a second processor to be added. This compromise would make for an affordable 6502 machine for the mass market which could be expanded with more sophisticated and expensive processors. The Tube enabled processing to be farmed out to the second processor leaving the 6502 to perform data input/output (I/O). The Tube would later be instrumental in the development of Acorn&#x27;s ARM processor.

In early 1980, the BBC Further Education department conceived the idea of a computer literacy programme, mostly as a follow-up to an ITV documentary, &quot;The Mighty Micro&quot;, in which Dr Christopher Evans from the UK National Physical Laboratory predicted the coming microcomputer revolution. It was a very influential documentary—so much so that questions were asked in Parliament. As a result of these questions, the Department of Industry (DoI) became interested in the programme, as did BBC Enterprises, which saw an opportunity to sell a machine to go with the series. BBC Engineering was instructed to draw up an objective specification for a computer to accompany the series.

Eventually, under some pressure from the DoI to choose a British system, the BBC chose the NewBrain from Newbury Laboratories. This selection revealed the extent of the pressure brought to bear on the supposedly independent BBC&#x27;s computer literacy project—Newbury was owned by the National Enterprise Board, a government agency operating in close collaboration with the DoI. The choice was also somewhat ironic given that the NewBrain started life as a Sinclair Radionics project, and it was Sinclair&#x27;s preference for developing it over Science of Cambridge&#x27;s MK14 that led to Curry leaving SoC to found CPU with Hauser. The NEB moved the NewBrain to Newbury after Sinclair left Radionics and went to SoC.

In 1980–1982, the British Department of Education and Science (DES) had begun the Microelectronics Education Programme to introduce microprocessing concepts and educational materials. In 1981, through to 1986, the DoI allocated funding to assist UK local education authorities to supply their schools with a range of computers, the being one of the most popular. Schools were offered 50% of the cost of computers, providing they chose one of three models: BBC Micro, or Research Machines 380Z. In parallel, the DES continued to fund more materials for the computers, such as software and applied computing projects, plus teacher training.
Although the NewBrain was under heavy development by Newbury, it soon became clear that they were not going to be able to produce it—certainly not in time for the literacy programme nor to the BBC&#x27;s specification. The BBC&#x27;s programmes, initially scheduled for autumn 1981, were moved back to spring 1982. After Curry and Sinclair found out about the BBC&#x27;s plans, the BBC allowed other manufacturers to submit their proposals. Hauser quickly drafted in Steve Furber (who had been working for Acorn on a voluntary basis since the ACE fruit machine project) and Sophie Wilson to help complete a revised version of the Proton which met the BBC&#x27;s specifications. BBC visited Acorn and were given a demonstration of the Proton. Shortly afterwards, the literacy programme computer contract was awarded to Acorn, and the Proton was launched in December 1981 as the BBC Micro. In April 1984, Acorn won the Queen&#x27;s Award for Technology for the BBC Micro. The award paid special tribute to the BBC Micro&#x27;s advanced design, and it commended Acorn &quot;for the development of a microcomputer system with many innovative features&quot;.
In April 1982, Sinclair launched the ZX Spectrum. Curry conceived of the Electron as Acorn&#x27;s sub-£200 competitor. In many ways a cut-down BBC Micro, it used one Acorn-designed uncommitted logic array (ULA) to reproduce most of the functionality. But problems in producing the ULAs led to short supply, and the Electron, although launched in August 1983, was not on the market in sufficient numbers to capitalise on the 1983 Christmas sales period. Acorn resolved to avoid this problem in 1984 and negotiated new production contracts. Acorn became more known for its than for its other products.

In 2008, the Computer Conservation Society organised an event at London&#x27;s Science Museum to mark the legacy of the BBC Micro. A number of the BBC Micro&#x27;s principal creators were present, and Sophie Wilson recounted to the BBC how Hermann Hauser tricked her and Steve Furber to agree to create the physical prototype in less than five days. Also in 2008 a number of former staff organised a reunion event to mark the 30th anniversary of the company&#x27;s formation.
===1983–1985: Acorn Computer Group===
The BBC Micro sold well—so much so that Acorn&#x27;s profits rose from £3000 in 1979 to £8.6 million in July 1983. In September 1983, CPU shares were liquidated and Acorn was floated on the Unlisted Securities Market as &quot;Acorn Computer Group plc&quot;, with Acorn Computers Ltd. as the microcomputer division. With a minimum tender price of 120p, the group came into existence with a market capitalisation of about £135 million. CPU founders Hermann Hauser and Chris Curry&#x27;s stakes in the new company were worth £64m and £51m, respectively. Ten per cent of the equity was placed on the market, with the money raised from the flotation &quot;mainly&quot; directed towards establishing US and German subsidiaries (the flotation raising around £13.4 million), although some was directed towards research and product development.

By the end of 1984, Acorn Computer Group was organised into several subsidiary companies. &quot;Acorn Computers Limited&quot; was responsible for the management of the microcomputer business, research and development, and UK sales and marketing, whereas &quot;Acorn Computer Corporation&quot; and &quot;Acorn Computers International Limited&quot; dealt with sales to the US and to other international markets respectively. &quot;Acorn Computers (Far East) Limited&quot; focused on component procurement and manufacturing with some distribution responsibilities in local markets. &quot;Acornsoft Limited&quot; was responsible for development, production and marketing of software for Acorn&#x27;s computer range. &quot;Vector Marketing Limited&quot; was established to handle distribution-related logistics and the increasing customer support burden. As part of Acorn&#x27;s office automation aspirations, conducting &quot;advanced software research and development&quot;, &quot;Acorn Research Center Incorporated&quot; was established in Palo Alto, California. &quot;Acorn Leasing Limited&quot; rounded out the portfolio.

====New RISC architecture====


Even from the time of Acorn&#x27;s earliest systems, the company was considering how to move on from the 6502 processor, introducing a Motorola 6809 processor card for its System 3 and System 4 models. Several years later in 1985, the Acorn Communicator employed the 16-bit 65816 processor as a step up from the 6502.

The IBM PC was launched on 12 August 1981. Although a version of that machine was aimed at the enthusiast market much like the BBC Micro, its real area of success was business. The successor to the PC, the XT (eXtended Technology) was introduced in early 1983. The success of these machines and the variety of Z80-based CP/M machines in the business sector demonstrated that it was a viable market, especially given that sector&#x27;s ability to cope with premium prices. The development of a business machine looked like a good idea to Acorn. A development programme was started to create a business computer using Acorn&#x27;s existing technology: the BBC Micro mainboard, the Tube and second processors to give CP/M, MS-DOS and Unix (Xenix) workstations.
This &quot;Acorn Business Computer&quot; (ABC) plan required a number of second processors to be made to work with the BBC Micro platform. In developing these, Acorn had to implement the Tube protocols on each processor chosen, in the process finding out, during 1983, that there were no obvious candidates to replace the 6502. Because of many-cycle uninterruptible instructions, for example, the interrupt response times of the Motorola 68000 were too slow to handle the communication protocol that the host 6502-based BBC Micro coped with easily. The National Semiconductor 32016-based model of the ABC range, was developed and later sold in 1985 as the Cambridge Workstation (using the Panos operating system). Advertising for this machine in 1986 included an illustration of an office worker using the workstation. The advert claimed mainframe power at a price of £3,480 (excluding VAT). The main text of the advertisement referred to available mainframe languages, communication capabilities and the alternative option of upgrading a BBC Micro using a coprocessor. The machine had shown Sophie Wilson and Steve Furber the value of memory bandwidth. It also showed that an 8 MHz 32016 was completely trounced in performance terms by a 4 MHz 6502. Furthermore, the Apple Lisa had shown the Acorn engineers that they needed to develop a windowing system; this was not going to be easy with a 2–4 MHz 6502-based system doing the graphics. Acorn would need a new architecture.

Acorn had investigated all of the readily available processors and found them wanting or unavailable to them. After testing all of the available processors and finding them lacking, Acorn decided that it needed a new architecture. Inspired by white papers on the Berkeley RISC project, Acorn seriously considered designing its own processor. A visit to the Western Design Center in the US, where the 6502 was being updated by what was effectively a single-person company, showed Acorn engineers Steve Furber and Sophie Wilson they did not need massive resources and state-of-the-art research and development facilities.

Sophie Wilson set about developing the instruction set, writing a simulation of the processor in that ran on a with a 6502 second processor. It convinced the Acorn engineers that they were on the right track. Before they could go any further, however, they would need more resources. It was time for Wilson to approach Hauser and explain what was afoot. Once the go-ahead had been given, a small team was put together to implement Wilson&#x27;s model in hardware.

&quot;Acorn&quot; initiated its RISC research project in October 1983, and by 1987 had spent . VLSI Technology, Inc were chosen as silicon partner, since they already supplied Acorn with ROMs and some custom chips. VLSI produced the first ARM silicon on 26 April 1985; it worked first time and came to be known as ARM1. Its first practical application was as a second processor to the BBC Micro, where it was used to develop the simulation software to finish work on the support chips (VIDC, IOC, MEMC) and to speed up the operation of the CAD software used in developing ARM2. The ARM evaluation system was promoted as a means for developers to try the system for themselves. This system was used with a BBC Micro and a PC compatible version was also planned. Advertising was aimed at those with technical expertise, rather than consumers and the education market, with a number of technical specifications listed in the main text of the adverts. Wilson subsequently coded in ARM assembly language, and the in-depth knowledge obtained from designing the instruction set allowed the code to be very dense, making ARM BBC BASIC an extremely good test for any ARM emulator.

Such was the secrecy surrounding the ARM CPU project that when Olivetti were negotiating to take a controlling share of Acorn in 1985, they were not told about the development team until after the negotiations had been finalised. In 1992, Acorn once more won the Queen&#x27;s Award for Technology for the ARM. Acorn&#x27;s development of their operating system required around 200 OS development staff at its peak. Acorn C/C++ was released commercially by Acorn, for developers to use to compile their own applications.

====Financial problems====
Having become a publicly traded company in 1983 during the home computer boom, Acorn&#x27;s commercial performance in 1984 proved to be consequential. Many home computer manufacturers struggled to maintain customer enthusiasm, some offering unconvincing follow-up products that failed to appeal to buyers. The more successful manufacturers, like Amstrad, emphasised the bundling of computers with essential peripherals such as monitors and cassette recorders along with value for money. The collapse of the market from the manufacturers&#x27; perspective, it was argued, was due to the &quot;neglect of the market by the manufacturers&quot;. Market adversity had led to Atari being sold, and Apple nearly went bankrupt.

The Electron had been launched in 1983, but problems with the supply of its ULA meant that Acorn was not able to capitalise on the 1983 Christmas selling period. A successful advertising campaign, including TV advertisements, had led to 300,000 orders, but the Malaysian suppliers were only able to supply 30,000 machines. The apparently strong demand for Electrons proved to be ephemeral: rather than wait, parents bought Commodore 64 or ZX Spectrum for their children&#x27;s presents. Ferranti solved the production problem and in 1984, production reached its anticipated volumes, but the contracts Acorn had negotiated with its suppliers were not flexible enough to allow volumes to be reduced quickly in this unanticipated situation, and supplies of the Electron built up. At the time of the eventual financial rescue of Acorn in early 1985, it still had 100,000 unsold Electrons plus an inventory of components which had all been paid for and needed to be stored at additional expense. 40,000 BBC Micros also remained unsold.

After a disappointing summer season in 1984, Acorn had evidently focused on making up for lost sales over the Christmas season, with the Electron being a particular focus. However, a refusal to discount the BBC Micro also appeared to inhibit sales of that machine, with some dealers expressing dissatisfaction to the point of considering abandoning the range altogether. With rumours of another, potentially cheaper, machine coming from Acorn, dealers eventually started to discount heavily after Christmas. For instance, high street retailer Rumbelows sought to clear unsold Christmas stocks of around 1500 machines priced at £299, offering a discount of around £100, also bundling them with a cassette recorder and software. The rumoured machine turned out to be the BBC Model B+ which was a relatively conservative upgrade and more, not less, expensive than the machine it replaced. It was speculated that the perception of a more competitive machine soon to be launched might well have kept potential purchasers away from the products that Acorn needed to sell.

Acorn was also spending a large portion of its reserves on development: the BBC Master was being developed; the ARM project was underway; the Acorn Business Computer entailed a lot of development work but delivered few products, with only the 32016-based model ever being sold (as the Cambridge Workstation). The company&#x27;s research and development staff had grown from around 100 in 1983 to around 150 in 1984, the latter out of a total of 450 employees. Meanwhile, Acorn&#x27;s chosen method of expansion into West Germany and the United States through the establishment of subsidiaries involved a &quot;major commitment of resources&quot;, in contrast with a less costly strategy that might have emphasised collaboration with local distributors. Localisation of the BBC Micro for the US market also involved more expenditure than it otherwise might have due to a failure to consider local market conditions and preferences, with &quot;complex technical efforts&quot; having been made to make the machine compatible with US television standards when local market information would have indicated that &quot;US home computer users expect to use a dedicated personal computer monitor&quot;. Consequently, obtaining Federal approval for the BBC Micro in order to expand into the United States proved to be a drawn-out and expensive process that proved futile: all of the expansion devices that were intended to be sold with the BBC Micro had to be tested and radiation emissions had to be reduced. It was claimed that Acorn spent £10 million on its US operation without this localised variant of the BBC Micro establishing a significant market share. The machine, however, did make an appearance in the school of &quot;Supergirl&quot; in the 1984 film &quot;Supergirl: The Movie&quot;.

Acorn also made or attempted various acquisitions. The Computer Education in Schools division of ICL was acquired by Acorn in late 1983 &quot;reportedly for less than £100,000&quot;, transferring a staff of six to Acorn&#x27;s Maidenhead office to form Acorn&#x27;s Educational Services division and to provide &quot;the core of education support development within Acorn&quot;. Having had a close relationship with Torch Computers in the early 1980s, Acorn sought to acquire Torch in 1984 with the intention of making Torch &quot;effectively the business arm&quot; of Acorn, despite a lack of clarity about competing product lines and uncertainty about the future of Acorn&#x27;s still-unreleased business machine within any rationalised product range, although this acquisition was never completed, with Torch having pulled out as Acorn&#x27;s situation deteriorated.

At around the same time, Acorn also bought into Torus Systems - a company developing a &quot;graphics-controlled local network called Icon&quot; for the IBM PC platform - to broaden Acorn&#x27;s networking expertise. Icon was a solution based on Ethernet, as opposed to the Acorn-related Econet and Cambridge Ring technologies, equipping appropriately specified IBM-compatible computers to participate on a network using a relatively low-cost Ethernet interface card utilising Intel&#x27;s 82586 network controller chip. Torus later released a network management solution called Tapestry, based on Icon and marketed by IBM for its own networking technologies. Torus also released support for the use of Novell&#x27;s Advanced Netware product on its own networking hardware. The company eventually entered receivership in 1990 with Acorn reporting a £242,000 loss associated with the investment. Such were the ambitions of Acorn&#x27;s management that a joint venture company was established in Hong Kong under the name &quot;Optical Information Systems&quot;, apparently engaging in the development of &quot;digital, optical technology for computer data storage&quot;. Involving a Hong Kong turntable manufacturer, Better Sound Reproduction Ltd., Acorn were to set up a research and development facility in Palo Alto, California, US to bring &quot;compact laser disk drives designed as floppy disk drive replacements&quot; to market within 18 months.

In February 1985, speculation about the state of Acorn&#x27;s finances intensified with the appointment of a temporary chief executive, Alexander Reid, to run the company, together with the announcement that Acorn had replaced its financial advisors, Lazards, and that the company&#x27;s stockbrokers, Cazenove, had resigned, ultimately leading to the suspension of Acorn shares, these having fallen to a low of 23 pence per share. With these events reportedly being the result of disagreement between Acorn and Lazards over the measures needed to rescue the company, with Lazards favouring a sale or refinancing whereby the founders would lose control, Acorn and their replacement advisors, Close Brothers, were reported to be pursuing a &quot;radical reorganisation of the company&quot;. Lazards had sought to attract financing from GEC but had failed to do so. Close Brothers also found themselves in the position of seeking a financing partner for Acorn, but in a significantly more urgent timeframe, making &quot;financial institutions or a large computer company&quot; the most likely candidates, these having the necessary resources and decision-making agility for a timely intervention.

===1985–1998: Olivetti subsidiary===
The dire financial situation was brought to a head in February 1985, when one of Acorn&#x27;s creditors issued a winding-up petition. It would eventually emerge that Acorn owed £31.1 million to various creditors including manufacturers AB Electronics and Wong&#x27;s Electronics. Wong&#x27;s had been awarded a contract to produce the BBC Micro for the US market. During the search for potential financing partners, an Olivetti director had approached Close Brothers, ostensibly as part of Olivetti&#x27;s strategy of acquiring technologically advanced small companies. After a short period of negotiations, Curry and Hauser signed an agreement with Olivetti on 20 February. With the founders relinquishing control of the company and seeing their combined stake fall from 85.7% to 36.5%, the Italian computer company took a 49.3% stake in Acorn for £10.39 million, which went some way to covering Acorn&#x27;s £10.9 million losses in the previous six months, effectively valuing Acorn at around a tenth of its valuation of £216 million the year before. Acorn&#x27;s share price collapse and the suspension of its listing was attributed by some news outlets to the company&#x27;s failure to establish itself in the US market, with one source citing costs of $5.5 million related to that endeavour.

In July 1985, Olivetti acquired an additional £4 million of Acorn shares, raising its ownership stake in the company to 79.8%. Major creditors agreed to write off £7.9 million in debts, and the BBC agreed to waive 50% of outstanding royalty payments worth a reported £2 million. This second refinancing left the Acorn founders with less than 15% ownership of the company. Meanwhile, the financial difficulties had reduced the number of employees at Acorn from a peak of 480 to around 270.

With Brian Long appointed as managing director, Acorn were set to move forward with a new OEM-focused computer named the Communicator and the Cambridge Workstation, whose launch had been delayed until the end of July 1985 due to the suspension of Acorn&#x27;s shares. Of subsequent significance, Hermann Hauser was also expected to announce a &quot;VLSI chip design using a reduced instruction set&quot;. Unveiled towards the end of 1985, the Communicator was Acorn&#x27;s answer to ICL&#x27;s One Per Desk initiative. This Acorn machine was based around a 16-bit 65SC816 CPU, 128 KB RAM, expandable to 512 KB, plus additional battery-backed RAM. It had a new multi-tasking OS, four internal ROM sockets, and shipped with a software suite based on View and ViewSheet. It also had an attached telephone, communications software and auto-answer/auto-dial modem. However, with Acorn&#x27;s finances having sustained the development cost of the Archimedes, and with the custom systems division having contributed substantially to the company&#x27;s losses in 1987, a change in strategy took effect towards the end of 1987, moving away from &quot;individual customers&quot; and towards &quot;volume products&quot;, resulting in 47 of Acorn&#x27;s 300 staff being made redundant, the closure of the custom systems division, and the abandonment of the Communicator.

In February 1986, Acorn announced that it was ceasing US sales operations, and sold its remaining US BBC Microcomputers for $1.25 million to a Texas company, Basic, which was a subsidiary of Datum, the Mexican manufacturer of the Spanish version of the BBC Microcomputer (with modified Spanish keyboards for the South American market). The sales office in Woburn, Massachusetts was closed at this time. Acorn was reported as having achieved &quot;negligible U.S. sales&quot;. In 1990, in contrast, Acorn set up a sales and marketing operation in Australia and New Zealand by seeking to acquire long-time distributor Barson Computers Australasia, with Acorn managing director Sam Wauchope noting Acorn&#x27;s presence in Australia since 1983 and being &quot;the only computer manufacturer whose products are recommended by all Australian state education authorities&quot;.

Acorn also sought once again to expand into Germany in the 1990s, identifying the market as the largest in Europe whose technically sophisticated computer retailers were looking for opportunities to sell higher-margin products than IBM PC compatibles, with a large enthusiast community amongst existing and potential customers. Efforts were made to establish a local marketing presence and to offer localised versions of Acorn&#x27;s products. Despite optimistic projections of success, and with Acorn having initially invested £700,000 in the endeavour, the loss-making operation was closed in 1995 as part of broader cost-cutting and restructuring in response to a decline in revenue and difficulties experienced by various Acorn divisions.

Ostensibly facilitated or catalysed by Olivetti&#x27;s acquisition of Acorn, reports in late 1985 indicated plans for possible collaboration between Acorn, Olivetti and Thomson in the European education sector to define a standard for an educational microcomputer system analogous to the MSX computing architecture and to the established IBM PC compatible architecture. Deliberations continued into 1986, with Acorn proposing its own ARM processor architecture as the basis for the initiative, whereas Thomson had proposed the Motorola 68000. Expectations that Olivetti would actively market Acorn&#x27;s machines in Europe were, however, frustrated by Olivetti&#x27;s own assessment of Acorn&#x27;s products as &quot;too expensive&quot; and the proprietary operating system offering &quot;limited flexibility&quot;. Instead, Olivetti sought to promote its M19 personal computer for the European schools market, offering it to Acorn for sale in the UK (ultimately, as the rebadged Acorn M19). Olivetti would eventually offer both Acorn&#x27;s Master Compact and the Thomson MO6 to the Italian market with its Prodest branding.

Collaboration involving Acorn, Olivetti and Thomson (subsequently as SGS-Thomson) continued in the context of research projects, with a consortium of vendors including AEG, Bull, Philips and ICL participating in the Multiworks initiative to develop Unix workstations as part of the European ESPRIT framework. Acorn&#x27;s particular role in Multiworks concerned a low-cost workstation featuring the ARM chipset, alongside a &quot;high-cost authoring workstation&quot; based on Olivetti&#x27;s CP486 workstation. The Chorus system was to be used as the basis of the Unix operating system provided.

Olivetti would eventually relinquish majority control of Acorn in early 1996, selling shares to US and UK investment groups to leave the company with a shareholding in Acorn of around 45%. In July 1996, Olivetti announced that it had sold 14.7% of the group to Lehman Brothers, reducing its stake at that time to 31.2%. Lehman said it planned to resell the shares to investors.

====BBC Master and Archimedes====

The BBC Master was launched in February 1986 and met with considerable success. From 1986 to 1989, about 200,000 systems were sold, each costing £499, mainly to UK schools and universities. A number of enhanced versions were launched, for example, the Master 512, which had 512 KB of RAM and an internal 80186 processor for MS-DOS compatibility, and the Master Turbo, which had a 65C102 second processor.

The first commercial use of the ARM architecture was in the ARM Development System, a Tube-linked second processor for the BBC Master which allowed one to write programs for the new system. It sold for £4,500 and included the ARM processor, 4 MB of RAM and a set of development tools with an enhanced version of . This system did not include the three support chips (VIDC, MEMC, and IOC) which were later to form part of the Archimedes system. They made their first appearance in the A500 second processor, which was used internally within Acorn as a development platform, and had a similar form-factor to the ARM development system.
The second ARM-based product was the Acorn Archimedes desktop-computer, released in mid-1987, some 18 months after IBM launched their RISC-based RT PC. The first RISC-based home computer, using the ARM (Acorn RISC Machine) chip, the Archimedes was popular in the United Kingdom, Australasia and Ireland, and was considerably more powerful and advanced than most offerings of the day. The Archimedes was advertised in both printed and broadcast media. One example of such advertising is a mock-up of the RISC OS 2 desktop, showing some software application directories, with the advert text added within windows. However, the vast majority of home users opted for an Atari ST or Amiga when looking to upgrade their 8-bit micros. As with the BBC, the Archimedes instead flourished in schools and other educational settings but just a few years later in the early 1990s this market began stratifying into the PC-dominated world. Acorn continued to produce updated models of the Archimedes, including a laptop (the A4), and in 1994 launched the Risc PC, whose top specification would later include a 233 MHz StrongARM processor. These were sold mainly into education, specialist and enthusiast markets, such as professional composers using Sibelius 7.

====ARM Ltd.====
Acorn&#x27;s silicon partner, VLSI, had been given the task of finding new applications for the ARM CPU and support chips. Hauser&#x27;s Active Book company had been developing a handheld device and for this the ARM CPU developers had created a static version of their processor, the ARM2aS.

Members of Apple&#x27;s Advanced Technology Group (ATG) had made initial contact with Acorn over use of the ARM in an experimental Apple II (2) style prototype called Möbius. Experiments done in the Möbius project proved that the ARM RISC architecture could be highly attractive for certain types of future products. The Möbius project was briefly considered as the basis for a new line of Apple computers but it was stopped for fear it would compete with the Macintosh and confuse the market. However, the Möbius project evolved awareness of the ARM processor within Apple. The Möbius Team made minor changes to the ARM registers, and used their working prototype to demonstrate a variety of impressive performance benchmarks.
Later Apple was developing an entirely new computing platform for its Newton. Various requirements had been set for the processor in terms of power consumption, cost and performance, and there was also a need for fully static operation in which the clock could be stopped at any time. Only the Acorn RISC Machine came close to meeting all these demands, but there were still deficiencies. The ARM did not, for example, have an integral memory management unit, as this function was being provided by the MEMC support chip and Acorn did not have the resources to develop one.

Apple and Acorn began to collaborate on developing the ARM, and it was decided that this would be best achieved by a separate company. The bulk of the Advanced Research and Development section of Acorn that had developed the ARM CPU formed the basis of ARM Holdings when that company was spun off in November 1990. Acorn Group and Apple Computer Inc. each had a 43% shareholding in ARM (in 1996), while VLSI was an investor and first ARM licensee.

====Acorn Pocket Book====

In 1993, Acorn decided to offer an Acorn branded Psion Series 3 PDA, badged as an Acorn Pocket Book, with a later variant branded the Acorn Pocket Book II. Essentially a rebadged OEM version of the Series 3 with slightly different on-board software, the device was marketed as an inexpensive computer for schoolchildren, rather than as an executive tool. The hardware was the same as the Series 3, but the integrated applications were different. For instance, the Pocket Book omitted the Agenda diary and Spell dictionary applications, which became an optional application, supplied on ROM SSD which could be inserted into either of the ROM bays underneath the device. Other programs were renamed: &quot;System&quot; became &quot;Desktop&quot;, &quot;Word&quot; became &quot;Write&quot;, &quot;Sheet&quot; became &quot;Abacus&quot; and &quot;Data&quot; became &quot;Cards&quot;.
====Set-top boxes====
In 1994, Acorn established a new division, &quot;Online Media&quot;, focusing on interactive multimedia client hardware. Online Media aimed to exploit the projected video-on-demand (VOD) boom, an interactive television system which would allow users to select and watch video content over a network. In September 1994 the Cambridge Digital Interactive Television Trial of video-on-demand services was set up by Online Media, Anglia Television, Cambridge Cable (now part of Virgin Media) and Advanced Telecommunication Modules Ltd (ATML). The trial involved creating a wide area ATM network linking TV-company to subscribers&#x27; homes and delivering services such as home shopping, online education, software downloaded on-demand and the World Wide Web. The wide area network used a combination of fibre and coaxial cable, and the switches were housed in the roadside cabinets of Cambridge Cable&#x27;s existing network.
Olivetti Research Laboratory developed the technology used by the trial. An ICL video server provided the service via ATM switches manufactured by ATML, another company set up by Hauser and Hopper. The trial commenced at a speed of 2 Mbit/s to the home, subsequently increased to 25 Mbit/s.

Subscribers used Acorn Online Media Set Top Boxes. For the first six months the trial involved 10 VOD terminals; the second phase was expanded to cover 100 homes and eight schools with a further 150 terminals in test labs. A number of other organisations gradually joined in, including the National Westminster Bank (NatWest), the BBC, the Post Office, Tesco, and the local education authority. Having initially deployed set-top boxes based on Risc PC hardware, a second generation of the hardware, STB2, featured the ARM7500 system-on-a-chip, this having been manufactured for Online Media by VLSI, and integrated MPEG video decoding hardware. (The C-Cube Microsystems CL450 part is evident on the STB20 circuit board, this product being an MPEG-1 decoder introduced in May 1992.) Plans were announced to expand the initiative from 250 homes to 1000, to support NatWest&#x27;s cable television banking and shopping services, with video on demand provision being strengthened through the deployment of a digital video server from ICL having &quot;a maximum capacity of several hundred gigabytes of fast hard disc storage&quot;, connected via a 155 Mbit/s link and supplementing Olivetti Research Disc Bricks already acting as smaller capacity video servers. Industry support for the Online Media platform was also announced by Oracle and Macromedia.

BBC Education tested delivery of radio-on-demand programmes to primary schools, and a new educational service, Education Online, was established to deliver material such as Open University television programmes and educational software. Netherhall School was provided with an inexpensive video server and operated as a provider of trial services, with Anglia Polytechnic University taking up a similar role some time later.

It was hoped that Online Media could be floated as a separate company, and a share issue raising of additional capital was announced in 1995, this to finance the division and &quot;underpin Acorn Group finances&quot; against a backdrop of deteriorating financial results partly caused by an increasingly uncompetitive lower-end product range. Having entered into a deal with Lightspan Partnership Inc. to supply set-top boxes for the US education market, the order was cancelled and put pressure on Acorn&#x27;s already straitened financial situation. Various other factors ensured that the predicted video-on-demand boom never really materialised as anticipated.

Acorn subsequently planned to incorporate set-top box technology into its product range, launching an initiative entitled &quot;No Limits to Learning&quot; and previewing a range of products under the MediaRange brand, with the MediaSurfer being &quot;essentially an Online Media STB with a World Wide Web browser built in&quot;, and with other products in the range being based on &quot;focused applications&quot; of established Acorn products. Evolution of the technology continued with the launch of the STB22 model, described as &quot;a cross between an NC (Network Computer) and a STB&quot;. This model combined set-top box features such as ATM25 networking for interactive video with more general Internet features such as Web browsing and Java application support. Described as &quot;the icing on the cake&quot;, MPEG2 video decoding hardware was provided by a chipset from LSI. Although Acorn were reportedly hoping for the interactive television market to &quot;eventually take off&quot; and initiate &quot;mass deployment&quot; by traditional telecoms operators, corporate intranet applications were also seen as a target market. With more conservative deployments in mind, the ATM25 interface in the product could be replaced by an Ethernet interface.

====NewsPad====

In 1994, the EU initiated the NewsPad programme, with the aim of developing a common mechanism to author and deliver news electronically to consumer devices. The programme&#x27;s name and format were inspired by the devices described and depicted in Arthur C. Clarke and Stanley Kubrick&#x27;s 1968 film &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot;. Acorn won a contract to develop a consumer device / receiver, and duly supplied a RISC OS-based touch-screen tablet computer for the pilot. The device measured and was being tried in 1996 in Spain by Ediciones Primera Plana. The Barcelona-based pilot ended in 1997, but the tablet format and ARM architecture may have influenced Intel&#x27;s 1999 WebPad / Web Tablet program.

====SchoolServer====
Although Acorn had largely focused on its ARM-based product range offering RISC OS (and, for a time, RISC iX), albeit with an increasing emphasis on DOS and Windows compatibility through its PC card products, the emergence of larger networks in education connecting systems based on different computing platforms—typically Acorn, PC and Apple Macintosh—motivated the introduction of the SchoolServer product range in 1995. The range consisted of server systems manufactured by IBM running Windows NT Server (specifically Windows NT 3.5), employing a single 100 MHz PowerPC processor, with 24 MB or 32 MB of RAM, one or two 1 GB hard drives, and built-in Ethernet interfaces.

Acorn bundled ANT Limited&#x27;s OmniClient software to provide the connectivity support required for Acorn&#x27;s own computers to access the SchoolServer&#x27;s facilities, these being based on Microsoft&#x27;s own SchoolServer platform and proprietary networking technologies. The adoption of such hardware and software platforms, motivated by concerns about the capabilities of Acorn&#x27;s existing products (such as the Risc PC) in the server role, even apparently led to Acorn becoming a Microsoft Solution Provider despite having been &quot;very vocal critics&quot; of Microsoft and its technologies in the past.

Other companies in the educational market introduced similar products to the SchoolServer. For instance, Datathorn Systems introduced a solution called Super Server based on the Motorola PowerStack server system, which was a PowerPC-based machine capable of running Windows NT 3.51 or AIX 4.1, with the Super Server project reportedly being &quot;the product of research at both Oxford and Cambridge universities&quot;. Having approval from Acorn and offering interoperability between Acorn and PC platforms, the solution was deployed at several sites.

====Xemplar Education====
In 1996, Acorn entered into a joint venture with Apple Computer UK called Xemplar to provide computers and services to the UK education market. Described as &quot;the unthinkable&quot; and a &quot;marriage of convenience&quot;, the alliance sought to reverse the declining fortunes of both Acorn and Apple in the sector, also prompting speculation that Apple&#x27;s own strategy based on adoption of the PowerPC platform might lead Acorn along the same path, with Acorn already having expressed some interest in PowerPC and having introduced a PowerPC-based product in the form of its SchoolServer offering. The deal was regarded as benefiting Apple more strongly, with Acorn developers being encouraged to port their software to Mac OS, and with RISC OS effectively being sidelined to Acorn&#x27;s set-top box and network computing products.

Xemplar initially resisted the demand for PC-compatible products in classrooms, limiting its PC offerings to school administration. A survey in 1998 found that Apple and Acorn systems at that time accounted for 47% and of computers in UK primary and secondary schools respectively. However, in 1999, with Acorn undergoing restructuring, the company&#x27;s remaining stake in Xemplar was sold to Apple for . By this time, Xemplar had become &quot;a significant supplier of Wintel PCs&quot; out of commercial necessity, with Acorn&#x27;s Network Computer being the only product from its former co-owner still actively marketed by Xemplar. Despite Acorn&#x27;s own upheavals, Xemplar remained committed to selling Acorn products in its portfolio. Renamed to Apple Xemplar Education, the operation was wound up in 2014. Acorn Education and later Xemplar Education were heavily involved in Tesco&#x27;s &quot;Computers for Schools&quot; programme in the UK, providing hardware and software in exchange for vouchers collected from Tesco purchases.

The Welsh Office Multimedia/Portables Initiative (WOMPI), launched in 1996 to provide primary schools with computer equipment, prescribed that Welsh schools choosing the multimedia option received multimedia PCs exclusively supplied by RM. This upset other suppliers such as Xemplar and members of the National Association of Advisers for Computers in Education (NAACE), with complaints including those about the imposition of an incompatible computing platform on small schools who were already committed to the RISC OS platform, these schools being potentially incapable of managing &quot;a mix of machines&quot;, and the lack of appropriate Welsh language software for the Windows platform, this being of particular concern in schools where lessons were &quot;conducted exclusively in Welsh&quot; and where an &quot;excellent working relationship with British software houses&quot; had cultivated the availability of major RISC OS applications in Welsh. The range of multimedia software offered in the initiative was also criticised: &quot;none of the scheme&#x27;s CD-Roms&quot; were in Welsh, and Acorn machines also needed additional software, at an estimated £300 in extra costs, to &quot;make effective use&quot; of the software titles.

====Network computers====

When BBC2&#x27;s &quot;The Money Programme&quot; screened an interview with Larry Ellison in October 1995, Acorn Online Media Managing Director Malcolm Bird realised that Ellison&#x27;s network computer was, basically, an Acorn set-top box. After initial discussions between Oracle Corporation and Olivetti, Hauser and Acorn a few weeks later, Bird was dispatched to San Francisco with Acorn&#x27;s latest Set Top Box. Oracle had already talked seriously with computer manufacturers including Sun and Apple about the contract for putting together the NC blueprint machine; there were also rumours in the industry that said Oracle itself was working on the reference design. After Bird&#x27;s visit to Oracle, Ellison visited Acorn and a deal was reached: Acorn would define the NC Reference Standard.

Ellison was expecting to announce the NC in February 1996. Sophie Wilson was put in charge of the NC project, and by mid-November a draft NC specification was ready. By January 1996 the formal details of the contract between Acorn and Oracle had been worked out, and the PCB was designed and ready to be put into production. In February 1996, Acorn Network Computing was founded. In August 1996 it launched the Acorn Network Computer.
It was hoped that the Network Computer would create a significant new sector in which Acorn Network Computing would be a major player, either selling its own products or earning money from licence fees paid by other manufacturers for the right to produce their own NCs. To that end, two of Acorn&#x27;s major projects were the creation of a new &#x27;consumer device&#x27; operating system named Galileo, and, in conjunction with Digital Semiconductor and ARM, a new StrongARM chipset consisting of the SA-1500 and SA-1501. Galileo&#x27;s main feature was a guarantee of a certain quality of service to each process in which the resources (CPU, memory, etc.) required to ensure reliable operation would be kept available regardless of the behaviour of other processes. The SA-1500 sported higher clock rates than existing StrongARM CPUs and, more importantly, a media-focussed coprocessor (the Attached Media Processor or AMP). The SA-1500 was to be the first release target for Galileo.

After having incorporated its STB and NC business areas as separate companies, Acorn created a new wholly owned subsidiary, Acorn RISC Technologies (ART). ART focused on the development of other software and hardware technologies built on top of ARM processors.
===1998–1999: Element 14 and MSDW acquisition===

During the first half of 1998 Acorn&#x27;s management were heavily involved in the initial public offering of ARM Holdings plc which raised £18 million for Acorn throughout 1998. In June 1998, Stan Boland took over as CEO of Acorn Computers from David Lee, initiating a review of Acorn&#x27;s core business.

The company had losses of £9 million in the first nine months of the year and in September 1998 the results of the review led to a significant restructuring of the company. The Workstation division was to close, a 40% reduction in staff, and the Risc PC 2 code-named Phoebe that was nearing completion was cancelled. These actions allowed the company to reduce ongoing losses and focus on other activities. Acorn concentrated on development of digital TV set-top boxes and high performance media centric DSP (silicon and software). It also produced a reference design for a Windows NT thin client using a Cirrus Logic system on a chip.

====Refocusing and discontinuation of activities====
To concentrate on these two activities Acorn hired a group of former STMicroelectronics silicon-design engineers and they formed the basis of a silicon-design centre that Acorn set up in Bristol. They also started to dispose of some of their interests in the former workstation market and in January 1999 sold their 50% interest in Xemplar Education to Apple Computer.

Attempts were made to secure the rights to Acorn&#x27;s desktop products including network computers and &quot;various associated technologies&quot;, RISC OS, and the abandoned Phoebe workstation project by a consortium of Acorn market interests, and a memorandum of understanding was reportedly signed by both Stan Boland, representing Acorn, and former Acorn executive Peter Bondar, representing the consortium. However, Acorn pulled out of this tentative deal amidst accusations of attempts to sideline the consortium and to negotiate directly with its financial backers. It was reported that Stephen Streater of Eidos may have made a bid for the rights to the PC range, but in October 1998 the distribution rights to the existing designs of machines were granted to Castle Technology to supply Acorn&#x27;s dealer network. In March 1999, RISCOS Ltd acquired a licence to develop and release RISC OS.

By January 1999, Acorn Computers Limited had renamed to Element 14 Limited (though still owned by Acorn Group plc), referring to the element silicon with atomic number 14; this change was to reflect the changed nature of the business and to distance itself from the education market that Acorn Computers was most known for. Other names had been considered by the company, but the domain name &quot;e-14.com&quot; had been registered before the official announcement.

====Acquisition and asset disposal====
Ultimately, the widely anticipated issues around releasing Acorn&#x27;s 24% shareholding in ARM, with a need for &quot;minimising the massive tax burden posed by disposing the holding&quot;, were resolved through &quot;creative accounting courtesy of Morgan Stanley&quot;, with an offshore subsidiary of the bank acquiring Acorn, releasing the shareholding &quot;using the purchase as a tax loss and swapping Acorn investors&#x27; shares for ARM shares&quot;, and with the bank retaining an estimated shareholding in ARM as a consequence. As part of the process leading to the acquisition of Acorn by the Morgan Stanley subsidiary, MSDW Investment Holdings Limited, with the intention to &quot;minimise the liabilities&quot; of the group through the disposal of assets, Pace Micro Technology agreed to acquire Acorn&#x27;s set-top box division for approximately £200,000, also obtaining Acorn&#x27;s rights and obligations with regard to RISC OS.

In conjunction with the acquisition of Acorn, an offer was extended to a company &quot;owned by Stan Boland and certain senior management to purchase ... the silicon and software design activity&quot; for approximately £1 million. This distinct company, known as &quot;New Jam Inc&quot; or &quot;NewJam Inc&quot;, already founded in April 1999, eventually acquired these assets for £620,539, and effectively became the independent Element 14 venture, acquiring the name from the former Acorn Computers Limited in October 1999. Acorn Computers then became known as Cabot 2 Limited. A subsequent report put the sale price of this division of Acorn at £1.5 million, offering the prescient observation that this new business would itself be acquired for &quot;several million pounds&quot; by an established company in the industry. This anticipated acquisition, involving Broadcom, occurred the following year.

===1999–2015: Legacy operations===
Acorn Computers, in its new guise of Cabot 2, would continue to administer the remaining assets of the business and to &quot;tidy up remaining contractual and logistical obligations&quot;, these including the servicing of product warranties. In late 1999, Reflex Electronics signed a five-year contract to perform warranty work and technical support for Acorn-manufactured products, renewing an earlier arrangement with Acorn. Acorn Group – the parent company of Acorn Computers Limited – had itself been renamed from Acorn Computer Group in 1997, and the company was subsequently renamed Cabot 1 Limited and taken private by MSDW in February 2000. The company remained (at least legally) active until being dissolved in December 2015.

== Legacy ==

The legacy of the company&#x27;s work is evidenced in spin-off technologies, with the company being described in 2013 as &quot;the most influential business in the innovation cluster&#x27;s history&quot;. In 2010, the company was listed by David Meyer in &quot;ZDNet&quot; as number nine in a feature of top ten &quot;Dead IT giants&quot;. Many British IT professionals gained their early experiences on Acorns, which were often more technically advanced than commercially successful US hardware. 

===Revival of the Acorn trademark===

In early 2006, the dormant Acorn trademark was licensed from the French company Aristide &amp; Co Antiquaire de Marques, by a new company based in Nottingham. This company was dissolved in late 2009.

On 23 February 2018 the Acorn trademark made another return when a new company Acorn Inc. Ltd announced a brand new smartphone, the Acorn Micro C5. The Acorn Micro C5 has since been discontinued.

==In popular culture==
In 2009, BBC4 screened &quot;Micro Men&quot;, a drama based on the rivalry between Acorn Computers and Sinclair&#x27;s competing machines.

===TV series===
Acorn products featured prominently in a number of Educational television series, including:

* &quot;The Computer Programme&quot;
* &quot;Micro Live&quot;
* &quot;Making the Most of the Micro&quot;
* &quot;Computers in Control&quot;

===Magazines===

Acorn products spawned a series of dedicated publications, including:

* &quot;Acorn User&quot; (named &quot;BBC Acorn User&quot; while its publisher was owned by the BBC)
* &quot;The Micro User&quot; (initially &quot;BBC Micro User&quot;, renamed due to a trade mark objection) / &quot;Acorn Computing&quot;
* &quot;Archive&quot;
* &quot;BEEBUG&quot;
* &quot;Electron User&quot;

They also featured in dedicated sections of:

* &quot;Computer Shopper&quot;
* &quot;Personal Computer News&quot;
* &quot;Personal Computer World&quot;
* &quot;Computer Gamer&quot;

==See also==
* Acornsoft
* Amber (processor core)
* Arm (company)
* List of Acorn Electron games
* List of British computers
* Microelectronics Education Programme
* Olivetti
* RISC OS

==Notes==
==References==

* &quot;Personal Computer World review of the BBC Micro&quot; (including details of BBC contract), December 1981 &quot;Personal Computer World&quot;
* &quot;ARM&#x27;s Way&quot; (LISA influence, Berkeley RISC, Fabrication date), April 1988, &quot;Electronics Weekly&quot;
* &quot;The history of the ARM CPU&quot;, taken from &#x27;The ARM RISC Chip: A Programmers&#x27; Guide&#x27; by Carol Atack and Alex van Someren, published 1993 by Addison-Wesley
* &quot;From Atom to ARC – The ups and downs of the development of Acorn&quot;, from October, November and December 1988 editions of &quot;Acorn User&quot;
* &quot;ARM&#x27;s Race to Embedded World Domination&quot; (Motorola 68000 was considered as a replacement to 6502), Paul DeMone, 2000
* &quot;Sophie Wilson&#x27;s most admired CPU&quot; (32016 chip as example of &quot;how to completely make a mess of things&quot;), Sophie Wilson
* Flotation of Acorn on Unlisted Securities Market, &quot;Electronics Times&quot;, 6 October 1983
==External links==

* The Acorn Atom pre-history
* RISC OS and Acorn pages
* Atom Review documentation of the Atom and many extensions made by Dutch Atom clubs
* About Acorn computers and ARM processors 
* Acorn information from Retro Madness, the museum of home computing and gaming
* RISC OS Ltd. develop Acorn&#x27;s OS under licence from Castle
* AdvantageSix develop computers and embedded systems for RISC OS
* Castle Technology are the current owners of RISC OS
* Acorn Computers The collection at The Centre for Computing History
* Steve Furber Video Interview—at Manchester University on 17 August 2009</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q342149" start="0" end="20" title="Acorn Computers" label="Acorn Computers Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="35" end="51" title="computer company" label="computer company"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="67" end="76" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803761" start="97" end="111" title="Hermann Hauser" label="Hermann Hauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112176" start="113" end="124" title="Christopher Curry (businessman)" label="Chris Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q92694" start="129" end="140" title="Andy Hopper" label="Andy Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="367" end="377" title="Central processing unit" label="processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q342163" start="399" end="413" title="Acorn Electron" label="Acorn Electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q41357" start="447" end="463" title="Acorn Archimedes" label="Acorn Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="610" end="643" title="reduced instruction set computing" label="reduced instruction set computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="683" end="699" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="751" end="754" title="ARM architecture family" label="ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="861" end="866" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362061" start="871" end="875" title="VLSI Technology" label="VLSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q296782" start="898" end="910" title="Arm Holdings" label="Arm Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="937" end="949" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="954" end="980" title="personal digital assistant" label="personal digital assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="987" end="1001" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353312" start="1049" end="1056" title="Risc PC" label="Risc PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674557" start="1070" end="1092" title="Acorn Network Computer" label="Acorn Network Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q842729" start="1122" end="1133" title="set-top box" label="set-top box"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901578" start="1356" end="1362" title="Phoebe (computer)" label="Phoebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="1503" end="1508" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096013" start="1540" end="1563" title="Fairchild Semiconductor" label="Fairchild Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23889" start="1653" end="1667" title="Clive Sinclair" label="Clive Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522044" start="1676" end="1694" title="Sinclair Radionics" label="Sinclair Radionics"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="1742" end="1752" title="calculator" label="calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288804" start="1780" end="1791" title="Black Watch (wristwatch)" label="Black Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="1852" end="1856" title="light-emitting diode" label="LEDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="1860" end="1864" title="Liquid-crystal display" label="LCDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967090" start="1936" end="1961" title="National Enterprise Board" label="National Enterprise Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112176" start="2046" end="2057" title="Christopher Curry (businessman)" label="Chris Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4409" start="2129" end="2146" title="Sinclair Research" label="Sinclair Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523796" start="2216" end="2220" title="MK14" label="MK14"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803761" start="2351" end="2365" title="Hermann Hauser" label="Hermann Hauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q33972" start="2779" end="2792" title="slot machine" label="fruit machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="2825" end="2830" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457100" start="2962" end="2990" title="National Semiconductor SC/MP" label="National Semiconductor SC/MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="3032" end="3051" title="MOS Technology 6502" label="MOS Technology 6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="3606" end="3620" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q92694" start="3679" end="3690" title="Andy Hopper" label="Andy Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063883" start="3742" end="3756" title="Cambridge Ring (computer network)" label="Cambridge Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="3804" end="3807" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895212" start="3922" end="3965" title="University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory" label="University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736931" start="4435" end="4449" title="Acorn System 1" label="Acorn System 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q16489" start="4467" end="4480" title="Sophie Wilson" label="Sophie Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="4737" end="4740" title="light-emitting diode" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="4762" end="4780" title="Compact audio cassette" label="cassette interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="4883" end="4886" title="central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375358" start="4934" end="4942" title="Eurocard (printed circuit board)" label="Eurocard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604597" start="4959" end="4967" title="Acorn System 2" label="System 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="5258" end="5263" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q183065" start="5264" end="5275" title="interpreter (computer software)" label="interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604597" start="5282" end="5290" title="Acorn System 3" label="System 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="5310" end="5321" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604597" start="5339" end="5347" title="Acorn System 4" label="System 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604597" start="5400" end="5408" title="Acorn System 5" label="System 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="5469" end="5472" title="megahertz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="5488" end="5492" title="MOS Technology 6502" label="6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q602406" start="5532" end="5545" title="Sinclair ZX80" label="Sinclair ZX80"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043357" start="5648" end="5652" title="Acorn Atom" label="Atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404827" start="5764" end="5772" title="the Fens" label="the Fens"/>
<link wikidata="Q473708" start="6069" end="6082" title="home computer" label="home computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731544" start="6285" end="6300" title="Allen Boothroyd" label="Allen Boothroyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043357" start="6573" end="6583" title="Acorn Atom" label="Acorn Atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333324" start="6726" end="6732" title="Econet" label="Econet"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="7075" end="7081" title="16-bit computing" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="7792" end="7804" title="input/output" label="input/output"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7884" end="7897" title="ARM architecture family#History" label="ARM processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="7919" end="7922" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="8033" end="8036" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="8037" end="8048" title="documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112292" start="8089" end="8109" title="Christopher Evans (computer scientist)" label="Dr Christopher Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967606" start="8122" end="8150" title="National Physical Laboratory (United Kingdom)" label="National Physical Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359420" start="8172" end="8196" title="microcomputer revolution" label="microcomputer revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="8276" end="8286" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q584148" start="8324" end="8346" title="Department of Industry" label="Department of Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071905" start="8396" end="8411" title="BBC Enterprises" label="BBC Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550793" start="8680" end="8688" title="Grundy NewBrain" label="NewBrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967090" start="8875" end="8900" title="National Enterprise Board" label="National Enterprise Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260118" start="9337" end="9372" title="Department for Education and Skills (United Kingdom)" label="Department of Education and Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839496" start="9393" end="9429" title="Microelectronics Education Programme" label="Microelectronics Education Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933349" start="9781" end="9803" title="Research Machines 380Z" label="Research Machines 380Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q92776" start="10417" end="10429" title="Steve Furber" label="Steve Furber"/>
<link wikidata="Q16489" start="10524" end="10537" title="Sophie Wilson" label="Sophie Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q749976" start="10827" end="10836" title="BBC Micro" label="BBC Micro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413988" start="10867" end="10900" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Award for Technology" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Award for Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="11141" end="11152" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q342163" start="11177" end="11185" title="Acorn Electron" label="Electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q114901" start="11285" end="11308" title="Gate array" label="uncommitted logic array"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157428" start="11718" end="11747" title="Computer Conservation Society" label="Computer Conservation Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q674773" start="11784" end="11798" title="Science Museum, London" label="Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897061" start="12409" end="12435" title="Unlisted Securities Market" label="Unlisted Securities Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604604" start="13641" end="13658" title="Acornsoft" label="Acornsoft Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="14316" end="14320" title="MOS Technology 6502" label="6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545600" start="14346" end="14359" title="Motorola 6809" label="Motorola 6809"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674551" start="14446" end="14464" title="Acorn Communicator" label="Acorn Communicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="14478" end="14484" title="16-bit computing" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q512020" start="14485" end="14490" title="WDC 65C816" label="65816"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="14534" end="14540" title="IBM Personal Computer" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q203315" start="14840" end="14843" title="Zilog Z80" label="Z80"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="14850" end="14854" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="15244" end="15248" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="15250" end="15256" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="15261" end="15265" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q589680" start="15267" end="15272" title="Xenix" label="Xenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674545" start="15299" end="15322" title="Acorn Business Computer" label="Acorn Business Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q220764" start="15685" end="15694" title="interrupt" label="interrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q667808" start="15717" end="15731" title="Motorola 68000" label="Motorola 68000"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131535" start="15977" end="15982" title="Panos (operating system)" label="Panos"/>
<link wikidata="Q859595" start="16345" end="16356" title="coprocessor" label="coprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16489" start="16380" end="16393" title="Sophie Wilson" label="Sophie Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q92776" start="16398" end="16410" title="Steve Furber" label="Steve Furber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789318" start="16471" end="16476" title="NS320xx" label="32016"/>
<link wikidata="Q371482" start="16556" end="16566" title="Apple Lisa" label="Apple Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638583" start="17029" end="17042" title="Berkeley RISC" label="Berkeley RISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505987" start="17123" end="17144" title="Western Design Center" label="Western Design Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q92776" start="17261" end="17273" title="Steve Furber" label="Steve Furber"/>
<link wikidata="Q16489" start="17278" end="17291" title="Sophie Wilson" label="Sophie Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="17349" end="17373" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362061" start="17947" end="17967" title="VLSI Technology, Inc" label="VLSI Technology, Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="18573" end="18586" title="PC compatible" label="PC compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q673267" start="19088" end="19096" title="Olivetti" label="Olivetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="19330" end="19333" title="ARM architecture family" label="ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674544" start="19440" end="19451" title="Acorn C/C++" label="Acorn C/C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q207922" start="20243" end="20248" title="Atari" label="Atari"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="20265" end="20270" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q114901" start="20370" end="20373" title="uncommitted logic array" label="ULA"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="20717" end="20729" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="20733" end="20744" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407586" start="20781" end="20789" title="Ferranti" label="Ferranti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379159" start="21869" end="21878" title="Rumbelows" label="Rumbelows"/>
<link wikidata="Q283134" start="24115" end="24124" title="Supergirl (1984 film)" label="Supergirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413338" start="24280" end="24283" title="International Computers Limited" label="ICL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825536" start="24599" end="24614" title="Torch Computers" label="Torch Computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063883" start="25353" end="25367" title="Cambridge Ring (computer network)" label="Cambridge Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208203" start="27341" end="27344" title="General Electric Company" label="GEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q673267" start="28389" end="28397" title="Olivetti" label="Olivetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674551" start="29648" end="29660" title="Acorn Communicator" label="Communicator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29669" end="29690" title="Acorn Business Computer#ABC 210/Acorn Cambridge Workstation" label="Cambridge Workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093118" start="30021" end="30033" title="One Per Desk" label="One Per Desk"/>
<link wikidata="Q853547" start="32792" end="32795" title="MSX" label="MSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="32842" end="32859" title="IBM PC compatible" label="IBM PC compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881830" start="33361" end="33364" title="Olivetti M19" label="M19"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881830" start="33485" end="33494" title="Acorn M19" label="Acorn M19"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33547" end="33561" title="BBC Master#Master Compact" label="Master Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525757" start="33570" end="33581" title="Thomson MO6" label="Thomson MO6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743938" start="33923" end="33929" title="European Strategic Programme on Research in Information Technology (ESPRIT)" label="ESPRIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q670316" start="34148" end="34161" title="ChorusOS" label="Chorus system"/>
<link wikidata="Q212900" start="34491" end="34506" title="Lehman Brothers" label="Lehman Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q795555" start="34648" end="34658" title="BBC Master" label="BBC Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="34922" end="34924" title="Kibibyte" label="KB"/>
<link wikidata="Q725524" start="34948" end="34953" title="Intel 80186" label="80186"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="34968" end="34974" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="35082" end="35098" title="ARM architecture family" label="ARM architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="35211" end="35218" title="computer program" label="program"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="35293" end="35295" title="Mebibyte" label="MB"/>
<link wikidata="Q41357" start="35721" end="35737" title="Acorn Archimedes" label="Acorn Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="35799" end="35802" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q502542" start="35829" end="35834" title="IBM RT PC" label="RT PC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35882" end="35885" title="ARM architecture family#ARM2" label="ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="35947" end="35961" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="35963" end="35974" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="35979" end="35986" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620924" start="36228" end="36251" title="application directories" label="application directories"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="36350" end="36358" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="36362" end="36367" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="36398" end="36403" title="8-bit computing" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="36590" end="36592" title="IBM PC compatible" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353312" start="36725" end="36732" title="Risc PC" label="Risc PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q296778" start="36788" end="36797" title="StrongARM" label="StrongARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q240110" start="36920" end="36930" title="Sibelius (scorewriter)" label="Sibelius 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362061" start="36980" end="36984" title="VLSI Technology, Inc" label="VLSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="37254" end="37259" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686304" start="37267" end="37292" title="Apple Advanced Technology Group" label="Advanced Technology Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="37977" end="37982" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q420772" start="38041" end="38047" title="Apple Newton" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351326" start="38184" end="38206" title="static logic (digital logic)" label="fully static operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q296782" start="38799" end="38811" title="Arm (company)" label="ARM Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047568" start="39071" end="39085" title="Psion Series 3" label="Psion Series 3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39104" end="39121" title="Psion Series 3#Acorn Pocket Book" label="Acorn Pocket Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q723685" start="40088" end="40103" title="video-on-demand" label="video-on-demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q874342" start="40119" end="40141" title="interactive television" label="interactive television"/>
<link wikidata="Q34508" start="40193" end="40198" title="video" label="video"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975048" start="40348" end="40365" title="Anglia Television" label="Anglia Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025372" start="40367" end="40382" title="Cambridge Cable" label="Cambridge Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199764" start="40396" end="40408" title="Virgin Media" label="Virgin Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933662" start="40414" end="40452" title="Advanced Telecommunication Modules Ltd" label="Advanced Telecommunication Modules Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="40662" end="40676" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045727" start="40845" end="40873" title="Olivetti Research Laboratory" label="Olivetti Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413338" start="40921" end="40924" title="International Computers Limited" label="ICL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674559" start="41154" end="41184" title="Acorn Online Media Set Top Box" label="Acorn Online Media Set Top Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740021" start="41427" end="41452" title="National Westminster Bank" label="National Westminster Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="41468" end="41471" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783168" start="41477" end="41488" title="Post Office Ltd" label="Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q487494" start="41490" end="41495" title="Tesco" label="Tesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664350" start="41505" end="41530" title="local education authority" label="local education authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005873" start="41787" end="41806" title="C-Cube Microsystems" label="C-Cube Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413375" start="42661" end="42676" title="Open University" label="Open University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261814" start="42725" end="42742" title="Netherhall School" label="Netherhall School"/>
<link wikidata="Q299009" start="44224" end="44229" title="ATM25" label="ATM25"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587129" start="44459" end="44462" title="LSI Corporation" label="LSI"/>
<link wikidata="" start="45169" end="45190" title="2001: A Space Odyssey" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="45307" end="45322" title="tablet computer" label="tablet computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35638" start="45398" end="45421" title="Ediciones Primera Plana" label="Ediciones Primera Plana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047860" start="45697" end="45704" title="RISC iX" label="RISC iX"/>
<link wikidata="Q11219" start="46085" end="46102" title="Windows NT Server" label="Windows NT Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q771202" start="46117" end="46131" title="Windows NT 3.5" label="Windows NT 3.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q209860" start="46161" end="46168" title="PowerPC" label="PowerPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q269856" start="47179" end="47182" title="IBM AIX" label="AIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="47523" end="47540" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Computer UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q487494" start="49203" end="49208" title="Tesco" label="Tesco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49222" end="49243" title="Tesco#Corporate social responsibility" label="Computers for Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341180" start="49504" end="49516" title="Education in Wales" label="Welsh school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327685" start="49558" end="49571" title="multimedia PC" label="multimedia PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3928338" start="49597" end="49599" title="RM plc" label="RM"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="50639" end="50643" title="BBC Two" label="BBC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751999" start="50657" end="50676" title="The Money Programme" label="The Money Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q92759" start="50710" end="50723" title="Larry Ellison" label="Larry Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q918090" start="50820" end="50836" title="network computer" label="network computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19900" start="50909" end="50927" title="Oracle Corporation" label="Oracle Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="51127" end="51130" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674557" start="51847" end="51869" title="Acorn Network Computer" label="Acorn Network Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q220501" start="52452" end="52470" title="quality of service" label="quality of service"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="53255" end="53278" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q296782" start="53282" end="53298" title="Arm (company)" label="ARM Holdings plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597560" start="53365" end="53376" title="Stan Boland" label="Stan Boland"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="53390" end="53393" title="CEO" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901578" start="53748" end="53754" title="Phoebe (computer)" label="Phoebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q842729" start="53936" end="53947" title="set-top box" label="set-top box"/>
<link wikidata="Q173142" start="53985" end="53988" title="Digital signal processing" label="DSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q486487" start="54055" end="54065" title="Windows NT" label="Windows NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q918090" start="54066" end="54077" title="thin client" label="thin client"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067998" start="54086" end="54098" title="Cirrus Logic" label="Cirrus Logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="54099" end="54115" title="system on a chip" label="system on a chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q661845" start="54240" end="54258" title="STMicroelectronics" label="STMicroelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="54358" end="54365" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608628" start="55137" end="55153" title="Stephen Streater" label="Stephen Streater"/>
<link wikidata="Q679933" start="55157" end="55162" title="Eidos Interactive" label="Eidos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050308" start="55311" end="55328" title="Castle Technology" label="Castle Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047859" start="55383" end="55393" title="RISCOS Ltd" label="RISCOS Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202514" start="55436" end="55443" title="RISC OS" label="RISC OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="55587" end="55594" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q334204" start="56204" end="56218" title="Morgan Stanley" label="Morgan Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202514" start="56891" end="56898" title="RISC OS" label="RISC OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q790060" start="57769" end="57777" title="Broadcom" label="Broadcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186164" start="58649" end="58657" title="corporate spin-off" label="spin-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457578" start="58856" end="58861" title="ZDNet" label="ZDNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="59197" end="59203" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674549" start="59256" end="59269" title="Acorn Computers (2006)" label="a new company"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="59279" end="59289" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044199" start="59582" end="59591" title="Micro Men" label="Micro Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727242" start="59811" end="59833" title="The Computer Programme" label="The Computer Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839169" start="59848" end="59858" title="Micro Live" label="Micro Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739691" start="59873" end="59901" title="Making the Most of the Micro" label="Making the Most of the Micro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674565" start="60040" end="60050" title="Acorn User" label="Acorn User"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751262" start="60141" end="60155" title="The Micro User" label="The Micro User"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751262" start="60248" end="60263" title="Acorn Computing" label="Acorn Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787252" start="60278" end="60285" title="Archive (magazine)" label="Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835418" start="60300" end="60306" title="BEEBUG" label="BEEBUG"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358150" start="60321" end="60334" title="Electron User" label="Electron User"/>
<link wikidata="Q868630" start="60396" end="60412" title="Computer Shopper (UK magazine)" label="Computer Shopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017708" start="60427" end="60449" title="Personal Computer News" label="Personal Computer News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170488" start="60464" end="60487" title="Personal Computer World" label="Personal Computer World"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789793" start="60502" end="60516" title="Computer Gamer" label="Computer Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604604" start="60539" end="60548" title="Acornsoft" label="Acornsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741217" start="60551" end="60573" title="Amber (processor core)" label="Amber (processor core)"/>
<link wikidata="Q296782" start="60576" end="60589" title="Arm (company)" label="Arm (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833579" start="60592" end="60620" title="List of Acorn Electron games" label="List of Acorn Electron games"/>
<link wikidata="Q30671754" start="60623" end="60648" title="List of British computers" label="List of British computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839496" start="60651" end="60687" title="Microelectronics Education Programme" label="Microelectronics Education Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q673267" start="60690" end="60698" title="Olivetti" label="Olivetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202514" start="60701" end="60708" title="RISC OS" label="RISC OS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56285" wikidata="Q12131" url="?curid=56285" title="Disability">
<text>Disability is the experience of any condition that makes it more difficult for a person to do certain activities or have equitable access within a given society. Disabilities may be cognitive, developmental, intellectual, mental, physical, sensory, or a combination of multiple factors. Disabilities can be present from birth or can be acquired during a person&#x27;s lifetime. Historically, disabilities have only been recognized based on a narrow set of criteria—however, disabilities are not binary and can be present in unique characteristics depending on the individual. A disability may be readily visible, or invisible in nature.

The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities defines disability as including:

Disabilities have been perceived differently throughout history, through a variety of different theoretical lenses. There are two main models that attempt to explain disability in our society: the medical model and the social model. The medical model serves as a theoretical framework that considers disability as an undesirable medical condition that requires specialized treatment. Those who ascribe to the medical model tend to focus on finding the root causes of disabilities, as well as any cures—such as assistive technology. The social model centers disability as a societally-created limitation on individuals who do not have the same ability as the majority of the population. Although the medical model and social model are the most common frames for disability, there are a multitude of other models that theorize disability.

There are many terms that explain aspects of disability. While some terms solely exist to describe phenomena pertaining to disability, others have been centered around stigmatizing and ostracizing those with disabilities. Some terms have such a negative connotation that they are considered to be slurs. A current point of contention is whether it is appropriate to use person-first language (i.e. a person who is disabled) or identity-first language (i.e. a disabled person) when referring to disability and an individual.

Due to the marginalization of disabled people, there have been several activist causes that push for equitable treatment and access in society. Disability activists have fought to receive equal and equitable rights under the law—though there are still political issues that enable or advance the oppression of disabled people. Although disability activism serves to dismantle ableist systems, social norms relating to the perception of disabilities are often reinforced by tropes used by the media. Since negative perceptions of disability are pervasive in modern society, disabled people have turned to self-advocacy in an attempt to push back against their marginalization. The recognition of disability as an identity that is experienced differently based on the other multi-faceted identities of the individual is one often pointed out by disabled self-advocates. The ostracization of disability from mainstream society has created the opportunity for a disability culture to emerge. While disabled activists still promote the integration of disabled people into mainstream society, several disabled-only spaces have been created to foster a disability community—such as with art, social media, and sports.

== History ==
Contemporary understandings of disability derive from concepts that arose during the scientific Enlightenment in the west; prior to the Enlightenment, physical differences were viewed through a different lens.
There is evidence of humans during prehistory that looked after people with disabilities. At the Windover Archeological Site, one of the skeletons was a male about 15 years old who had spina bifida. The condition meant that the boy, probably paralyzed below the waist, was taken care of in a hunter-gatherer community.

Disability was not viewed as a means of divine punishment and therefore disabled individuals were neither exterminated nor discriminated against for their impairments. Many were instead employed in different levels of Mesopotamian society including working in religious temples as servants of the gods.

In Ancient Egypt, staffs were frequently used in society. A common usage for them was for older persons with disabilities to help them walk.

Provisions that enabled individuals with impaired mobility to access temples and healing sanctuaries were made in ancient Greece. Specifically, by 370 B.C., at the most important healing sanctuary in the wider area, the Sanctuary of Asclepius at Epidaurus, there were at least 11 permanent stone ramps that provided access to mobility-impaired visitors to nine different structures; evidence that people with disabilities were acknowledged and cared for, at least partly, in ancient Greece. In fact, the Ancient Greeks may not have viewed persons with disability all that differently from more able-bodied individuals as terms describing them in their records appear to be very vague. As long as the disabled person in question could still contribute to society, the Greeks appeared to tolerate them.

During the Middle Ages, madness and other conditions were thought to be caused by demons. They were also thought to be part of the natural order, especially during and in the fallout of the Black Death, which wrought impairments throughout the general population. In the early modern period there was a shift to seeking biological causes for physical and mental differences, as well as heightened interest in demarcating categories: for example, Ambroise Pare, in the sixteenth century, wrote of &quot;monsters&quot;, &quot;prodigies&quot;, and &quot;the maimed&quot;. The European Enlightenment&#x27;s emphases on knowledge derived from reason and on the value of natural science to human progress helped spawn the birth of institutions and associated knowledge systems that observed and categorized human beings; among these, the ones significant to the development of today&#x27;s concepts of disability were asylums, clinics, and prisons.

Contemporary concepts of disability are rooted in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century developments. Foremost among these was the development of clinical medical discourse, which made the human body visible as a thing to be manipulated, studied, and transformed. These worked in tandem with scientific discourses that sought to classify and categorize and, in so doing, became methods of normalization.

The concept of the &quot;norm&quot; developed in this time period, and is signaled in the work of the Belgian statistician, sociologist, mathematician, and astronomer Adolphe Quetelet, who wrote in the 1830s of – the average man. Quetelet postulated that one could take the sum of all people&#x27;s attributes in a given population (such as their height or weight) and find their average and that this figure should serve as a statistical norm toward which all should aspire.

This idea of the statistical norm threads through the rapid take-up of statistics gathering by Britain, the United States, and the Western European states during this time period, and it is tied to the rise of eugenics. Disability, as well as the concepts of abnormal, non-normal, and normalcy, came from this. The circulation of these concepts is evident in the popularity of the freak show, where showmen profited from exhibiting people who deviated from those norms.

With the rise of eugenics in the latter part of the nineteenth century, such deviations were viewed as dangerous to the health of entire populations. With disability viewed as part of a person&#x27;s biological make-up and thus their genetic inheritance, scientists turned their attention to notions of weeding such as &quot;deviations&quot; out of the gene pool. Various metrics for assessing a person&#x27;s genetic fitness were determined and were then used to deport, sterilize, or institutionalize those deemed unfit. People with disabilities were one of the groups targeted by the Nazi regime in Germany, resulting in approximately 250,000 disabled people being killed during the Holocaust. At the end of the Second World War, with the example of Nazi eugenics, eugenics faded from public discourse, and increasingly disability cohered into a set of attributes to which medicine could attend – whether through augmentation, rehabilitation, or treatment. In both contemporary and modern history, disability was often viewed as a by-product of incest between first-degree relatives or second-degree relatives.
Disability scholars have also pointed to the Industrial Revolution, along with the economic shift from feudalism to capitalism, as prominent historical moments in the understanding of disability. Although there was a certain amount of religious superstition surrounding disability during the Middle Ages, disabled people were still able to play significant roles in the rural production based economy, allowing them to make genuine contributions to daily economic life. The Industrial Revolution and the advent of capitalism made it so that people were no longer tied to the land and were then forced to find work that would pay a wage in order to survive. The wage system, in combination with industrialized production, transformed the way bodies were viewed as people were increasingly valued for their ability to produce like machines. Capitalism and the industrial revolution effectively solidified this class of &quot;disabled&quot; people who could not conform to the standard worker&#x27;s body or level of work power. As a result, disabled people came to be regarded as a problem, to be solved or erased.

In the early 1970s, the disability rights movement became established, when disability activists began to challenge how society treated disabled people and the medical approach to disability. Due to this work, physical barriers to access were identified. These conditions functionally disabled them, and what is now known as the social model of disability emerged. Coined by Mike Oliver in 1983, this phrase distinguishes between the medical model of disability – under which an impairment needs to be fixed – and the social model of disability – under which the society that limits a person needs to be fixed.

== Theory ==
Like many social categories, the concept of &quot;disability&quot; is under heavy discussion amongst academia, the medical and legal worlds, and the disability community.

=== Disability studies ===
The academic discipline focused on theorizing disability is disability studies, which has been expanding since the late twentieth century. The field investigates the past, present, and future constructions of disability, along with advancing the viewpoint that disability is a complex social identity from which we can all gain insight. As disabilities scholar Claire Mullaney puts it, &quot;At its broadest, disability studies encourages scholars to value disability as a form of cultural difference&quot;. Scholars of the field focus on a range of disability-related topics, such as ethics, policy and legislation, history, art of the disability community, and more. Notable scholars from the field include Marta Russell, Robert McRuer, Johanna Hedva, Laura Hershey, Irving Zola, and many more. Prominent disability scholar Lennard J. Davis notes that disability studies should not be considered a niche or specialized discipline, but instead is applicable to a wide range of fields and topics.

=== International Classification ===
The International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF), produced by the World Health Organization, distinguishes between body functions (physiological or psychological, such as vision) and body structures (anatomical parts, such as the eye and related structures). Impairment in bodily structure or function is defined as involving an anomaly, defect, loss or other significant deviation from certain generally accepted population standards, which may fluctuate over time. Activity is defined as the execution of a task or action. The ICF lists nine broad domains of functioning which can be affected:
* Learning and applying knowledge
* General tasks and demands
* Communication
* Basic physical mobility, Domestic life, and Self-care (for example, activities of daily living)
* Interpersonal interactions and relationships
* Community, social and civic life, including employment
* Other major life areas
In concert with disability scholars, the introduction to the ICF states that a variety of conceptual models have been proposed to understand and explain disability and functioning, which it seeks to integrate. These models include the following:

=== Medical model ===
The medical model views disability as a problem of the person, directly caused by disease, trauma, or other health conditions which therefore requires sustained medical care in the form of individual treatment by professionals. In the medical model, management of the disability is aimed at a &quot;cure&quot;, or the individual&#x27;s adjustment and behavioral change that would lead to an &quot;almost-cure&quot; or effective cure. The individual, in this case, must overcome their disability by medical care. In the medical model, medical care is viewed as the main issue, and at the political level, the principal response is that of modifying or reforming healthcare policy.

The medical model focuses on finding causes and cures for disabilities.

==== Causes ====
There are many causes of disability that often affect basic activities of daily living, such as eating, dressing, transferring, and maintaining personal hygiene; or advanced activities of daily living such as shopping, food preparation, driving, or working. However, causes of disability are usually determined by a person&#x27;s capability to perform the activities of daily life. As Marta Russell and Ravi Malhotra argue, &quot;The &#x27;medicalization&#x27; of disablement and the tools of classification clearly played an important role in establishing divisions between the &#x27;disabled&#x27; and the &#x27;able-bodied. This positions disability as a problem to be solved via medical intervention, which hinders our understanding about what disability can mean.

 For the purposes of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, the US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission regulations provide a list of conditions that should easily be concluded to be disabilities: amputation, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism, bipolar disorder, blindness, cancer, cerebral palsy, deafness, diabetes, epilepsy, HIV/AIDS, intellectual disability, major depressive disorder, mobility impairments requiring a wheelchair, multiple sclerosis, muscular dystrophy, obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), spina bifida, and schizophrenia.

This is not an exhaustive list and many injuries and medical problems cause disability. Some causes of disability, such as injuries, may resolve over time and are considered &quot;temporary disabilities&quot;. An &quot;acquired disability&quot; is the result of impairments that occur suddenly or chronically during the lifespan, as opposed to being born with the impairment. &quot;Invisible disabilities&quot; may not be obviously noticeable.

==== Cures ====
The medical model focuses heavily on finding treatments, cures, or rehabilitative practices for disabled people.

===== Assistive technology =====

Assistive technology is a generic term for devices and modifications (for a person or within a society) that help overcome or remove a disability. The first recorded example of the use of a prosthesis dates to at least 1800 BC. The wheelchair dates from the 17th century. The curb cut is a related structural innovation. Other examples are standing frames, text telephones, accessible keyboards, large print, braille, and speech recognition software. Disabled people often develop adaptations which can be personal (e.g. strategies to suppress tics in public) or community (e.g. sign language in d/Deaf communities).

As the personal computer has become more ubiquitous, various organizations have formed to develop software and hardware to make computers more accessible for disabled people. Some software and hardware, such as Voice Finger, Freedom Scientific&#x27;s &quot;JAWS&quot;, the Free and Open Source alternative &quot;Orca&quot; etc. have been specifically designed for disabled people while other software and hardware, such as Nuance&#x27;s Dragon NaturallySpeaking, were not developed specifically for disabled people, but can be used to increase accessibility. The LOMAK keyboard was designed in New Zealand specifically for persons with disabilities.
The World Wide Web consortium recognized a need for International Standards for Web Accessibility for persons with disabilities and created the Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI). As at Dec 2012 the standard is WCAG 2.0 (WCAG = Web Content Accessibility Guidelines).

=== Social model ===
The social model of disability sees &quot;disability&quot; as a socially created problem and a matter of the full integration of individuals into society. In this model, disability is not an attribute of an individual, but rather a complex collection of conditions, created by the social environment. The management of the problem requires social action and it is the collective responsibility of society to create a society in which limitations for disabled people are minimal. Disability is both cultural and ideological in creation. According to the social model, equal access for someone with an impairment/disability is a human rights concern. The social model of disability has come under criticism. While recognizing the importance played by the social model in stressing the responsibility of society, scholars, including Tom Shakespeare, point out the limits of the model and urge the need for a new model that will overcome the &quot;medical vs. social&quot; dichotomy. The limitations of this model mean that often the vital services and information persons with disabilities face are simply not available, often due to limited economic returns in supporting them.

Some say medical humanities is a fruitful field where the gap between the medical and the social model of disability might be bridged.

==== Social construction ====
The social construction of disability is the idea that disability is constructed by social expectations and institutions rather than biological differences. Highlighting the ways society and institutions construct disability is one of the main focuses of this idea. In the same way that race and gender are not biologically fixed, neither is disability.

Around the early 1970s, sociologists, notably Eliot Friedson, began to argue that labeling theory and social deviance could be applied to disability studies. This led to the creation of the social construction of disability theory. The social construction of disability is the idea that disability is constructed as the social response to a deviance from the norm. The medical industry is the creator of the ill and disabled social role. Medical professionals and institutions, who wield expertise over health, have the ability to define health and physical and mental norms. When an individual has a feature that creates an impairment, restriction, or limitation from reaching the social definition of health, the individual is labeled as disabled. Under this idea, disability is not defined by the physical features of the body but by a deviance from the social convention of health.

The social construction of disability would argue that the medical model of disability&#x27;s view that a disability is an impairment, restriction, or limitation is wrong. Instead what is seen as a disability is just a difference in the individual from what is considered &quot;normal&quot; in society.

=== Other models ===
* The political/relational model is an alternative to and critical engagement with both the social and medical models. This analytic posed by Alison Kafer shows not only how the &quot;problem&quot; of disability &quot;is located in inaccessible buildings, discriminatory attitudes, and ideological systems that attribute normalcy and deviance to particular minds and bodies&quot; but also how mind and bodily impairments can still have disabling effects. Furthermore, the political/relational model frames the medicalization of disabled folks as political in nature given it should always be interrogated.
* The spectrum model refers to the range of audibility, sensibility, and visibility under which people function. The model asserts that disability does not necessarily mean a reduced spectrum of operations. Rather, disability is often defined according to thresholds set on a continuum of disability.
* The moral model refers to the attitude that people are &quot;morally responsible&quot; for their own disability. For example, disability may be seen as a result of bad actions of parents if congenital, or as a result of practicing witchcraft if not. Echoes of this can be seen in the doctrine of karma in Eastern and New Age religions. It also includes notions that a disability gives a person &quot;special abilities to perceive, reflect, transcend, be spiritual&quot;.
* The expert/professional model has provided a traditional response to disability issues and can be seen as an offshoot of the medical model. Within its framework, professionals follow a process of identifying the impairment and its limitations (using the medical model), and taking the necessary action to improve the position of the disabled person. This has tended to produce a system in which an authoritarian, over-active service provider prescribes and acts for a passive client.
* The tragedy/charity model depicts disabled people as victims of circumstance who are deserving of pity. This, along with the medical model, are the models used by most people with no acknowledged disability to define and explain disability.
* The legitimacy model views disability as a value-based determination about which explanations for the atypical are legitimate for membership in the disability category. This viewpoint allows for multiple explanations and models to be considered as purposive and viable.
* The social adapted model states although a person&#x27;s disability poses some limitations in an able-bodied society, often the surrounding society and environment are more limiting than the disability itself.
* The economic model defines disability in terms of reduced ability to work, the related loss of productivity and economic effects on the individual, employer and society in general.
* The empowering model (also, customer model or supported decision making) allows for the person with a disability and their family to decide the course of their treatment. This turns the professional into a service provider whose role is to offer guidance and carry out the client&#x27;s decisions. This model &quot;empowers&quot; the individual to pursue their own goals.
* The market model of disability is minority rights and consumerist model of disability that recognizing disabled people and their stakeholders as representing a large group of consumers, employees, and voters. This model looks to personal identity to define disability and empowers people to chart their own destiny in everyday life, with a particular focus on economic empowerment. Based on US Census data, this model shows that there are 1.2 billion people in the world who consider themselves to have a disability. &quot;This model states that due to the size of the demographic, companies and governments will serve the desires, pushed by demand as the message becomes prevalent in the cultural mainstream.&quot;
* The consumer model of disability is based upon the &quot;rights-based&quot; model and claims that disabled people should have equal rights and access to products, goods, and services offered by businesses. The consumer model extends the rights-based model by proposing that businesses, not only accommodate customers with disabilities under the requirements of legislation but that businesses actively seek, market to, welcome and fully engage disabled people in all aspects of business service activities. The model suggests that all business operations, for example, websites, policies, procedures, mission statements, emergency plans, programs, and services, should integrate access and inclusion practices. Furthermore, these access and inclusion practices should be based on established customer service access and inclusion standards that embrace and support the active engagement of people of all abilities in business offerings. In this regard, specialized products and specialized services become important, such as auxiliary means, prostheses, special foods, domestic help, and assisted living.
* Different theories revolve around prejudice, stereotyping, discrimination, and stigma related to disability. One of the more popular ones, as put by Weiner, Perry, and Magnusson&#x27;s (1988) work with attribution theory, physical stigmas are perceived as to be uncontrollable and elicit pity and desire to help, whereas, mental-behavioral stigmas are considered to be controllable and therefore elicit anger and desire to neglect the individuals with disabilities.
* The &#x27;just-world hypothesis&#x27; talks about how a person is viewed as deserving the disability. And because it is the fault of that person, an observer does not feel obligated to feel bad for them or to help them.

== Terminology ==

=== People-first language ===
People-first language is one way to talk about disability which some people prefer. Using people-first language is said to put the person before the disability. Those individuals who prefer people-first language would prefer to be called, &quot;a person with a disability&quot;. This style is reflected in major legislation on disability rights, including the Americans with Disabilities Act and the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

&quot;Cerebral Palsy: A Guide for Care&quot; at the University of Delaware describes people-first language:

People-first terminology is used in the UK in the form &quot;people with impairments&quot; (such as &quot;people with visual impairments&quot;). However, in the UK, identity-first language is generally preferred over people-first language.

The use of people-first terminology has given rise to the use of the acronym PWD to refer to person(s) (or people) with disabilities (or disability). However other individuals and groups prefer identity-first language to emphasize how a disability can impact people&#x27;s identities. Which style of language used varies between different countries, groups and individuals.

=== Identity-first language ===
Identity-first language describes the person as &quot;disabled&quot;. Some people prefer this and argue that this fits the social model of disability better than people-first language, as it emphasizes that the person is disabled not by their body, but by a world that does not accommodate them.

This is especially true in the UK, where it is argued under the social model that while someone&#x27;s impairment (for example, having a spinal cord injury) is an individual property, &quot;disability&quot; is something created by external societal factors such as a lack of accessibility. This distinction between the individual property of impairment and the social property of disability is central to the social model. The term &quot;disabled people&quot; as a political construction is also widely used by international organizations of disabled people, such as Disabled Peoples&#x27; International.

Using the identity-first language also parallels how people talk about other aspects of identity and diversity. For example:

Similarly, Deaf communities in the US reject people-first language in favor of identity-first language.

In 2021, the US Association on Higher Education and Disability (AHEAD) announced their decision to use identity-first language in their materials, explaining:
&quot;Identity-first language challenges negative connotations by claiming disability directly. Identity-first language references the variety that exists in how our bodies and brains work with a myriad of conditions that exist, and the role of inaccessible or oppressive systems, structures, or environments in making someone disabled.&quot;

=== Handicap ===
:The term &quot;handicap&quot; derives from the medieval game hand-in-cap, in which two players trade possessions, and a third, neutral person judges the difference of value between the possessions. The concept of a neutral person evening up the odds was extended to handicap racing in the mid-18th century, where horses carry different weights based on the umpire&#x27;s estimation of what would make them run equally. In the early 20th century the word gained the additional meaning of describing a disability, in the sense that a person with a handicap was carrying a heavier burden than normal. This concept, then, adds to the conception of disability as a burden, or individual problem, rather than a societal problem. The UK government advises civil servants to avoid this term.

=== Accessibility ===

: Accessibility is the degree to which a product, service or environment is available for use to the people that need it. People with certain types of disabilities struggle to get equal access to some things in society. For example, a blind person cannot read printed paper ballots, and therefore does not have access to voting that requires paper ballots. Another example can be that a person in a wheelchair cannot ascend stairs and therefore does not have access to buildings without ramps. Accessible access to health clubs and fitness centers has been observed to be especially problematic.

=== Accommodation ===
: A change that improves access. For example, if voting ballots are available in braille or on a text-to-speech machine, or if another person reads the ballot to the blind person and recorded the choices, then the blind person would have access to voting.

=== Invisible disability ===

Invisible disabilities, also known as Hidden Disabilities or Non-visible Disabilities (NVD), are disabilities that are not immediately apparent, or seeable. They are often chronic illnesses and conditions that significantly impair normal activities of daily living. Invisible disabilities can hinder a person&#x27;s efforts to go to school, work, socialize, and more.
Some examples of invisible disabilities include intellectual disabilities, autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, fibromyalgia, mental disorders, asthma, epilepsy, allergies, migraines, arthritis, and chronic fatigue syndrome.

Employment discrimination is reported to play a significant part in the high rate of unemployment among those with a diagnosis of mental illness.

=== Episodic disability ===
People with health conditions such as arthritis, bipolar disorder, HIV, or multiple sclerosis may have periods of wellness between episodes of illness. During the illness episodes people&#x27;s ability to perform normal tasks, such as work, can be intermittent.

==Disability activism==
Disability activism itself has led to the revision of appropriate language, when discussing disability and disabled people. For example, the medical classification of &#x27;retarded&#x27; has since been disregarded, due to its negative implications. Moreover, disability activism has also led to pejorative language being reclaimed by disabled people. Mairs (1986) explained how disabled people may choose to self-describe themselves as a &#x27;cripple&#x27;. This may appear surprising that they are using stereotypically negative language associated with disability to describe themselves; however the purpose is to reclaim the &#x27;disabled identity&#x27; from medical professionals, and realign it with the preferred language of disabled people. The reclamation of language demonstrated above positions itself within the social model, as it highlights how as a society we construct concepts and perceptions of disability.Disability activists have drawn attention to the following issues:

=== Rights and policies ===

==== Rights movement ====
The disability rights movement aims to secure equal opportunities and equal rights for disabled people. The specific goals and demands of the movement are accessibility and safety in transportation, architecture, and the physical environment; equal opportunities in independent living, employment, education, and housing; and freedom from abuse, neglect, and violations of patients&#x27; rights. Effective civil rights legislation is sought to secure these opportunities and rights.

The early disability rights movement was dominated by the medical model of disability, where emphasis was placed on curing or treating disabled people so that they would adhere to the social norm, but starting in the 1960s, rights groups began shifting to the social model of disability, where disability is interpreted as an issue of discrimination, thereby paving the way for rights groups to achieve equality through legal means.

Advocacy for disability issues and accessibility in the republics of the former Soviet Union has become more organized and influential in policymaking.

==== Disability Justice Movement ====
Evolving from the disability rights movement is the Disability Justice movement, which aims to improve the lives of disabled people through prioritizing collective liberation, as opposed to prioritizing legislative change and traditional civil rights. This framework, dubbed the &quot;second wave&quot; of disability rights, seeks to examine the many systems of oppression that are intertwined with ableism, such colonialism, white supremacy, and heteropatriarchal capitalism. The term &quot;Disability Justice&quot; was coined in 2005 by LGBTQ disabled women of color, Mia Mingus, Patricia Berne, and Stacey Milbern, who sought to build an anti-ableist movement with a larger emphasis on intersectionality than mainstream disability rights, as to center marginalized voices. Their group, the Disability Justice Collective, also included notable disability activists such as Sebastian Margaret, Leroy F. Moore Jr., well known for his poetry and founding of the Krip Hop movement, and Eli Clare, well known for popularizing the bodymind concept within disability studies.

==== Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities ====
On December 13, 2006, the United Nations formally agreed on the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the first human rights treaty of the 21st century, to protect and enhance the rights and opportunities of the world&#x27;s estimated 650 million disabled people. , 182 nations have ratified or accepted accession to the convention. Countries that sign the convention are required to adopt national laws, and remove old ones, so that persons with disabilities will, for example, have equal rights to education, employment, and cultural life; to the right to own and inherit property; to not be discriminated against in marriage, etc.; and to not be unwilling subjects in medical experiments. UN officials, including the High Commissioner for Human Rights, have characterized the bill as representing a paradigm shift in attitudes toward a more rights-based view of disability in line with the social model.

==== International Year of Disabled Persons ====
In 1976, the United Nations began planning for its International Year of Disabled Persons (1981), later renamed the International Year of Disabled Persons. Some disability activists used the Year to highlight various injustices, such as in Australia where beauty pageants were targeted in order to, in the words of activist Leslie Hall, &quot;challenge the notion of beauty&quot; and &quot;reject the charity ethic. The UN Decade of Disabled Persons (1983–1993) featured a World Programme of Action Concerning Disabled Persons. In 1979, Frank Bowe was the only person with a disability representing any country in the planning of IYDP-1981. Today, many countries have named representatives who are themselves individuals with disabilities. The decade was closed in an address before the General Assembly by Robert Davila. Both Bowe and Davila are deaf. In 1984, UNESCO accepted sign language for use in the education of deaf children and youth.

==== Policies in former Soviet Union republics ====
UN programs and OSCE work to align policy and programs in countries that were part of the former Soviet Union with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

=== Political issues ===
Political rights, social inclusion and citizenship have come to the fore in developed and some developing countries. The debate has, some instances, moved beyond a concern about the perceived cost of maintaining dependent disabled people to finding effective ways to ensure that disabled people can participate in and contribute to society in all spheres of life.

In developing nations, where the vast bulk of the estimated 650 million disabled people reside, a great deal of work is needed to address concerns ranging from accessibility and education to self-empowerment, self-supporting employment, and beyond.

In the past few decades, the efforts of disability rights activists around the world, focused on obtaining full citizenship for disabled people, have come under academic study and gained some level of public recognition in many places, such as in the United States.

There are obstacles in many countries in getting full employment and public perception of disabled people varies.

==== Abuse ====
Disability abuse happens when a person is abused physically, financially, verbally or mentally due to the person having a disability. As many disabilities are not visible (for example, asthma, learning disabilities) some abusers cannot rationalize the non-physical disability with a need for understanding, support, and so on.

As the prevalence of disability and the cost of supporting disability increases with medical advancement and longevity in general, this aspect of society becomes of greater political importance. How political parties treat their disabled constituents may become a measure of a political party&#x27;s understanding of disability, particularly in the social model of disability.

==== Insurance ====
Disability benefit, or disability pension, is a major kind of disability insurance that is provided by government agencies to people who are temporarily or permanently unable to work due to a disability. In the US, the disability benefit is provided in the category of Supplemental Security Income. In Canada, it is within the Canada Pension Plan. Following a long nationwide campaign involving hundreds of thousands of people the National Disability Insurance Scheme was introduced in Australia in 2013 to fund a number of supports.In other countries, disability benefits may be provided under social security systems.

Costs of disability pensions are steadily growing in Western countries, mainly in Europe and the United States. It was reported that, in the UK, expenditure on disability pensions accounted for 0.9% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1980; two decades later it had reached 2.6% of GDP. Several studies have reported a link between increased absence from work due to sickness and elevated risk of future disability pension.

A study by researchers in Denmark suggests that information on self-reported days of absence due to sickness can be used to effectively identify future potential groups for disability pension. These studies may provide useful information for policymakers, case managing authorities, employers, and physicians.

In Switzerland, social policies in the field of disability have been significantly reshaped over the last two decades by reducing the number of allowances awarded and by increasing the recourse to vocational rehabilitation measures. Drawing on interviews conducted with individuals who have been involved in programs set up by Swiss disability insurance, a study highlights their uncertainties and concerns relating to their place in society, as well as their reactions to disability insurance&#x27;s interventions.

Private, for-profit disability insurance plays a role in providing incomes to disabled people, but the nationalized programs are the safety net that catch most claimants.

==== Employment ====
Studies have illustrated a correlation between disability and poverty. Notably, jobs offered to disabled people are scarce. Marta Russell notes that &quot;[a] primary basis for oppression of disabled persons (those who could work with accommodations) is their exclusion from exploitation as wage laborers.&quot;

===== Intellectual disability =====
Many countries have programs which aid intellectually disabled (ID) people to acquire skills needed in the workforce. Such programs include sheltered workshops and adult day care programs. Sheltered programs consist of daytime activities such as gardening, manufacturing, and assembling. These activities facilitate routine-oriented tasks that in turn allow ID people to gain experience before entering the workforce. Similarly, adult day care programs also include day time activities. However, these activities are based in an educational environment where ID people are able to engage in educational, physical, and communication-based tasks which helps facilitate communication, memory, and general living skills. In addition, adult day care programs arranged community activities by scheduling field trips to public places (e.g. zoos, and movie theaters). Despite both programs providing essential skills for intellectually disabled people prior to entering the workforce, researchers have found that ID people prefer to be involved with community-integrated employment. Community-integrated employment opportunities are offered to ID people at minimum or higher wages, in a variety of occupations ranging from customer service, clerical, janitorial, hospitality and manufacturing positions. ID employees work alongside employees without disabilities who are able to assist them with training. All three options allow intellectually disabled people to develop and exercise social skills that are vital to everyday life. However, it is not guaranteed that ID employees receive the same treatment as employees without ID; according to Lindstrom et al., community-integrated employees are less likely to receive raises, and only 26% are able to retain full-time status.

Finding a stable workforce poses additional challenges. A study published in the &quot;Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disability&quot; indicated that although finding a job may be difficult, stabilizing a job is even harder. Chadsey-Rusch proposed that securing employment for ID people requires adequate production skills and effective social skills. Other underlying factors for job loss include structural factors and worker-workplace integration. As stated by Kilsby, limited structural factors can affect a multitude of factors in a job, such as a restricted number of hours an ID person is allowed to work. This in return, according to Fabian et al., leads to a lack of opportunity to develop relationships with coworkers or to better integrate within the workplace. Nevertheless, those who are unable to stabilize a job often are left discouraged. According to the same study conducted by JARID, many who had participated found that they had made smaller incomes when compared to their co-workers, had an excess of time throughout their days, because they did not have work. They also had feelings of hopelessness and failure. According to the US National Organization on Disability, not only do ID people face constant discouragement, but many live below the poverty line, because they are unable to find or stabilize employment and because of employee restricting factors placed on ID workers. This renders ID people unable to provide for themselves, including basic necessities such as food, medical care, transportation, and housing.

==== Poverty ====
The poverty rate for working-age people with disabilities is nearly two and a half times higher than that for people without disabilities. Disability and poverty may form a vicious circle, in which physical barriers and stigma of disability make it more difficult to get income, which in turn diminishes access to health care and other necessities for a healthy life. In societies without state funded health and social services, living with a disability could require spending on medication and frequent health care visits, in-home personal assistance, and adaptive devices and clothing, along with the usual costs of living. The World report on disability indicates that half of all disabled people cannot afford health care, compared to a third of abled people. In countries without public services for adults with disabilities, their families may be impoverished.

==== Disasters ====
There is limited research knowledge, but many anecdotal reports, on what happens when disasters impact disabled people. Individuals with disabilities are greatly affected by disasters. Those with physical disabilities can be at risk when evacuating if assistance is not available. Individuals with cognitive impairments may struggle with understanding instructions that must be followed in the event a disaster occurs. All of these factors can increase the degree of variation of risk in disaster situations with disabled individuals.

Research studies have consistently found discrimination against individuals with disabilities during all phases of a disaster cycle. The most common limitation is that people cannot physically access buildings or transportation, as well as access disaster-related services. The exclusion of these individuals is caused in part by the lack of disability-related training provided to emergency planners and disaster relief personnel.

== Disability in society ==

=== Aging ===
To a certain degree, physical impairments and changing mental states are almost ubiquitously experienced by people as they age. Aging populations are often stigmatized for having a high prevalence of disability. Kathleen Woodward, writing in &quot;Key Words for Disability Studies&quot;, explains the phenomenon as follows:

In &quot;Feminist, Queer, Crip&quot;, Alison Kafer mentions aging and the anxiety associated with it. According to Kafer, this anxiety stems from ideas of normalcy. She says:

=== Societal norms ===
In contexts where their differences are visible, persons with disabilities often face stigma. People frequently react to disabled presence with fear, pity, patronization, intrusive gazes, revulsion, or disregard. These reactions can, and often do, exclude persons with disabilities from accessing social spaces along with the benefits and resources these spaces provide. Disabled writer/researcher Jenny Morris describes how stigma functions to marginalize persons with disabilities:

Additionally, facing stigma can cause harm to the psycho-emotional well-being of the person being stigmatized. One of the ways in which the psycho-emotional health of persons with disabilities is adversely affected is through the internalization of the oppression they experience, which can lead to feeling that they are weak, crazy, worthless or any number of other negative attributes that may be associated with their conditions. Internalization of oppression damages the self-esteem of the person affected and shapes their behaviors in ways that are compliant with dominance of those with no acknowledged disability. Ableist ideas are frequently internalized when disabled people are pressured by the people and institutions around them to hide and downplay their disabled difference, or, &quot;pass&quot;. According to writer Simi Linton, the act of passing takes a deep emotional toll by causing disabled individuals to experience loss of community, anxiety and self-doubt. The media play a significant role in creating and reinforcing stigma associated with disability. Media portrayals of disability usually cast disabled presence as necessarily marginal within society at large. These portrayals simultaneously reflect and influence the popular perception of disabled difference.

==== Tropes ====

There are distinct tactics that the media frequently employ in representing disability. These common ways of framing disability are heavily criticized for being dehumanizing and failing to place importance on the perspectives of persons with disabilities. As outlined by disability theorist and rhetorician Jay Timothy Dolmage, ableist media tropes can reflect and continue to perpetuate societal myths about disabled people.

===== Inspiration porn =====
Inspiration porn refers to portrayals of persons with disabilities in which they are presented as being inspiring simply because the person has a disability. These portrayals are criticized because they are created with the intent of making viewers with no acknowledged disability feel better about themselves in comparison to the individual portrayed. Rather than recognizing the humanity of persons with disabilities, inspiration porn turns them into objects of inspiration for an audience composed of those with no acknowledged disability.

===== Supercrip =====
The supercrip trope refers to instances when the media reports on or portray a disabled person who has made a noteworthy achievement but centers on their disability rather than what they actually did. They are portrayed as awe-inspiring for being exceptional compared to others with the same or similar conditions. This trope is widely used in reporting on disabled athletes as well as in portrayals of autistic savants.

These representations, notes disability scholar Ria Cheyne, &quot;are widely assumed to be inherently regressive&quot;, reducing people to their condition rather than viewing them as full people. Furthermore, supercrip portrayals are criticized for creating the unrealistic expectation that disability should be accompanied by some type of special talent, genius, or insight.

Examples of this trope in the media include Dr. Shaun Murphy from &quot;The Good Doctor&quot;, Marvel&#x27;s Daredevil, and others.

Scholar Sami Schalk argues that the term supercrip has a narrow definition given how widely used the term is. As a result, Schlak provides three categories of supercrip narratives used:

# The regular supercrip narrative in which a disabled person gains regulation for completing mundane tacts. This is commonly seen as a disabled person being able to accomplish something despite their disability. 
# The glorified supercrip narrative in which a disabled person is praised for succeeding at something even a non-disabled person would not be able to do. This narrative form is commonly used to talk about disabled Paralympic athletes.
# The superpowered supercrip narrative which appears in functionalized representations of disabled characters. Characters of this narrative type gain superpowers due to their disability. Common examples of this narrative form in action are prosthetics limbs that make one more powerful than expected or have futuristic technology that makes one a cyborg.

===== Disabled villain =====
Characters in fiction that bear physical or mental markers of difference from perceived societal norms are frequently positioned as villains within a text. Lindsey Row-Heyveld shares ways students should be taught to begin to further analyze this issue. Disabled people&#x27;s visible differences from the abled majority are meant to evoke fear in audiences that can perpetuate the mindset of disabled people being a threat to individual or public interests and well-being.

===== Disability drop =====
The &quot;disability drop&quot; trope is when a supposedly disabled character is revealed to have been faking, embellishing, or otherwise not actually embodying their claimed disability. Jay Dolmage offers Kevin Spacey&#x27;s character, Verbal Kint, in the film &quot;Usual Suspects&quot; as an example of this, and depictions like this can reflect able-bodied society&#x27;s mistrust of disabled people. In addition, this reveal of a character&#x27;s nondisabledness often serves as the narrative climax of a story, and the use of disability as a source of conflict in the plot, narrative obstacle, or a device of characterization aligns with other disability studies scholars&#x27; theory of &quot;Narrative Prosthesis&quot;, a term coined by David T. Mitchell and Sharon Snyder.

===== The disabled victim =====
Another frequent occurrence is when someone with a disability is assumed to be miserable or helpless.

&quot;The Hunchback of Notre Dame&#x27;s&quot; Quasimodo, &quot;The Elephant Man&#x27;s&quot; John Merrick, &quot;A Christmas Carol&#x27;s&quot; Tiny Tim, and even news broadcasts that refer to people as &quot;victims&quot; or &quot;sufferers&quot; are a few examples of this stereotype.

===== Eternally Innocent =====
Characters with disabilities are frequently portrayed in movies as being angelic or childish. These films include &quot;Rain Man&quot; (1988), &quot;Forrest Gump&quot; (1994) and &quot;I Am Sam&quot; (2001).

The innocent and endearing person with a disability often points out the inadequacies of their &quot;normal&quot; adult peers, which helps them achieve salvation.

Like all the others, this stereotype perpetuates patronizing perceptions that are simply untrue and are therefore damaging.

While there are many disability tropes, disability aesthetics attempts to dispel them by accurately depicting disabled bodies in art and media.

==== Self-advocacy ====
Some disabled people have attempted to resist marginalization through the use of the social model in opposition to the medical model; with the aim of shifting criticism away from their bodies and impairments and towards the social institutions that oppress them relative to their abled peers. Disability activism that demands many grievances be addressed, such as lack of accessibility, poor representation in media, general disrespect, and lack of recognition, originates from a social model framework.

The creation of &quot;disability culture&quot; stemmed from the shared experience of stigmatization in broader society. Embracing disability as a positive identity by becoming involved in disabled communities and participating in disability culture can be an effective way to combat internalized prejudice; and can challenge dominant narratives about disability.

==== Intersections ====
The experiences that disabled people have to navigate social institutions vary greatly as a function of what other social categories they may belong to. For example, a disabled man and a disabled woman experience disability differently. This speaks to the concept of intersectionality, which explains that different aspects of a person&#x27;s identity (such as their gender, race, sexuality, religion, or social class) intersect and create unique experiences of oppression and privilege. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities differentiates between a few kinds of disability intersections, such as the age-disability, race-disability, and gender-disability intersection. However, many more intersections exist. Disability is defined differently by each person; it may be visible or invisible, and multiple intersections often arise from overlapping identity categories.

===== Race =====
Incidence of disability is reported to be greater among several minority communities across the globe, according to a systematic analysis of the Global Burden of Disease Study. Disabled people who are also racial minorities generally have less access to support and are more vulnerable to violent discrimination. A study in the journal &quot;Child Development&quot; indicated that minority disabled children are more likely to receive punitive discipline in low and middle income countries. Due to the fact that children with disabilities are mistreated more often than those without disability; racialized children in this category are at an even higher risk. With respect to disability in the United States, Camille A. Nelson, writing for the &quot;Berkeley Journal of Criminal Law&quot;, notes the dual discrimination that racial minorities with disabilities experience from the criminal justice system, expressing that for &quot;people who are negatively racialized, that is people who are perceived as being non-white, and for whom mental illness is either known or assumed, interaction with police is precarious and potentially dangerous.&quot;

===== Gender =====
The marginalization of people with disabilities can leave persons with disabilities unable to actualize what society expects of gendered existence. This lack of recognition for their gender identity can leave persons with disabilities with feelings of inadequacy. Thomas J. Gerschick of Illinois State University describes why this denial of gendered identity occurs:

To the extent that women and men with disabilities are gendered, the interactions of these two identities lead to different experiences. Women with disabilities face a sort of &quot;double stigmatization&quot; in which their membership to both of these marginalized categories simultaneously exacerbates the negative stereotypes associated with each as they are ascribed to them. However, according to the framework of intersectionality, gender and disability intersect to create a unique experience that is not simply the coincidence of being a woman and having a disability separately, but the unique experience of being a woman with a disability. It follows that the more marginalized groups one belongs to, their experience of privilege or oppression changes: in short, a black woman and a white woman will experience disability differently.

According to The UN Woman Watch, &quot;Persistence of certain cultural, legal and institutional barriers makes women and girls with disabilities the victims of two-fold discrimination: as women and as persons with disabilities.&quot; As Rosemarie Garland-Thomson puts it, &quot;Women with disabilities, even more intensely than women in general, have been cast in the collective cultural imagination as inferior, lacking, excessive, incapable, unfit, and useless.&quot;

===== Socio-economic background =====
Similar to the intersections of race and disability or gender and disability, a person&#x27;s socio-economic background will also change their experience of disability. A disabled person with a low socio-economic status will experience the world differently, with more obstacles and fewer opportunities, than a disabled person with a high socio-economic status.

A good example of the intersection between disability and socio-economic status is access to education, as we know that there are direct links between poverty and disability - often working in a vicious cycle. The costs of special education and caring for a disabled child are higher than for a child with no acknowledged disability, which poses an immense barrier in accessing appropriate education. The inaccessibility of appropriate education (at any stage), can lead to difficulties in finding employment, which often results in the vicious cycle of being &#x27;bound&#x27; by one&#x27;s experience as a poor and disabled person to remain in the same social structure and experience socio-economic exclusion. In short, this vicious cycle exacerbates the lack of economic, social, and cultural capital for disabled people with a low socio-economic background. On the other hand, a disabled person of a high socio-economic status, may have an easier time accessing appropriate (special) education or treatment - for example by having access to better aids, resources, or programmes that can help them succeed.

== Disability culture ==

===Sport===

The Paralympic Games (meaning &quot;alongside the Olympics&quot;) are held after the (Summer and Winter) Olympics. The Paralympic Games include athletes with a wide range of physical disabilities. In member countries, organizations exist to organize competition in the Paralympic sports on levels ranging from recreational to elite (for example, Disabled Sports USA and BlazeSports America in the United States).

The Paralympics developed from a rehabilitation program for British war veterans with spinal injuries. In 1948, Sir Ludwig Guttman, a neurologist working with World War II veterans with spinal injuries at Stoke Mandeville Hospital in Aylesbury in the UK, began using sport as part of the rehabilitation programs of his patients.

In 2006, the Extremity Games were formed for physically disabled people, specifically limb loss or limb difference, to be able to compete in extreme sports.

==Demographics==
Estimates of worldwide and country-wide numbers of disabled people are problematic. The varying approaches taken to defining disability notwithstanding, demographers agree that the world population of individuals with disabilities is very large. For example, in 2012, the World Health Organization estimated a world population of 6.5 billion people. Of those, nearly 650 million people, or 10%, were estimated to be moderately or severely disabled. In 2018 the International Labour Organization estimated that about a billion people, one-seventh of the world population, had disabilities, 80% of them in developing countries, and 80% of working age. Excluding disabled people from the workforce was reckoned to cost up to 7% of gross domestic product.

=== United States ===
According to the Centers for Disease Control&#x27;s Morbidity and Mortality weekly report, one-fourth of people in the United States are reported to be disabled as of 2016. 10% of young adults were reported to have mental disabilities. The rates of mobility-related issues were highest among middle-aged people and elderly people, with 18.1% and 26.9%, respectively. In terms of race or ethnicity, Asians have the lowest reported rate of disability at around 10%, while Native Americans, the ethnic group with the highest reported incidence, are reported to have a disability rate at an estimated 30% of adults. African Americans had a higher reported disability rate of 25%, compared to 16% for white adults and 17% for Hispanic people.

=== Canada ===
22.3% of Canadians over 15 are reported to have a disability, or 6,246,640 people, according to the 2017 Canadian Survey on Disability Reports. In Canada, women and older people are more likely to be disabled than working-class men. In comparison to working-age persons between 25 and 65, seniors over 65 reported a disability rate of 38%, which is nearly twice as high. In Canada, women over 15 had a reported disability rate of 24.3%, compared to men&#x27;s 20%. According to reports from the 2017 Canadian Survey of Disability, South Asians over the age of 15 in Canada had the greatest proportion of disability at 4%, while Latin Americans had a lower rate at 1%.

=== Australia ===
Nearly one in five Australians, or 4.4 million people, were estimated by the Australian Bureau of Statistics to have a disability. A mental or behavioral issue was reported in over 25% of Australians with disabilities. Male prevalence was 17.6 million, while female prevalence was somewhat higher at 17.8 million between the sexes. Age-wise, 11.6% of adults between 0 and 64 in Australia had a disability, compared to 49.6% of seniors 65 and over. 53.4% of Australians aged 15 to 64 who have a disability are employed.

=== United Kingdom ===
According to the House of Commons Library, 14.6 million, or 22%, of the population in the UK, were reported to be disabled in 2020–2021. In the UK, there were 9% of children, 21% of working-age people, and 42% of persons over the state pension age who were disabled or impaired. Approximately 29% of White individuals, 27% of mixed-race people, 22% of Asian people, 21% of Black people, and 19% of people from other ethnic groups were reported as having impairments or disabilities, according to the Life Opportunities Survey, which surveyed 35,875 people in 2011. When compared to men, women are a little more likely than men to have a disability, with 31% of women reportedly having one as opposed to 26% of men, according to results of another survey taken the same year.

=== China ===
According to Twenty-Year Trends in the Prevalence of Disability in China, a medical publication from the National Library of Medicine, there were an estimated 84.6 million Chinese individuals living with a disability in 2006. In a 2006 poll of 83,342 men and 78,137 women, the age groups with the highest reported rates of disability are 18–44-year-old males (22.5%) and 65–74-year-old females (22.8%), according to polls published in the journal that were representative of the country as a whole. In China, the percentage of people with disabilities varies substantially between urban and rural regions, with men and women having reported rates of 72.4% and 72.2%, respectively, in rural China, compared to reported rates of 27.6% and 27.8%, respectively, in urban China. Hearing and speech disabilities are the most commonly reported in China, with men being more affected than women at rates 39.6% and 36.2% among disabled people, respectively.

=== South Korea ===
In South Korea, there were accounted to be 2.517 million people with disabilities in total, or roughly 5.0% of the population, in 2018. When compared to Koreans without disabilities, people with disabilities spent an average of 56.5 days in medical facilities, which was 2.6 more than the national average. 34.9% of the entire workforce was employed in jobs connected to disabilities. Families with disabilities made an average income of 41.53 million won, or 71.3% of total family earnings. According to the Korean 2020 Statistics on the Disabled The majority of persons with disabilities needed help with &quot;cleaning&quot; and &quot;using transportation&quot;, among other everyday tasks.

=== Developing nations ===
Disability is more common in developing than in developed nations. The connection between disability and poverty is thought to be part of a &quot;vicious cycle&quot; in which these constructs are mutually reinforcing.

== See also ==

* Ableism
* Accessibility
* Assistive technology
* Curb cut effect
* Disability abuse
* Disability benefits
* Disability flag
* Disability hate crime
* Disadvantaged
* Epistemic injustice
* Frailty syndrome
* Hidden disability
* Hidden disability sunflower
* Nothing about us without us
* Parents with disabilities
* Physiological functional capacity
* Youth and disability
==Bibliography==
* Vega, Eugenio (2022) Crónica del siglo de la peste. Pandemias, discapacidad y diseño. Madrid, Experimenta Libros. 
* Williamson, Bess (2019). Accessible America. A History of Disability and Design. New York University Press. 

==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Atherton, Martin, ed. 2017. &quot;Deafness, Community and Culture in Britain: Leisure and Cohesion, 1945-95&quot;. Manchester University Press. https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/j.ctt21216hx.
* 
* Bohata, Kirsti, Alexandra Jones, Mike Mantin, and Steven Thompson. 2020. &quot;Disability in Industrial Britain: A Cultural and Literary History of Impairment in the Coal Industry, 1880-1948&quot;. Manchester (UK): Manchester University Press. 
* 
* Alt URL
* 
* 
* Long, Vicky, Julie Anderson, and Walton Schalick. 2015. &quot;Destigmatising Mental Illness?: Professional Politics and Public Education in Britain, 1870-1970&quot;. Oxford: Manchester University Press. https://doi.org/10.7765/9781526103253.
* 
* McGuire, Coreen. 2020. &quot;Measuring Difference, Numbering Normal Setting the Standards for Disability in the Interwar Period&quot;. Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press. 
* Jones, Claire L. 2017. &quot;Rethinking Modern Prostheses in Anglo-American Commodity Cultures, 1820-1939&quot;. Manchester: Manchester University Press. 
* McDonagh, Patrick, C. F. Goodey, and Timothy Stainton, eds. 2018. &quot;Intellectual Disability: A Conceptual History, 1200-1900&quot;. Manchester: Manchester University Press. 
* Metzler, Irina. &quot;Fools and Idiots?: Intellectual Disability in the Middle Ages&quot;. Manchester University Press, 2016. 
* Nielsen, Kim E. 2012. &quot;A Disability History of the United States&quot;. Boston: Beacon Press.
* O’Brien, Gerald V. 2016. &quot;Framing the Moron: The Social Construction of Feeble-Mindedness in the American Eugenic Era&quot;. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
* 
* Robinson, Michael. 2020. &quot;Shell-Shocked British Army Veterans in Ireland, 1918-39: A Difficult Homecoming&quot;. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
* Wheatcroft, Sue. 2015. &quot;Worth Saving: Disabled Children during the Second World War&quot;. Manchester University Press. 
* Schmidt, Marion Andrea. 2020. &quot;Eradicating Deafness?: Genetics, Pathology, and Diversity in Twentieth-Century America&quot;. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
* Turner, David M., and Daniel Blackie. 2018. &quot;Disability in the Industrial Revolution: Physical Impairment in British Coalmining, 1780-1880&quot;. Manchester: Manchester University Press. 

==External links==
* 
* WHO fact sheet on disability</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="0" end="10" title="Disability" label="Disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317827" start="182" end="191" title="Cognitive disability" label="cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142806" start="193" end="206" title="Developmental disability" label="developmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="208" end="220" title="Intellectual disability" label="intellectual"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="222" end="228" title="mental disorder#Disability" label="mental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179623" start="230" end="238" title="physical disability" label="physical"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="240" end="247" title="Sense" label="sensory"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="307" end="325" title="Birth defect" label="present from birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q10613200" start="616" end="625" title="Invisible disability" label="invisible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="642" end="656" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069706" start="657" end="710" title="Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities" label="Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916614" start="942" end="955" title="Medical model of disability" label="medical model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640064" start="964" end="976" title="Social model of disability" label="social model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853064" start="2119" end="2134" title="Social exclusion" label="marginalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192251" start="2484" end="2491" title="Ableism" label="ableist"/>
<link wikidata="Q110248179" start="2581" end="2587" title="Trope (literature)" label="tropes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="3430" end="3443" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583773" start="3641" end="3668" title="Windover Archeological Site" label="Windover Archeological Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q844717" start="3729" end="3741" title="spina bifida" label="spina bifida"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="3836" end="3851" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="4171" end="4184" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698713" start="4530" end="4552" title="Temple of Asclepius, Epidaurus" label="Sanctuary of Asclepius"/>
<link wikidata="Q233576" start="4556" end="4565" title="Epidaurus" label="Epidaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="5123" end="5134" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="5302" end="5313" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="5383" end="5402" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="5685" end="5707" title="European Enlightenment" label="European Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070165" start="5837" end="5849" title="Institutionalisation" label="institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="6024" end="6031" title="Psychiatric hospital" label="asylums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774898" start="6033" end="6039" title="clinic" label="clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="6046" end="6052" title="prison" label="prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555267" start="6442" end="6455" title="Normalization (people with disabilities)" label="normalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732142" start="6568" end="6580" title="statistician" label="statistician"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="6582" end="6593" title="Sociology" label="sociologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="6595" end="6608" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="6614" end="6624" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q20012" start="6625" end="6641" title="Adolphe Quetelet" label="Adolphe Quetelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="7145" end="7153" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591557" start="7316" end="7326" title="freak show" label="freak show"/>
<link wikidata="Q379693" start="7870" end="7876" title="Deportation" label="deport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="7993" end="8004" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="8088" end="8101" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8121" end="8137" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q701673" start="8159" end="8172" title="Nazi eugenics" label="Nazi eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17945" start="8194" end="8210" title="Public sphere" label="public discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q127683" start="8454" end="8460" title="incest" label="incest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520805" start="8469" end="8491" title="first-degree relatives" label="first-degree relatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520805" start="8495" end="8518" title="second-degree relatives" label="second-degree relatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="8565" end="8586" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="8623" end="8632" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="8636" end="8646" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="8812" end="8823" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="9503" end="9509" title="Working class" label="worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q814493" start="9658" end="9684" title="disability rights movement" label="disability rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q555097" start="9853" end="9871" title="Accessibility" label="barriers to access"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640064" start="9963" end="9989" title="social model of disability" label="social model of disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916614" start="10068" end="10095" title="medical model of disability" label="medical model of disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q627208" start="10518" end="10536" title="disability studies" label="disability studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993259" start="11167" end="11180" title="Marta Russell" label="Marta Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347593" start="11182" end="11195" title="Robert McRuer" label="Robert McRuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q29588800" start="11197" end="11210" title="Johanna Hedva" label="Johanna Hedva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498990" start="11212" end="11225" title="Laura Hershey" label="Laura Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673275" start="11227" end="11238" title="Irving Zola" label="Irving Zola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522710" start="11284" end="11300" title="Lennard J. Davis" label="Lennard J. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q917426" start="11497" end="11563" title="International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health" label="International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="11587" end="11612" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q423243" start="12265" end="12291" title="activities of daily living" label="activities of daily living"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="12386" end="12396" title="employment" label="employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919223" start="12695" end="12708" title="medical model" label="medical model"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="13352" end="13362" title="healthcare" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q423243" start="13522" end="13548" title="activities of daily living" label="activities of daily living"/>
<link wikidata="Q162297" start="13606" end="13622" title="personal hygiene" label="personal hygiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134368" start="13902" end="13916" title="medicalization" label="medicalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111004" start="14257" end="14296" title="Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990" label="Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673184" start="14305" end="14344" title="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission" label="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q477415" start="14438" end="14448" title="amputation" label="amputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="14450" end="14490" title="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="14499" end="14505" title="autism" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="14507" end="14523" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="14525" end="14534" title="blindness" label="blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="14536" end="14542" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q210427" start="14544" end="14558" title="cerebral palsy" label="cerebral palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12133" start="14560" end="14568" title="deafness" label="deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="14570" end="14578" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="14580" end="14588" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="14590" end="14598" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="14600" end="14623" title="intellectual disability" label="intellectual disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="14625" end="14650" title="major depressive disorder" label="major depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179623" start="14652" end="14671" title="mobility impairment" label="mobility impairment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="14697" end="14715" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137767" start="14717" end="14735" title="muscular dystrophy" label="muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178190" start="14737" end="14766" title="obsessive–compulsive disorder" label="obsessive–compulsive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="14774" end="14804" title="post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q844717" start="14813" end="14825" title="spina bifida" label="spina bifida"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="14831" end="14844" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10613200" start="15229" end="15251" title="Invisible disabilities" label="Invisible disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q688498" start="15456" end="15476" title="Assistive technology" label="Assistive technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q181802" start="15646" end="15656" title="prosthesis" label="prosthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191931" start="15688" end="15698" title="wheelchair" label="wheelchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891126" start="15732" end="15740" title="curb cut" label="curb cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598600" start="15796" end="15811" title="standing frames" label="standing frames"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="15818" end="15828" title="telephones" label="telephones"/>
<link wikidata="Q250" start="15841" end="15850" title="Keyboard (computing)" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548123" start="15852" end="15863" title="large print" label="large print"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="15865" end="15872" title="braille" label="braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q189436" start="15878" end="15896" title="speech recognition" label="speech recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="15897" end="15905" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="16035" end="16048" title="sign language" label="sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="16081" end="16098" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q638608" start="16164" end="16180" title="software development" label="develop software"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966" start="16185" end="16193" title="computer hardware" label="hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939481" start="16285" end="16297" title="Voice Finger" label="Voice Finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500621" start="16299" end="16317" title="Freedom Scientific" label="Freedom Scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676557" start="16331" end="16335" title="JAWS (screen reader)" label="JAWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486012" start="16386" end="16390" title="Orca (assistive technology)" label="Orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137289" start="16497" end="16503" title="Nuance Communications" label="Nuance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254878" start="16511" end="16535" title="Dragon NaturallySpeaking" label="Dragon NaturallySpeaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q6459528" start="16637" end="16642" title="LOMAK" label="LOMAK"/>
<link wikidata="Q636020" start="16868" end="16896" title="Web Accessibility Initiative" label="Web Accessibility Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589264" start="17127" end="17166" title="Inclusion (disability rights)" label="integration of individuals into society"/>
<link wikidata="Q203764" start="17353" end="17366" title="social activist" label="social action"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="17511" end="17519" title="cultural" label="cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="17524" end="17535" title="ideological" label="ideological"/>
<link wikidata="Q11897994" start="17843" end="17858" title="Tom Shakespeare" label="Tom Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q769420" start="18199" end="18217" title="medical humanities" label="medical humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q40613" start="18793" end="18808" title="labeling theory" label="labeling theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q623184" start="18813" end="18828" title="social deviance" label="social deviance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640064" start="18901" end="18934" title="social construction of disability" label="social construction of disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q367293" start="19568" end="19585" title="social convention" label="social convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916614" start="19657" end="19684" title="medical model of disability" label="medical model of disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="21022" end="21032" title="congenital" label="congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="21128" end="21133" title="karma" label="karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q116763903" start="22747" end="22772" title="supported decision making" label="supported decision making"/>
<link wikidata="Q900584" start="25102" end="25120" title="Attribution (psychology)" label="attribution theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511079" start="25378" end="25399" title="just-world hypothesis" label="just-world hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111004" start="25998" end="26029" title="Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990" label="Americans with Disabilities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069706" start="26038" end="26094" title="Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities" label="UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068072" start="26149" end="26171" title="University of Delaware" label="University of Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640064" start="27215" end="27227" title="Social model of disability" label="social model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415275" start="27288" end="27306" title="spinal cord injury" label="spinal cord injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640064" start="27560" end="27572" title="Social model of disability" label="social model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228328" start="27718" end="27754" title="Disabled Peoples&amp;#x27; International" label="Disabled Peoples&amp;#x27; International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498636" start="27894" end="27910" title="Deaf culture" label="Deaf communities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28004" end="28050" title="Association on Higher Education and Disability" label="Association on Higher Education and Disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647093" start="28570" end="28581" title="hand-in-cap" label="hand-in-cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038558" start="28775" end="28790" title="Handicap (horse racing)" label="handicap racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q555097" start="29319" end="29332" title="Accessibility" label="Accessibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q905151" start="29585" end="29598" title="Ballot" label="paper ballots"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="30017" end="30024" title="braille" label="braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q16346" start="30033" end="30047" title="Text to Speech" label="text-to-speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q383126" start="30395" end="30412" title="chronic illnesses" label="chronic illnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="30639" end="30664" title="intellectual disabilities" label="intellectual disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="30666" end="30690" title="autism spectrum disorder" label="autism spectrum disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="30692" end="30732" title="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q540571" start="30734" end="30746" title="fibromyalgia" label="fibromyalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="30748" end="30763" title="mental disorder" label="mental disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="30766" end="30772" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="30774" end="30782" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="30784" end="30793" title="allergies" label="allergies"/>
<link wikidata="Q133823" start="30795" end="30803" title="migraine" label="migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170990" start="30806" end="30815" title="arthritis" label="arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q209733" start="30821" end="30845" title="chronic fatigue syndrome" label="chronic fatigue syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606784" start="30848" end="30873" title="Employment discrimination" label="Employment discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="30933" end="30945" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q170990" start="31061" end="31070" title="arthritis" label="arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="31072" end="31088" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="31090" end="31093" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="31098" end="31116" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q555097" start="32514" end="32527" title="accessibility" label="accessibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566551" start="32532" end="32538" title="safety" label="safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373709" start="32625" end="32643" title="independent living" label="independent living"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976740" start="32732" end="32753" title="patients&amp;#x27; rights" label="patients&amp;#x27; rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="34007" end="34012" title="LGBT" label="LGBTQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q85011114" start="34038" end="34048" title="Mia Mingus" label="Mia Mingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q104845076" start="34050" end="34064" title="Patricia Berne" label="Patricia Berne"/>
<link wikidata="Q96145004" start="34070" end="34084" title="Stacey Milbern" label="Stacey Milbern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516555" start="34157" end="34174" title="intersectionality" label="intersectionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q18977861" start="34363" end="34381" title="Leroy F. Moore Jr." label="Leroy F. Moore Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q15613662" start="34429" end="34437" title="Krip Hop" label="Krip Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360190" start="34452" end="34461" title="Eli Clare" label="Eli Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937012" start="34495" end="34503" title="bodymind" label="bodymind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="34630" end="34644" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069706" start="34668" end="34721" title="Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities" label="Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="35591" end="35605" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054409" start="35629" end="35667" title="International Year of Disabled Persons" label="International Year of Disabled Persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054409" start="35694" end="35732" title="International Year of Disabled Persons" label="International Year of Disabled Persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485419" start="36115" end="36125" title="Frank Bowe" label="Frank Bowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349096" start="36385" end="36398" title="Robert Davila" label="Robert Davila"/>
<link wikidata="Q12133" start="36425" end="36429" title="deaf" label="deaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="36440" end="36446" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="36456" end="36469" title="sign language" label="sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069706" start="36695" end="36748" title="Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities" label="Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q780687" start="36786" end="36792" title="rights" label="rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853064" start="36794" end="36810" title="social inclusion" label="social inclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="36815" end="36826" title="citizenship" label="citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412022" start="38538" end="38556" title="disability pension" label="disability pension"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118291" start="38577" end="38597" title="disability insurance" label="disability insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572938" start="38784" end="38812" title="Supplemental Security Income" label="Supplemental Security Income"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090356" start="38842" end="38861" title="Canada Pension Plan" label="Canada Pension Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972303" start="38946" end="38982" title="National Disability Insurance Scheme" label="National Disability Insurance Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="39110" end="39125" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="39338" end="39366" title="gross domestic product (GDP)" label="gross domestic product (GDP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281187" start="40628" end="40650" title="disability and poverty" label="disability and poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="40969" end="40997" title="Intellectual disability" label="intellectually disabled (ID)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154971" start="41972" end="42003" title="Community integration" label="community-integrated employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036673" start="44910" end="44936" title="World report on disability" label="World report on disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141203" start="45466" end="45487" title="cognitive impairments" label="cognitive impairments"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="45917" end="45931" title="transportation" label="transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="46109" end="46124" title="disaster relief" label="disaster relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q23013960" start="46392" end="46409" title="Kathleen Woodward" label="Kathleen Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q109332104" start="46543" end="46555" title="Alison Kafer" label="Alison Kafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="46790" end="46796" title="social stigma" label="stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q208351" start="46892" end="46901" title="Disgust" label="revulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853064" start="48343" end="48351" title="Social exclusion" label="marginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q627208" start="48768" end="48787" title="Disability studies" label="disability theorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="48792" end="48800" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q109138913" start="48804" end="48823" title="Jay Timothy Dolmage" label="Jay Timothy Dolmage"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963472" start="48953" end="48969" title="Inspiration porn" label="Inspiration porn"/>
<link wikidata="Q29908604" start="50390" end="50405" title="The Good Doctor (American TV series)" label="The Good Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q327553" start="50427" end="50436" title="Daredevil (Marvel Comics character)" label="Daredevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q97294741" start="50459" end="50470" title="Sami Schalk" label="Sami Schalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q589184" start="51065" end="51084" title="Paralympic sports" label="Paralympic athletes"/>
<link wikidata="Q235799" start="51433" end="51439" title="cyborg" label="cyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q181802" start="52684" end="52694" title="Prosthesis" label="Prosthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q213787" start="52898" end="52932" title="The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1996 film)" label="The Hunchback of Notre Dame&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q272860" start="52956" end="52979" title="The Elephant Man (film)" label="The Elephant Man&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q86791" start="53006" end="53030" title="A Christmas Carol (2009 film)" label="A Christmas Carol&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q188845" start="53332" end="53340" title="Rain Man" label="Rain Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q134773" start="53361" end="53373" title="Forrest Gump" label="Forrest Gump"/>
<link wikidata="Q640387" start="53397" end="53405" title="I Am Sam" label="I Am Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853064" start="53925" end="53940" title="marginalization" label="marginalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q555097" start="54251" end="54264" title="accessibility" label="accessibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q815577" start="54320" end="54339" title="ignorance" label="lack of recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516555" start="55039" end="55056" title="intersectionality" label="intersectionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069706" start="55279" end="55332" title="Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities" label="Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q499419" start="55840" end="55870" title="Global Burden of Disease Study" label="Global Burden of Disease Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="55908" end="55918" title="minority group" label="minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996993" start="55984" end="56007" title="Police brutality" label="violent discrimination."/>
<link wikidata="Q16147973" start="56372" end="56403" title="disability in the United States" label="disability in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15767080" start="56446" end="56478" title="Berkeley Journal of Criminal Law" label="Berkeley Journal of Criminal Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q558922" start="57153" end="57178" title="Illinois State University" label="Illinois State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="57424" end="57438" title="social stigma" label="stigmatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633422" start="58976" end="58988" title="Socioeconomic status and mental health" label="intersection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515895" start="59012" end="59033" title="Socioeconomic status" label="socio-economic status"/>
<link wikidata="Q295385" start="59720" end="59728" title="Economic capital" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214693" start="59730" end="59736" title="Social capital" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q918002" start="59742" end="59758" title="cultural capital" label="cultural capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q73633" start="60110" end="60126" title="Paralympic Games" label="Paralympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="60211" end="60219" title="Olympics" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281216" start="60452" end="60471" title="Disabled Sports USA" label="Disabled Sports USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925593" start="60476" end="60495" title="BlazeSports America" label="BlazeSports America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741521" start="60725" end="60750" title="Stoke Mandeville Hospital" label="Stoke Mandeville Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q213474" start="60754" end="60763" title="Aylesbury" label="Aylesbury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60863" end="60878" title="Extremity Games" label="Extremity Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q309162" start="60991" end="61005" title="extreme sports" label="extreme sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="61297" end="61322" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="61486" end="61519" title="International Labour Organization" label="International Labour Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="61753" end="61775" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="61817" end="61844" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347" start="63314" end="63349" title="Australian Bureau of Statistics" label="the Australian Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15226006" start="63801" end="63825" title="House of Commons Library" label="House of Commons Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q611833" start="64679" end="64707" title="United States National Library of Medicine" label="National Library of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="66314" end="66332" title="Developed country" label="developed nations."/>
<link wikidata="Q5281187" start="66356" end="66378" title="disability and poverty" label="disability and poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192251" start="66503" end="66510" title="Ableism" label="Ableism"/>
<link wikidata="Q555097" start="66513" end="66526" title="Accessibility" label="Accessibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q688498" start="66529" end="66549" title="Assistive technology" label="Assistive technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q104868923" start="66552" end="66567" title="Curb cut effect" label="Curb cut effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281181" start="66570" end="66586" title="Disability abuse" label="Disability abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281188" start="66589" end="66608" title="Disability benefits" label="Disability benefits"/>
<link wikidata="Q105593273" start="66611" end="66626" title="Disability flag" label="Disability flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281195" start="66629" end="66650" title="Disability hate crime" label="Disability hate crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q106394435" start="66653" end="66666" title="Disadvantaged" label="Disadvantaged"/>
<link wikidata="Q48970669" start="66669" end="66688" title="Epistemic injustice" label="Epistemic injustice"/>
<link wikidata="Q177171" start="66691" end="66707" title="Frailty syndrome" label="Frailty syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q10613200" start="66710" end="66727" title="Invisible disability" label="Hidden disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q107504067" start="66730" end="66757" title="Hidden Disabilities Sunflower" label="Hidden disability sunflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q184818" start="66760" end="66787" title="Nothing about us without us" label="Nothing about us without us"/>
<link wikidata="Q65065953" start="66790" end="66815" title="Parents with disabilities" label="Parents with disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324638" start="66818" end="66851" title="Physiological functional capacity" label="Physiological functional capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18589172" start="66854" end="66874" title="Youth and disability" label="Youth and disability"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56288" wikidata="Q16489" url="?curid=56288" title="Sophie Wilson">
<text>Sophie Mary Wilson (born Roger Wilson; June 1957) is an English computer scientist, a co-designer of the instruction set for the ARM architecture.

Wilson first designed a microcomputer during a break from studies at Selwyn College, Cambridge. She subsequently joined Acorn Computers and was instrumental in designing the BBC Microcomputer, including the BBC BASIC programming language. She first began designing the ARM reduced instruction set computer (RISC) in 1983, which entered production two years later. It became popular in embedded systems and is now the most widely used processor architecture in smartphones. In 2011, she was listed in &quot;Maximum PC&quot; as number 8 in an article titled &quot;The 15 Most Important Women in Tech History&quot;. She was made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 2019.

==Early life and education==
Wilson was born in Leeds to schoolteacher parents, her father specialising in English and her mother physics. She spent her childhood in the village of Burn Bridge, North Yorkshire. After secondary schooling at Harrogate Grammar School, in 1976 Wilson went up to Selwyn College, Cambridge, where she studied mathematics for her first two years, switching to computer science in her final year. She was a member of the university Microprocessor society.

==Career==
Before going to university, Wilson had designed and built two electronic systems for ICI Fibres Research in Harrogate near her home village. The following year, in the 1977 summer vacation after her first year at university, she designed a small system around a MOS Technology 6502 microprocessor, which was used to electronically control feed for cows.

Wilson&#x27;s success with the cow-feeder project and paper designs for a more general system based on it caught the notice of Hermann Hauser, at the time a Cambridge postgraduate student. Hauser was impressed, and supported Wilson to stay in Cambridge for the 1978 summer vacation to see if she could turn the design into reality. At the same time a small microcomputer kit, the MK14, was just being launched by Science of Cambridge, led by Chris Curry on behalf of Cambridge electronics businessman Clive Sinclair. Wilson was convinced she could do better, and Hauser encouraged her to do so, using parts from the MK14.

In December 1978 Hauser and Curry set up Cambridge Processor Unit Ltd (CPU), initially as a consultancy designing microprocessor-based control systems. Their first customer was Ace Coin Equipment Ltd, who needed controllers for their fruit machines, with Wilson designing a device to prevent cigarette lighter sparks triggering payouts. Meanwhile Wilson&#x27;s computer design, combined with a cassette interface designed by Steve Furber, became the Acorn Micro-Computer, the first of a long line of computers sold by the company. Wilson started at the company in 1979.

Based on this processor board CPU Ltd developed an increasing number of different interface, display, control, and test add-ons for different customers, which in turn led to the Acorn Eurocard rack systems that were made generally available, and then the Acorn Atom released in March 1980. Wilson, initially moonlighting from the final year of her degree, contributed first the machine code monitor, then an assembler, then a version of BASIC and multiple device drivers for the machines (&quot;an incredible task of bootstrapping things up&quot;), as well as pitching in with everything else in the office.

=== BBC micro ===
Wilson was at the forefront of creating the prototype that enabled Acorn to win the contract with the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) for their ambitious computer education project. 

The BBC had planned that the centrepiece of their project would be an upcoming tv series that would relate the possibilities that computers were opening up to demonstrations shown running on a standard reference microcomputer, that viewers would then be able to experiment with themselves. However by the end of 1980 it had become clear that the BBC&#x27;s intended machine, the government-backed Newbury Newbrain, would not be able to meet either the capability or the timetable the BBC sought, and the programme team began an urgent search for other options. Curry pressed the already existing Acorn Atom, but when this was rejected at the start of February 1981 as being too limited and too non-standard, Curry instead offered for the BBC to come to Cambridge the following week to view a prototype of Acorn&#x27;s next computer — a machine that in reality did not as yet exist, beyond some general design discussion and a name, the Acorn Proton. Hauser employed a deception, telling both Wilson and colleague Steve Furber that the other had agreed a prototype could be built within a week. Taking up the challenge, the Acorn team designed the system including the circuit board and components from Monday to Wednesday, which required fast new DRAM integrated circuits to be sourced directly from Hitachi. By Thursday evening, a prototype had been built, but it was only on Friday morning that it was actually working, allowing Wilson (who had managed to catch a few hours sleep in the night) to start porting over an operating system, in time to be able to show it consistently drawing a line to a high-res graphics screen by the time the BBC arrived, with full text and graphics on screen by the time the BBC returned from an unproductive visit to the nearby Sinclair Research. 

The Proton was accepted to become the BBC Micro, with it falling to Wilson to develop its operating system and its version of BASIC, BBC BASIC — at 16K and 16K respectively a fourfold increase on the 4K and 4K of the Atom, including a full set of floating point mathematical routines. Wilson&#x27;s &quot;Acorn SuperBASIC&quot; development had reached about 10K by the time of the BBC&#x27;s visit, and she was keen to preserve the improvements she considered she had made with Acorn System BASIC over previous versions of the language. But the BBC, in particular their external consultant John Coll and BBC Engineering&#x27;s Richard Russell, were adamant that the core established features of the language needed to be present with recognisably standard syntax. On the other hand extensions that Wilson had written to allow more structured programming in BASIC chimed closely with the BBC team&#x27;s ambitions, and long fully-significant variable names, repeat/until loops, and multi-line procedures and functions with variables that could be declared local all became hallmarks of BBC BASIC. Work on the system design, operating system, and BASIC language (and fitting everything into the memory available) continued through the summer, and Wilson recalled watching the wedding of Prince Charles and Lady Diana Spencer in July 1981 on a small portable television while attempting to debug and re-solder the prototype. Along with Furber, Wilson was present backstage at the machine&#x27;s first studio recordings for television, in case any software fixes were required. She later described the event as &quot;a unique moment in time when the public wanted to know how this stuff works and could be shown and taught how to program.&quot;

=== ARM processor ===
In October 1983, Wilson began designing the instruction set for one of the first reduced instruction set computer (RISC) processors, the Acorn RISC Machine (ARM). The ARM1 was delivered on 26 April 1985 and worked first time, entering into production the same year. This processor type was later to become one of the most successful IP cores – a licensed CPU core – and by 2012 was being used in 95% of smartphones. Wilson also designed Acorn Replay, the video architecture for Acorn machines. This included operating system extensions for video access, as well as the codecs, optimised to run high frame rate video on ARM CPUs from the ARM 2 onwards.

She was a non-executive director of the technology and games company Eidos plc, which bought and created Eidos Interactive, for the years following its flotation in 1990. She was a consultant to ARM Ltd when it was split off from Acorn in 1990.
Since the demise of Acorn Computers, Wilson has made a small number of public appearances to talk about work done there.

=== Firepath ===
Wilson was the Chief Architect of Broadcom&#x27;s Firepath processor. Firepath has its history in Acorn Computers, which, after being renamed to Element 14, was broken up in an acquisition, with the Element 14 name being transferred to a new company, this company eventually being bought by Broadcom in 2000. In 2001 she became a research fellow and director at Broadcom.

Wilson was listed in 2011 in &quot;Maximum PC&quot; as number 8 in an article titled &quot;The 15 Most Important Women in Tech History&quot;.

==Honours and awards==
Wilson was awarded the Fellow Award by the Computer History Museum in California in 2012 &quot;for her work, with Steve Furber, on the BBC Micro computer and the ARM processor architecture.&quot; In 2009, she was elected as a Fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering and, in 2013, as a Fellow of the Royal Society. Wilson received the 2014 Lovie Lifetime Achievement Award in acknowledgement for her invention of the ARM processor. In 2016, she became an honorary fellow of her alma mater, Selwyn College, Cambridge, and was received the Royal Society Mullard Award with Furber for their work on ARM. In 2020, she was honoured as a Distinguished Fellow of the British Computer Society.

Wilson was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2019 Birthday Honours for services to computing.

In 2022 the Charles Stark Draper Prize for Engineering was awarded in Washington D.C. to David A. Patterson, John L. Hennessy, Stephen B. Furber, and Sophie M. Wilson for their &quot;invention, development, and implementation&quot; of the RISC chips.

The Sophie Wilson scholarship for Scientific Computing was set up in 2024, and is co-funded by Wilson. It supports students to study in the MPhil in Scientific Computing at the University of Cambridge.

==Personal life==
Wilson underwent gender reassignment surgery and transitioned from male to female in 1994. She enjoys photography and is involved in a local theatre group, where she is in charge of costumes and set pieces and has acted in a number of productions. She has also played a cameo role as a pub landlady in the BBC television drama &quot;Micro Men&quot;, in which a younger Wilson is played by Stefan Butler.
==See also==
*List of pioneers in computer science

==References==
===Sources===
*
==External links==
*An interview with Sophie Wilson
*Interviewed by Alan Macfarlane 21 May 2017 (video)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16489" start="0" end="18" title="Sophie Wilson" label="Sophie Mary Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16489" start="25" end="37" title="Sophie Wilson" label="Roger Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="64" end="82" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="105" end="120" title="instruction set" label="instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="129" end="145" title="ARM architecture" label="ARM architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q767650" start="217" end="242" title="Selwyn College, Cambridge" label="Selwyn College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q342149" start="268" end="283" title="Acorn Computers" label="Acorn Computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q429801" start="355" end="364" title="BBC BASIC" label="BBC BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="365" end="385" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="421" end="453" title="reduced instruction set computer" label="reduced instruction set computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="533" end="548" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="608" end="618" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795863" start="654" end="664" title="Maximum PC" label="Maximum PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="776" end="820" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="879" end="884" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999500" start="1012" end="1023" title="Burn Bridge" label="Burn Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23086" start="1025" end="1040" title="North Yorkshire" label="North Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666412" start="1071" end="1095" title="Harrogate Grammar School" label="Harrogate Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q767650" start="1123" end="1148" title="Selwyn College, Cambridge" label="Selwyn College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539558" start="1168" end="1179" title="Mathematical Tripos" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157476" start="1218" end="1234" title="Computer Science Tripos" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q899151" start="1410" end="1413" title="Imperial Chemical Industries" label="ICI"/>
<link wikidata="Q215829" start="1433" end="1442" title="Harrogate" label="Harrogate"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="1587" end="1606" title="MOS Technology 6502" label="MOS Technology 6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803761" start="1807" end="1821" title="Hermann Hauser" label="Hermann Hauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523796" start="2060" end="2064" title="MK14" label="MK14"/>
<link wikidata="Q4409" start="2093" end="2113" title="Science of Cambridge" label="Science of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112176" start="2122" end="2133" title="Christopher Curry (businessman)" label="Chris Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23889" start="2181" end="2195" title="Clive Sinclair" label="Clive Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q33972" start="2537" end="2551" title="slot machine" label="fruit machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q92776" start="2728" end="2740" title="Steve Furber" label="Steve Furber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736931" start="2753" end="2773" title="Acorn System 1" label="Acorn Micro-Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604597" start="3052" end="3079" title="Acorn Eurocard systems" label="Acorn Eurocard rack systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043357" start="3129" end="3139" title="Acorn Atom" label="Acorn Atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863649" start="3182" end="3194" title="side job" label="moonlighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780522" start="3252" end="3272" title="machine code monitor" label="machine code monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="3282" end="3291" title="Assembler (computing)" label="assembler"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="3311" end="3316" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033951" start="3330" end="3343" title="device driver" label="device driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195936" start="3391" end="3404" title="bootstrapping" label="bootstrapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="3603" end="3641" title="BBC" label="British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727242" start="3762" end="3780" title="The Computer Programme" label="upcoming tv series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550793" start="4089" end="4105" title="Grundy Newbrain" label="Newbury Newbrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="4939" end="4943" title="Dynamic random-access memory" label="DRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="4944" end="4962" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q53238" start="4992" end="4999" title="Hitachi" label="Hitachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4409" start="5456" end="5473" title="Sinclair Research" label="Sinclair Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q749976" start="5515" end="5524" title="BBC Micro" label="BBC Micro"/>
<link wikidata="Q429801" start="5610" end="5619" title="BBC BASIC" label="BBC BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="5724" end="5738" title="floating point" label="floating point"/>
<link wikidata="Q116443570" start="5955" end="5973" title="Acorn System BASIC" label="Acorn System BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226670" start="6067" end="6076" title="John Coll" label="John Coll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329365" start="6104" end="6119" title="Richard T. Russell" label="Richard Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q223335" start="6308" end="6330" title="structured programming" label="structured programming"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6395" end="6431" title="Naming_convention_(programming)#Length_of_identifiers" label="long fully-significant variable name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242594" start="6434" end="6452" title="Repeat until loop" label="repeat/until loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="6469" end="6478" title="Procedure (computer science)" label="procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="6484" end="6492" title="Function (computer programming)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q960279" start="6523" end="6537" title="Local variable" label="declared local"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094155" start="6751" end="6799" title="wedding of Prince Charles and Lady Diana Spencer" label="wedding of Prince Charles and Lady Diana Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="7322" end="7354" title="reduced instruction set computer" label="reduced instruction set computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="7378" end="7396" title="ARM architecture" label="Acorn RISC Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654284" start="7574" end="7581" title="Semiconductor intellectual property core" label="IP core"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="7596" end="7599" title="central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="7644" end="7654" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q184748" start="7810" end="7815" title="codec" label="codec"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7999" end="8016" title="Square Enix Europe#Eidos Interactive" label="Eidos Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="8046" end="8055" title="Initial public offering" label="flotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q296782" start="8089" end="8096" title="Arm (company)" label="ARM Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q555925" start="8312" end="8327" title="Broadcom Corporation" label="Broadcom&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358820" start="8423" end="8433" title="Element 14 (company)" label="Element 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795863" start="8686" end="8696" title="Maximum PC" label="Maximum PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q964035" start="8860" end="8883" title="Computer History Museum" label="Computer History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="9119" end="9132" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q767650" start="9309" end="9334" title="Selwyn College, Cambridge" label="Selwyn College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204895" start="9451" end="9503" title="Distinguished Fellow of the British Computer Society" label="Distinguished Fellow of the British Computer Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="9527" end="9571" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q64518246" start="9585" end="9606" title="2019 Birthday Honours" label="2019 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063447" start="9647" end="9673" title="Charles Stark Draper Prize" label="Charles Stark Draper Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053501" start="10125" end="10152" title="gender reassignment surgery" label="gender reassignment surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="10378" end="10388" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo role"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="10414" end="10417" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044199" start="10441" end="10450" title="Micro Men" label="Micro Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q82529" start="10526" end="10562" title="List of pioneers in computer science" label="List of pioneers in computer science"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56290" wikidata="Q5112292" url="?curid=56290" title="Christopher Evans (computer scientist)">
<text>Christopher Riche Evans (29 May 1931 – 10 October 1979) was a British computer scientist and author.

== Biography ==
Born in Aberdyfi, Christopher Evans spent his childhood in Wales and was educated at Christ College, Brecon (1941–1949). He spent two years in the RAF (1950–1952), and worked as a science journalist and writer until 1957, when he began a B.A. course in Psychology at University College London, graduating with honours in 1960. After a summer fellowship at Duke University in the United States, where he first met his American wife, Nancy Fullmer, he took up a research assistant post in the Physics Laboratory, University of Reading, working on eye movements under Professor R. W. Ditchburn. Upon receiving his PhD (the title of his thesis was &quot;Pattern Perception and the Stabilised Retinal Image&quot;), he went to the Division of Computer Science, National Physical Laboratory, Teddington, in 1964, where he remained until his death from cancer in 1979. He had two children, Christopher Samuel Evans and Victoria Evans-Theiler.

== Works ==
In 1979, Christopher Evans wrote a book about the oncoming microcomputer revolution, &quot;The Mighty Micro: The Impact of the Computer Revolution&quot;, which included predictions for the future up to the year 2000. This book was also printed in the US as &quot;The Micro Millennium&quot; (New York: The Viking Press, ). He subsequently scripted and presented for ATV a six-part television series based on this book and broadcast posthumously by ITV between October and December 1979.

His other books include &quot;Cults of Unreason&quot;, a study of Scientology and other pseudoscience, and &quot;Landscapes of the Night: How and Why We Dream&quot;.

In the 1970s, Evans undertook a set of interviews with computer pioneers such as Konrad Zuse and Grace Hopper. These were released through the Science Museum, London, as &quot;Pioneers of Computing&quot;, a set of cassette tapes.

Christopher Evans also edited two anthologies of psychological science fiction/horror stories, &quot;Mind at Bay&quot; and &quot;Mind in Chains&quot;, a collection of science writings, &quot;Cybernetics: Key Papers&quot;, a reference book &quot;Psychology: A Dictionary of Mind, Brain and Behaviour&quot;, and was a contributing editor to the science magazine &quot;Omni&quot;. A keen pilot, he also edited a yearly pilot&#x27;s diary of rural airfields in Great Britain.

Evans had a significant friendship and collaboration with the writer J. G. Ballard. Together around 1968 they developed ideas for a play about a car crash, offered to
the Institute of Contemporary Arts but not produced.
Later came an exhibition of crashed cars at The New Arts Lab in London in 1970, and ultimately Ballard&#x27;s novel
Crash, published in 1973. Evans&#x27; charismatic appearance as a &quot;hoodlum scientist&quot; (in Ballard&#x27;s description) was an inspiration for the
character of Dr. Robert Vaughan in Crash. Evans also appears in Ballard&#x27;s fictionalised life story The Kindness of Women
as the psychologist Dr. Richard Sutherland. (Ballard recounts his friendship with Evans in his autobiography Miracles of Life.)

During the 1970s, Evans was the scientific advisor to the ITV TV series, &quot;The Tomorrow People&quot;.

Christopher Evans died of cancer in 1979, at the age of 48, shortly after &quot;The Mighty Micro&quot; had been published in hardcover and before the broadcast of the TV programmes.

== Selected works ==
;&quot;Cults of Unreason&quot;
* 
* 

;&quot;The Mighty Micro&quot;
* 

;&quot;As editor&quot;
*

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5112292" start="0" end="23" title="Christopher Evans (computer scientist)" label="Christopher Riche Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="70" end="88" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q319536" start="126" end="134" title="Aberdyfi" label="Aberdyfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="177" end="182" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108840" start="203" end="225" title="Christ College, Brecon" label="Christ College, Brecon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="265" end="268" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="385" end="410" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="474" end="489" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405633" start="578" end="596" title="research assistant" label="research assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="609" end="616" title="Physics" label="Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432632" start="629" end="650" title="University of Reading" label="University of Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967606" start="873" end="913" title="National Physical Laboratory (United Kingdom)" label="National Physical Laboratory, Teddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="963" end="969" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359420" start="1125" end="1149" title="microcomputer revolution" label="microcomputer revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1157" end="1212" title="The Mighty Micro (book)" label="The Mighty Micro: The Impact of the Computer Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399070" start="1431" end="1434" title="Associated TeleVision" label="ATV"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="1513" end="1516" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193178" start="1583" end="1600" title="Cults of Unreason" label="Cults of Unreason"/>
<link wikidata="Q131036" start="1619" end="1630" title="Scientology" label="Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="1641" end="1654" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q60093" start="1801" end="1812" title="Konrad Zuse" label="Konrad Zuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11641" start="1817" end="1829" title="Grace Hopper" label="Grace Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q674773" start="1863" end="1877" title="Science Museum (London)" label="Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1896" end="1917" title="Pioneers of Computing" label="Pioneers of Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="1934" end="1942" title="compact audio cassette" label="cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q286328" start="2000" end="2029" title="psychological science fiction" label="psychological science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="2030" end="2036" title="Horror fiction" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q663053" start="2317" end="2321" title="Omni (magazine)" label="Omni"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="2408" end="2421" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q140201" start="2493" end="2506" title="J. G. Ballard" label="J. G. Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093988" start="2760" end="2765" title="Crash (Ballard novel)" label="Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093988" start="2950" end="2955" title="Crash (Ballard novel)" label="Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q12323232" start="3019" end="3040" title="The Kindness of Women" label="The Kindness of Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872514" start="3150" end="3166" title="Miracles of Life" label="Miracles of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="3228" end="3231" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769555" start="3249" end="3268" title="The Tomorrow People" label="The Tomorrow People"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56291" wikidata="Q959841" url="?curid=56291" title="Schneider Trophy">
<text>The Coupe d&#x27;Aviation Maritime Jacques Schneider, also known as the Schneider Trophy, Schneider Prize or (incorrectly) the Schneider Cup is a trophy that was awarded first annually, and later biennially, to the winner of a race for seaplanes and flying boats. In 1931 Britain met the conditions to retain the Trophy permanently; it is on display at the Science Museum in South Kensington, London.

Announced in 1912 by Jacques Schneider, a French financier, balloonist and aircraft enthusiast, the competition offered a prize of approximately £1,000. The race was held twelve times between 1913 and 1931, the year when it was finally won permanently by the British. It was intended to encourage technical advances in civil aviation but became a contest for pure speed with laps over a (usually) triangular course, initially and later extended to . The contests were staged as time trials, with aircraft setting off individually at set intervals, usually 15 minutes apart. The contests were very popular, and some of them attracted crowds of over 200,000 spectators.

The race was significant in advancing aeroplane design, particularly in the fields of aerodynamics and engine design, and showed its results in the best fighters of World War II. The streamlined shape and the low drag, liquid-cooled engine pioneered by Schneider Trophy designs are obvious in the British Supermarine Spitfire, the American North American P-51 Mustang, and the Italian Macchi C.202 &quot;Folgore&quot;.

An earlier 1910 trophy for land planes presented by Jacques Schneider, in France, the &quot;Grande Semaine d&#x27;Aviation de Tours&quot;, in the possession of the RAF College Cranwell, is also known as the Schneider Cup.
==Rules==

Aircraft taking part had to be seaworthy, having to float for six hours and travel about 550 yards (503m) on water. Twice during the flight they had to land on or &quot;come in contact&quot; with the water (which allowed contestants to carry out a fast bouncing manoeuvre). If the pontoons took on water, the flight had to continue with the added weight. Each competition was to be held in and managed by the country currently holding the trophy. If a country won three consecutive races, as the British finally did, they would retain the trophy permanently and the winning pilot would receive 75,000 French francs for each of the first three wins. The races were supervised by the Fédération Aéronautique Internationale and the aero club in the hosting country. Each club could enter up to three competitors with an equal number of alternatives.

==Trophy==
The Schneider Trophy is a sculpture of silver and bronze set on a marble base. It depicts a zephyr skimming the waves, and a nude winged figure is seen kissing a zephyr recumbent on a breaking wave. The heads of two other zephyrs and of Neptune, the god of the Sea, can be seen surrounded by octopus and crabs. The symbolism represents speed conquering the elements of sea and air. The cost of the trophy was 25,000 francs.
After the British finally won permanent possession of the trophy in 1931, the sculpture was displayed for many years at the end of the corridor outside the ballroom of the Lansdowne Club. It has since been entrusted to the Royal Aero Club and can be viewed along with the winning Supermarine S.6B floatplane at the London Science Museum Flight exhibition hall. Supermarine S.6, &quot;N248&quot;, which competed in the 1929 contest but was disqualified, is preserved at Solent Sky maritime museum in Southampton.

==History==
Schneider was a hydroplane racer who came from a wealthy family; his interest in aircraft began after he met Wilbur Wright in 1908, but a boating accident in 1910 crippled him and prematurely ended his racing and flying career. Schneider served as a race referee at the Monaco Hydroplane Meet in 1912, where he noted that seaplane development was lagging land-based aircraft; seeking to spur amphibious aircraft development, capable of reliable operation, extended range, and reasonable payload capacity, he announced the annual Schneider Trophy competition at a race banquet on 5 December, to cover a distance of at least .
The first competition was held on 16 April 1913, at Monaco, consisting of six laps, distance in total. It was won by Maurice Prévost, piloting a French Deperdussin Monocoque (Coupe Schneider) at an average speed of . Although Prévost had averaged a faster flying speed, he lost 50 minutes when he landed prematurely after losing count of the laps completed. All four entrants were flying French-made aircraft; two withdrew before completing the race. The British won in 1914 with a Sopwith Tabloid flown by Howard Pixton at ; the 1914 race was contested by three nations: France, the United Kingdom, and Switzerland. The United States and Germany failed to qualify. From 1915 to 1918, competition was suspended for the duration of World War I.

After the war, the competition resumed in 1919 at Bournemouth where in foggy conditions the Italian team won. They were later disqualified and the race was voided, as the referees ruled they had incorrectly flown around a marker buoy. In 1920 and 1921 at Venice the Italians won again; in 1920 no other nation entered and in 1921 the French entry did not start.  Had it not been for the 1919 disqualification, Italy would have been awarded the trophy permanently. After 1921, an additional requirement was added: the winning seaplane had to remain moored to a buoy for six hours without human intervention.

In 1922 in Naples the British and French competed with the Italians. The British private entry, a Supermarine Sea Lion II, was the victor, flown by Henry Biard. The French aircraft did not start the race, which became a competition between the Sea Lion and three Italian aircraft, two Macchi M.17s and a Savoia S.51.

===Nationalism===

The 1923 trophy, contested at Cowes, went to the Americans with a sleek, liquid-cooled engined craft designed by Glenn Curtiss. It used the Curtiss D-12 engine. US Navy Lieutenant David Rittenhouse won the cup, and his teammate Rutledge Irvine was second in an identical aircraft. The British Sea Lion III (flown by 1922 winner Henry Biard), and the French entry withdrew from the race. The preparation of the United States team, backed by government support and using Curtiss racing biplanes derived from inter-military competitions, increased the speed and the investment of a winning entry significantly. In 1924 the competition was cancelled as no other nation turned out to face the Americans: the Italians and the French withdrew; and both British craft crashed in pre-race trials. In 1925 at Chesapeake Bay the Americans won again, with US pilot Jimmy Doolittle winning in a Curtiss R3C ahead of the British Gloster III and the Italian Macchi M.33. R. J. Mitchell&#x27;s Supermarine S.4 and the other Gloster III were damaged before the race and did not compete. Two of the American planes did not finish.

Benito Mussolini instructed the Italian aircraft industry to &quot;win the Schneider Trophy at all costs&quot; and so demonstrate the effectiveness of his Fascist government. In 1926, the Italians returned with a Macchi M.39 and won against the Americans with a run at Hampton Roads. The United States, short of funds, did not develop new aircraft for the 1926 title defence; the M.39, designed by Mario Castoldi, used a Fiat AS2 engine and was streamlined in the manner of the 1925 Supermarine and Curtiss entrants. The American teams withdrew from further competition after the 1926 race, as the military was unwilling to fund entrants. In 1927 at Venice the British responded by enlisting government backing and RAF pilots (the High Speed Flight) for the Supermarine, Gloster, and Shorts entries. Supermarine&#x27;s Mitchell-designed S.5s took first and second places; no other entrants finished. The race was witnessed by an estimated 250,000 spectators. 1927 was the last annual competition, the event was then mutually agreed to be held biennially to allow more development time.

In 1929, at Calshot, Supermarine won again in the Supermarine S.6 with the new Rolls-Royce R engine with an average speed of . Both Britain and Italy entered two new aircraft and a backup plane from the previous race. Three of the four new aircraft were disqualified (Supermarine S.6 &quot;N.248&quot;) or failed to finish the course (both Macchi M.67s), with the older Macchi M.52R taking second and Supermarine S.5 taking third. Although France had ordered racing seaplanes from Bernard and Nieuport-Delage in 1928, they were unable to complete them in time for the 1929 race.
===The UK win===

In 1931 the British government withdrew support, but a private donation of £100,000 from the wealthy and ultra-patriotic Lucy, Lady Houston, allowed Supermarine to compete. When the French and Italian teams dropped out, leaving no other competitors, the British team flew the course alone on 13 September and won the coveted Schneider Trophy outright, having beaten the time record from the 1929 competition. Reportedly half a million spectators lined the beachfronts. The Italian, French, and German entrants failed to ready their aircraft in time for the competition. The remaining British team set both a new world speed record of and won the trophy outright with a third straight win. The following days saw the winning Supermarine S.6B further break the world speed record twice, making it the first craft to break the 400 mph barrier on 29 September at an average speed of .
Although the British team had secured the trophy for the UK permanently with the 1931 uncontested win, the development of the other 1931 entrants continued. The proposed Italian entrant (the Macchi M.C.72), which had pulled out of the contest due to engine problems, later went on to set two new world speed records with the help of British fuel expert Rod Banks, who had worked on the Rolls Royce R engine of the S6B. In April 1933 it set a record over Lake Garda in northern Italy with a speed of . Eighteen months later in the same venue, it broke the 700 km/h barrier with an average speed of . Both times the plane was piloted by Francesco Agello. This speed remains the fastest speed ever attained by a piston-engined seaplane.

For a complete list of the aircraft which competed in the competitions, see List of Schneider Trophy aircraft.
===Winners===

===Alumni===
*Reginald J. Mitchell, designer of the winning Supermarine Schneider Trophy entrants, also designed the Supermarine Spitfire fighter.
*Mario Castoldi, designer of the 1926 winner, the Macchi M.39, also designed other contestants such as the M.52, the M.52R, the M.67, and the M.C.72. After the M.C.72 Castoldi designed some of the Italian fighters which flew during World War II, such as the MC.202.
*James Doolittle, winning pilot of the 1925 race, was accomplished in many other areas. He led the famous &quot;Doolittle Raid&quot;, an American bombing attack on several Japanese homeland targets in April 1942.

===1981 revival===
In 1981 the race was revived, no longer for seaplanes and under different rules, by the Royal Aero Club of Great Britain to commemorate the 50th anniversary of Britain&#x27;s ultimate retention of the Schneider Trophy. The original trophy remained in the Science Museum, a full-size replica was cast, and the race opened on a handicapped basis to any propeller–driven landplane capable of maintaining in straight and level flight, and weighing up to . Pilots had to have a minimum of 100 hours as pilot-in-command, and a valid air racing licence.

Following that event, the UK subsidiary of US computer company Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) independently decided to sponsor a long-term revival of the Schneider Trophy, with the first race held in 1984, and races held annually, with a few omissions, since then. The idea was submitted by DEC&#x27;s then UK PR consultancy Infopress as part of a broader commercial sponsorship programme designed to increase DEC&#x27;s presence in the UK market at that time. DEC sponsored this revived race series from 1984 until 1991, which also marked the diamond jubilee of the final race in the original series. DEC and Infopress turned to the expertise of the Royal Aero Club&#x27;s Records, Racing &amp; Rally Association which again administered and ran the actual races. The 1981 Solent course, itself a close approximation of the original 1929 and 1931 Schneider Trophy courses over the Solent, was also used and adapted from year to year.

This sponsorship had a profound effect on the awareness and popularity of handicapped air racing in the UK and further afield, as well as markedly increasing DEC&#x27;s commercial profile in the UK. The appeal of the race, its historic connections, and the fact that prize money was now on offer, meant that the entry list for the race was large enough to warrant the introduction of heats from 1985 onwards. (There were 62 entrants to the 1984 race, believed at the time to be the largest-ever in all forms of air racing.)

The event received further boosts in 1986, when it was started by Prince Andrew, Duke of York and his fiancée Sarah Ferguson; in 1987, when the event was featured as one episode in a BBC television documentary series; and in 1988, when it was a central part of that year&#x27;s ITV Telethon Appeal.

DEC invited customers and partners to each year&#x27;s event as guests, and the general public watched in increasing numbers as the series grew in size and popularity.

For the pilots taking part, the event became, along with the King&#x27;s Cup air race, the highlight of the UK&#x27;s air racing season, and regularly attracted entrants from continental Europe.

DEC continued to sponsor the races until 1991. Since that time, the race has been run by the Royal Aero Club Records Racing and Rally Association along with the King&#x27;s Cup and the British air racing championship. The venue has varied but is still flown on most occasions around a Solent-based course, usually around September of each year.

====Revival winners====
==In popular culture==
*The Schneider Cup is frequently referred to in the 1992 animated film &quot;Porco Rosso&quot;, even to the extent of director Hayao Miyazaki&#x27;s naming the film&#x27;s antagonist Donald Curtiss, a reference to American aircraft designers Glenn Curtiss and Donald Douglas.
*In the song &quot;Bill Hosie&quot; by Archie Fisher, the protagonist rebuilds a Supermarine S.5 seaplane that survived the 1927 Schneider Trophy Race. The plane, race, and trophy are referred to throughout the song. (Bill Hosie and the replica were both real. Hosie competed in the 1985 and 1986 DEC Schneider Trophy Races, and DEC partly financed his rebuild of the S.5 replica. He crashed during a test-flight of this replica on 23 May 1987, near Mylor, Cornwall in the UK, just one month before that year&#x27;s DEC Schneider Trophy Race. Hosie was killed. Details of the crash and its cause are in AIB Bulletin 9/87 published by the Accidents Investigation Branch of the UK&#x27;s Department of Transport, 1987.)
*The film &quot;The First of the Few&quot; (1942) starring Leslie Howard as R. J. Mitchell centres on Mitchell&#x27;s life as the designer of multiple Schneider Trophy–winning seaplanes and then the Spitfire fighter plane.

==See also==

* List of aviation awards
* Gordon Bennett Trophy (aeroplanes)
* National Air Races

==References==
===Bibliography===
* Barker, Ralph. &quot;The Schneider Trophy Races&quot;. Shrewsbury, UK: Airlife Publishing Ltd., 1981. 
* Eves, Edward. &quot;The Schneider Trophy Story&quot;. Shrewsbury, UK: Airlife Publishing Ltd., 2001. 
* Gunston, Bill. &quot;World Encyclopaedia of Aero Engines&quot;. Cambridge, UK: Patrick Stephens Limited, 1989. 
* Lewis, Julian. &quot;Racing Ace - The Fights and Flights of &#x27;Kink&#x27; Kinkead DSO DSC* DFC*&quot;. Barnsley, UK: Pen &amp; Sword, 2011. 
* 
* Mondey, David. &quot;The Schneider Trophy&quot;. London, UK: Robert Hale, 1975. 
* Shelton, John. &quot;Schneider Trophy to Spitfire - The Design Career of R.J. Mitchell&quot;. Yeovil, UK: Haynes Publishing, 2008. 
* Schofield, H. M. &quot;High Speed and Other Flights&quot;. London, UK. John Hamilton Limited. (Schofield was a member of the 1927 British Schneider Trophy team.)
* Orlebar, A. H. &quot;Schneider Trophy&quot;. London, UK. Seeley Service &amp; Co. Limited. (Orlebar was the commanding office of the 1929 and 1931 British Schneider Trophy teams.)
* Smith, Alan. &quot;Schneider Trophy Diamond Jubilee, Looking Back 60 Years&quot;. Poole, UK. Waterfront Publications, 1991. .
* James, Derek N. &quot;Schneider Trophy Aircraft 1913-1931&quot;. London, UK. Putnam &amp; Company Limited, 1991. 

==Further reading==
* Jane&#x27;s Encyclopedia of Aviation (1989) has an extensive article on the Schneider Trophy (pp. 794–797).
* Baldrey, Dennis &amp; Jerram, Mike. &quot;The DEC Schneider Trophy Race&quot;. London, UK. Osprey Publishing Limited, 1988. 

==External links==

* &quot;Schneider Contest 1931&quot; (Course layout and general regulations)&quot;Flight the Aircraft Engineer and Airships&quot;, No. 1181, Vol. XXIII, No. 33, 14 August 1931
* Schneider Trophy web site
* Royal Air Force official web page on the Schneider Trophy (archive)
* SPEEDBIRDS Graphics study on the Schneider Trophy planes
* Newsreel footage of Macchi M.39 and Major Mario de Bernardi after winning the 1926 Schneider Trophy race 
* Newsreel footage of 1929 Schneider Trophy racing teams, British Supermarine S.6A aircraft (#2 and #8), and Italian Macchi M.67 (#10) and Macchi M.52R (#4) aircraft at 1929 Schneider Trophy race 
* The Schneider Cup racers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q959841" start="4" end="52" title="Schneider Trophy" label="Coupe d&amp;#x27;Aviation Maritime Jacques Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q959841" start="72" end="88" title="Schneider Trophy" label="Schneider Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q959841" start="90" end="105" title="Schneider Trophy" label="Schneider Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q959841" start="127" end="140" title="Schneider Trophy" label="Schneider Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940" start="236" end="244" title="seaplane" label="seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153376" start="250" end="261" title="flying boat" label="flying boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q674773" start="357" end="371" title="Science Museum, London" label="Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q350855" start="423" end="440" title="Jacques Schneider" label="Jacques Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="1157" end="1169" title="aerodynamics" label="aerodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="1376" end="1396" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192075" start="1411" end="1438" title="North American P-51 Mustang" label="North American P-51 Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975" start="1456" end="1488" title="Macchi C.202" label="Macchi C.202 &amp;quot;Folgore&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373601" start="1655" end="1675" title="RAF College Cranwell" label="RAF College Cranwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="2325" end="2337" title="French franc" label="French franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q214130" start="2406" end="2444" title="Fédération Aéronautique Internationale" label="Fédération Aéronautique Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954" start="2820" end="2827" title="Neptune (mythology)" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487379" start="3179" end="3193" title="Lansdowne Club" label="Lansdowne Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149581" start="3230" end="3245" title="Royal Aero Club" label="Royal Aero Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q916690" start="3287" end="3303" title="Supermarine S.6B" label="Supermarine S.6B"/>
<link wikidata="Q674773" start="3322" end="3343" title="Science Museum (London)" label="London Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557658" start="3476" end="3486" title="Solent Sky" label="Solent Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="3506" end="3517" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q122714" start="3548" end="3558" title="hydroplane (boat)" label="hydroplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="3641" end="3654" title="Wilbur Wright" label="Wilbur Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="4209" end="4215" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301298" start="4274" end="4289" title="Maurice Prévost" label="Maurice Prévost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164315" start="4309" end="4320" title="Société pour les Appareils Deperdussin" label="Deperdussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65080433" start="4321" end="4348" title="Deperdussin Coupe Schneider" label="Monocoque (Coupe Schneider)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118167" start="4639" end="4654" title="Sopwith Tabloid" label="Sopwith Tabloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961583" start="4664" end="4677" title="Howard Pixton" label="Howard Pixton"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4888" end="4899" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170478" start="4952" end="4963" title="Bournemouth" label="Bournemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="4973" end="4976" title="fog" label="fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="5157" end="5163" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="5521" end="5527" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977968" start="5608" end="5631" title="Supermarine Sea Lion II" label="Supermarine Sea Lion II"/>
<link wikidata="Q107987277" start="5658" end="5669" title="Henry Biard" label="Henry Biard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841985" start="5795" end="5806" title="Macchi M.17" label="Macchi M.17"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951122" start="5814" end="5825" title="SIAI S.51" label="Savoia S.51"/>
<link wikidata="Q587996" start="5877" end="5882" title="Cowes" label="Cowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q454544" start="5960" end="5973" title="Glenn Curtiss" label="Glenn Curtiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q496735" start="5987" end="5999" title="Curtiss D-12" label="Curtiss D-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="6646" end="6660" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q366547" start="6700" end="6715" title="Jimmy Doolittle" label="Jimmy Doolittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q689253" start="6729" end="6740" title="Curtiss R3C" label="Curtiss R3C"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571970" start="6762" end="6773" title="Gloster III" label="Gloster III"/>
<link wikidata="Q379355" start="6790" end="6801" title="Macchi M.33" label="Macchi M.33"/>
<link wikidata="Q186025" start="6803" end="6817" title="R. J. Mitchell" label="R. J. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q830264" start="6825" end="6840" title="Supermarine S.4" label="Supermarine S.4"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="6961" end="6977" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q916250" start="7174" end="7185" title="Macchi M.39" label="Macchi M.39"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="7230" end="7243" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848433" start="7359" end="7373" title="Mario Castoldi" label="Mario Castoldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="7676" end="7679" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757041" start="7692" end="7709" title="High Speed Flight RAF" label="High Speed Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061821" start="7719" end="7730" title="Supermarine" label="Supermarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532217" start="7732" end="7739" title="Gloster Aircraft Company" label="Gloster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656412" start="7745" end="7751" title="Short Brothers" label="Shorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q688812" start="7798" end="7802" title="Supermarine S.5" label="S.5s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023961" start="8060" end="8067" title="Calshot" label="Calshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477280" start="8127" end="8140" title="Rolls-Royce R" label="Rolls-Royce R"/>
<link wikidata="Q752692" start="8388" end="8399" title="Macchi M.67" label="Macchi M.67"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642200" start="8418" end="8430" title="Macchi M.52R" label="Macchi M.52R"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488046" start="8529" end="8536" title="Société des Avions Bernard" label="Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231877" start="8541" end="8556" title="Nieuport" label="Nieuport-Delage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698142" start="8766" end="8784" title="Lucy, Lady Houston" label="Lucy, Lady Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414" start="9980" end="9990" title="Lake Garda" label="Lake Garda"/>
<link wikidata="Q320920" start="10161" end="10177" title="Francesco Agello" label="Francesco Agello"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431897" start="10337" end="10370" title="List of Schneider Trophy aircraft" label="List of Schneider Trophy aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="10504" end="10524" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066331" start="10676" end="10682" title="Macchi M.C.72" label="M.C.72"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10766" end="10778" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975" start="10792" end="10798" title="MC.202" label="MC.202"/>
<link wikidata="Q713516" start="10912" end="10926" title="Doolittle Raid" label="Doolittle Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="11644" end="11673" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q153330" start="13113" end="13140" title="Prince Andrew, Duke of York" label="Prince Andrew, Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742185" start="13577" end="13601" title="King&amp;#x27;s Cup air race" label="King&amp;#x27;s Cup air race"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971265" start="13897" end="13928" title="British air racing championship" label="British air racing championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q498375" start="14182" end="14193" title="Porco Rosso" label="Porco Rosso"/>
<link wikidata="Q55400" start="14232" end="14246" title="Hayao Miyazaki" label="Hayao Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240497" start="14365" end="14379" title="Donald Wills Douglas Sr." label="Donald Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281937" start="14420" end="14433" title="Archie Fisher" label="Archie Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="14439" end="14450" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940" start="14478" end="14486" title="seaplane" label="seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="14838" end="14846" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q406725" start="15019" end="15049" title="Accidents Investigation Branch" label="Accidents Investigation Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="15067" end="15090" title="Department for Transport" label="Department of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795293" start="15115" end="15135" title="The First of the Few" label="The First of the Few"/>
<link wikidata="Q156178" start="15158" end="15171" title="Leslie Howard (actor)" label="Leslie Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q85779083" start="15339" end="15362" title="List of aviation awards" label="List of aviation awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243717" start="15365" end="15399" title="Gordon Bennett Trophy (aeroplanes)" label="Gordon Bennett Trophy (aeroplanes)"/>
<link wikidata="Q825144" start="15402" end="15420" title="National Air Races" label="National Air Races"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56293" wikidata="Q23889" url="?curid=56293" title="Clive Sinclair">
<text>Sir Clive Marles Sinclair (30 July 1940 – 16 September 2021) was an English entrepreneur and inventor, best known for being a pioneer in the computing industry and also as the founder of several companies that developed consumer electronics in the 1970s and early 1980s.

After spending several years as assistant editor of &quot;Instrument Practice&quot;, Sinclair founded Sinclair Radionics Ltd in 1961. He produced the world&#x27;s first slimline electronic pocket calculator (the Sinclair Executive) in 1972. Sinclair then moved into the production of home computers in 1980 with Sinclair Research Ltd, producing the Sinclair ZX80 (the UK&#x27;s first mass-market home computer for less than £100) and in the early 1980s, the ZX81, ZX Spectrum and the Sinclair QL. Sinclair Research is widely recognised for its importance in the early days of the British and European home computer industry, as well as helping to give rise to the British video game industry.

Sinclair also had several commercial failures, including the Sinclair Radionics Black Watch wristwatch, the Sinclair Vehicles C5 battery electric vehicle, and the Sinclair Research TV80 flatscreen CRT handheld television set. The failure of the C5, along with a weakened computer market, forced Sinclair to sell most of his companies by 1986. Through 2010, Sinclair concentrated on personal transport, including the A-bike, a folding bicycle for commuters which was small enough to fit in a handbag. He also developed the Sinclair X-1, a revised version of the C5 electric vehicle, which never made it to the market.

Sinclair was appointed Knight Bachelor in the 1983 Birthday Honours for his contributions to the personal computer industry in the UK.

==Early life, family and education==
Sinclair&#x27;s father and grandfather were engineers; both had been apprentices at the shipbuilders Vickers. His grandfather George Sinclair was a naval architect who got the &quot;paravane&quot;, a mine sweeping device, to work. George Sinclair&#x27;s son, George William &quot;Bill&quot; Sinclair, wanted to take religious orders or become a journalist. His father suggested he train as an engineer first; Bill became a mechanical engineer and remained in the field. At the outbreak of World War II in 1939, he was running his own machine tools business in London, and later worked for the Ministry of Supply.

Clive Sinclair was born to George Sinclair and Thora Edith Ella Marles on 30 July 1940, in Ealing, Middlesex. He and his mother left London for safety to stay with an aunt in Devon, where they eventually moved to Teignmouth. A telegram arrived shortly afterwards, bringing the news that their home in Ealing had been bombed. Sinclair&#x27;s father found a house in Bracknell in Berkshire. His brother Iain was born in 1943 and his sister Fiona in 1947.

Sinclair attended Boxgrove Preparatory School, excelling in mathematics. Sinclair had little interest in sports and found himself out of place at school. By the time he was ten, his father had financial problems. He had branched out from machine tools and planned to import miniature tractors from the U.S.; he had to give up the business. Because of his father&#x27;s problems, Sinclair had to move school several times. After a time at Reading School, Sinclair took his O-levels at Highgate School in London in 1955, and his A-levels and S-levels in physics, pure maths, and applied maths at St. George&#x27;s College, Weybridge.

During his early years, Sinclair earned money mowing lawns and washing up in a café, earning 6d (2½p) more than the permanent staff. Later he went for holiday jobs at electronic companies. At Solartron he inquired about the possibility of electrically propelled personal vehicles. Sinclair applied for a holiday job at Mullard and took one of his circuit designs; he was rejected for precociousness. While still at school he wrote his first article for &quot;Practical Wireless&quot;.

After he left school at the age of 18, he sold miniature electronic kits by mail order to the hobby market.

==Career==

===Sinclair Radionics===

Sinclair&#x27;s Micro Kit was formalised in an exercise book dated 19 June 1958, three weeks before his A-levels. Sinclair drew a radio circuit, Model Mark I, with a components list: cost per set 9/11 (49½p), plus coloured wire and solder, nuts and bolts, plus celluloid chassis (drilled) for nine shillings (45p). Also in the book are the advertisement rates for &quot;Radio Constructor&quot; at the time (9d (3¾p)/word, minimum 6/- (30p)) and &quot;Practical Wireless&quot; (5/6 (27½p) per line or part line). Sinclair estimated producing 1,000 a month, placing orders with suppliers for 10,000 of each component to be delivered.

Sinclair wrote a book for Bernard&#x27;s Publishing, &quot;Practical transistor receivers Book 1&quot;, which appeared in January 1959. It was re-printed late that year and nine times subsequently. His practical stereo handbook was published in June 1959 and reprinted seven times over 14 years. The last book Sinclair wrote as an employee of Bernard&#x27;s was &quot;Modern Transistor Circuits for Beginners&quot;, published in May 1962. At Bernard Babani, he wrote 13 constructor books.

In 1961, Sinclair registered Sinclair Radionics Ltd. His original choice, &quot;Sinclair Electronics&quot;, had been taken; &quot;Sinclair Radio&quot; was available but did not sound right. Sinclair Radionics was formed on 25 July 1961. Sinclair made two attempts to raise startup capital to advertise his inventions and buy components. He designed PCB kits and licensed some technology. Then he took his design for a miniature transistor pocket radio and sought a backer for its production in kit form. Eventually he found someone who agreed to buy 55% of his company for £3,000, but the deal didn&#x27;t finalise.

Sinclair, unable to find capital, joined United Trade Press (UTP) as technical editor of &quot;Instrument Practice&quot;. Sinclair appeared in the publication as an assistant editor in March 1962. Sinclair described making silicon planar transistors, their properties and applications and hoped they might be available by the end of 1962. Sinclair undertook a survey of semiconductor devices for &quot;Instrument Practice&quot;, which appeared in four sections between September 1962 and January 1963.
His last appearance as assistant editor was in April 1969. Through UTP, Sinclair had access to thousands of devices from 36 manufacturers. He contacted Semiconductors Ltd (who at that time sold semiconductors made by Plessey) and ordered rejects to repair. He produced a design for a miniature radio powered by a couple of hearing aid cells and made a deal with Semiconductors to buy its micro-alloy transistors at 6d (2½p) each in boxes of 10,000. He then carried out his own quality control tests, and marketed his renamed MAT 100 and 120 at 7s 9d (38¾p) and 101 and 121 at 8s 6d (42½p).

By the late 1960s and early 1970s, Sinclair Radionics was producing handheld electronic calculators, miniature televisions, and the digital Black Watch wristwatch. The latter product, introduced in 1975, was a significant failure for Sinclair: in addition to being unable to meet demand, the watch itself was found to be inaccurate and difficult to service, and its battery life was too short. Sinclair Radionics suffered its first financial loss in 1975–1976, and Sinclair sought potential investors to help recover the lost funds. He eventually worked with the National Enterprise Board (NEB), which bought a 43% interest in the company in 1976, but this injection of funds was found to be too late as by this point, other companies were starting to make similar products at lower costs on the market. The NEB streamlined Sinclair Radionics&#x27; product line, selling off the watch and television lines, and brought in Norman Hewitt as a managing director to assist Sinclair. While Sinclair made efforts to work with Hewitt and the NEB, his relationship with these worsened, as the NEB had little faith in Sinclair&#x27;s vision. By 1979, the NEB opted to break up Sinclair Radionics, holding its instruments division as Sinclair Electronics, and selling its television division to Binatone and its calculator division to ESL Bristol. Sinclair himself left the company at this point. Effectively NEB wrote off its estimated £7 million investment into Sinclair Radionics as a loss. Sinclair was given a golden handshake and an estimated £10,000 package with the dissolution of his company.

===Sinclair Research===

While Sinclair was dealing with the NEB and had seen problems developing, he had a former employee, Christopher Curry, establish a &quot;lifeboat&quot; company, called Science of Cambridge Ltd, in July 1977, called such as they were located near University of Cambridge, and planned for Curry to develop technology from ideas from the school. An early product from Science of Cambridge was a wrist calculator kit, which helped to keep the company financially afloat.

By the time that Sinclair had left Radionics and joined Curry at Science of Cambridge, inexpensive microprocessors had started appearing on the market. Sinclair came up with the idea of selling a microprocessor teaching kit, and in June 1978, Science of Cambridge launched the MK14 kit, based on the National SC/MP chip, in June 1978. As Sinclair began working on the MK14&#x27;s successor, Curry was in discussions with Hermann Hauser, and opted to leave Science of Cambridge to co-found Acorn Computers with Hauser in 1978. Acorn became a direct competitor to Sinclair&#x27;s products, with the Acorn System 75 as its answer to the MK14, effectively an MK14 chip with a keyboard.

To follow up on the MK14, Sinclair started looking to build a personal computer. At around that time (1979), premade systems such as the Commodore PET cost about £700, and Sinclair believed he could get the price of a system to under £100. Keeping the cost low was also essential for Sinclair to avoid his products from becoming outpriced by American or Japanese equivalents as had happened to several of the Sinclair Radionics products. In May 1979, Jim Westwood, a former Sinclair Radionics employee Sinclair hired for this new company, started the ZX80 project at Science of Cambridge; it was launched in February 1980 at £79.95 in kit form and £99.95 ready-built. The ZX80 was immediately successful, and besides sales in the UK, Sinclair also sought to introduce the computer into the United States. Science of Cambridge was subsequently renamed Sinclair Computers Ltd, and then again to Sinclair Research Ltd.

On hearing that the BBC was preparing to run a television series to teach viewers about computing and programming, both Sinclair and Curry pressured the BBC to choose computers from their respective companies to use as the primary tool. This pushed the development of the Sinclair ZX81 ahead as Sinclair&#x27;s standard for the BBC. The ZX81 was launched at £49.95 in kit form and £69.95 ready-built, by mail order. Ultimately, the BBC chose Acorn and standardized on a successor to the Acorn Atom—originally named Acorn Proton, but ultimately branded as the BBC Micro. Despite losing out to the BBC, Sinclair&#x27;s push had established the ZX80 and ZX81 as one of the most-sold brands of computers across the UK and the United States as well as establishing a deal with distribution in Japan with Mitsui. A number of user groups, magazines and third party accessories for both computers started to appear.

In February 1982, Timex obtained a licence to manufacture and market Sinclair&#x27;s computers in the United States under the name Timex Sinclair. In April, the ZX Spectrum was launched at £125 for the 16 kB RAM version and £175 for the 48 kB version. It was the first computer in the ZX line to support colour output. The ZX Spectrum remained more affordable than other computers on the market, including the BBC Micro, VIC-20, and Apple II, and during a time of recession and high unemployment in the UK, was positioned by Sinclair as a low-cost home computer for productivity applications. However, it also proved to be a popular gift for teenagers and young adults that year. This led to a number of these young people learning to program on the ZX Spectrum, using its newfound colour support, to make quirky video games inspired by British humour which they sold through word of mouth and mail order. So-called &quot;bedroom coders&quot; using the ZX Spectrum gave rise to the start of the UK&#x27;s video game industry. By 1984, over 3,500 games had been released for the ZX Spectrum.

The popularity of the ZX Spectrum spread to Western Europe. While Sinclair could not export into Eastern European countries still within the Soviet bloc at the time, numerous low-cost clones of the ZX Spectrum sprang up within these countries, further boosting the start of video game development by similar bedroom coders. The ZX Spectrum went on to become the UK&#x27;s most-sold computer, selling more than 5 million units before it was discontinued in 1992. Sinclair Research computers accounted for 45% of the British market in 1984, including those from British and American companies.

The continued success of the computer market continued to help boost Sinclair Research&#x27;s profit. In 1982, the company had a pre-tax profit of £9.2 million on a turnover of £27.6 million. Sinclair himself was estimated to a net value of over £100 million in 1983, two years after launching the first of the ZX computers. With the additional funds, Sinclair converted the Barker &amp; Wadsworth mineral water bottling factory into the company&#x27;s headquarters in 1982. In January 1983, American news magazine &quot;Time&quot; named the personal computer the 1982 &quot;Machine of the Year,&quot; and Sinclair was one of six individuals from the computing industry who were spotlighted in the accompanying feature.

===Sinclair Vehicles and market decline===
As Sinclair Research continued to be successful, Sinclair launched a new company, Sinclair Vehicles Ltd., in March 1983 to develop electric vehicles, using 10% of the capital generated by Sinclair Research and selling some of his own shares to fund the new venture. Sinclair had an interest in electric vehicles since the 1970s at Sinclair Radionics, and had been working with Tony Wood Rogers, a former Radionics employee, since 1979 to start developing prototypes of a new vehicle for the market. The company&#x27;s only product was the Sinclair C5 which launched in January 1985. The Sinclair C5 was considered a significant failure, having been developed without any market research. It was widely criticised and widely ridiculed for its high price, its toy-like appearance, lack of safety features and exposure to the elements, and the need for the user to pedal the vehicle up steeper hills. Whilst Sinclair had anticipated 100,000 C5&#x27;s would be sold in the first year, only 14,000 units were produced and 4,500 sold before the C5 line was terminated in August that same year.

Another noted misfire for Sinclair was the Sinclair Research TV80, a flatscreen portable mini television utilising a cathode-ray tube, which took several years to develop, and by the time the TV80 was ready for market in 1983, the Sony Watchman had been released in Japan in 1982. Furthermore, LCD television technology was already in advanced development to bypass the limitations of CRT. The TV80 was a commercial flop, only 15,000 units being produced. Despite these commercial failures, both the C5 and TV80 have since been considered products ahead of their time, with the C5 a precursor to the modern day electric car and the TV80 comparable to watching videos on smartphones.

Sinclair continued to direct Sinclair Research as they continued the ZX Spectrum line of computers through 1983 and 1984 as well as launching the Sinclair QL (short for Quantum Leap) brand in 1984 intended to compete with business lines of computers from IBM and Apple but at about half their cost. However, towards the end of 1984, the market for personal computers in the United Kingdom became cautious; Sinclair Research had entered into a small price war with Acorn Computers. The price drops meant that consumers saw these computers as more toys rather than productivity tools, and Sinclair Research missed its planned sales milestones for the 1984 holiday season. Into 1985, Acorn fell under investigation which propagated solvency concerns throughout the computer industry, including Sinclair Research. Robert Maxwell, the owner of &quot;The Daily Mirror&quot; and &quot;Pergamon Press&quot;, planned to help Sinclair Research through its £12 million acquisition via Pergamon&#x27;s Hollis Brothers division, announced in June 1985. However the deal was aborted in August 1985 as Sinclair found an offer with the Dixons Group of only £10 million.

The lack of funds for Sinclair Research and the failure of the C5 created financial difficulties for Sinclair. Sinclair Vehicles was placed into receivership by October 1985, and in April 1986, Sinclair sold the bulk of Sinclair Research to Amstrad for £5 million. Sinclair Research Ltd. was reduced to an R&amp;D business and holding company, with shareholdings in several spin-off companies, formed to exploit technologies developed by the company. These included Anamartic Ltd. (wafer-scale integration) and Cambridge Computer Ltd. (Z88 portable computer and satellite television receivers).

===Later years===

By 1990, Sinclair Research consisted of Sinclair and two other employees down from 130 employees at its peak in 1985, and its activities later concentrated on personal transport, including the Zike electric bicycle. By 2003, Sinclair Research was collaborating with Hong Kong-based firm Daka. A laboratory was set up for Daka near Croydon to develop products on a royalty basis. The two firms collaborated on a Sea Scooter and a wheelchair drive. In 1997, he invented the Sinclair XI, which was a radio the size of a 10p coin.

Sinclair had planned to introduce the Sinclair X-1 through Sinclair Research, another attempt at a personal electric vehicle following the Sinclair C5. The X-1 was first announced in 2010, and incorporated design aspects that the C5 had been panned for, including an open egg-like shell for the rider with a more ergonomic seat, a more powerful motor and larger battery storage, and an effectively lower cost accounting for inflation than the C5. However, the X-1 failed to reach the market.

==Recognition==
Sinclair received several honours for his contributions towards helping establish the personal computer industry in the United Kingdom. In 1983, he was awarded Honorary Degrees of Doctor of Science by the University of Bath, Heriot-Watt University and University of Warwick. He was knighted in the Queen&#x27;s 1983 Birthday Honours List. In 1984, he was honoured by Imperial College London by being made a fellow. In 1988, London&#x27;s National Portrait Gallery purchased a portrait of Sinclair by photographer Simon Lewis for its permanent collection.

==Personal life==
Sinclair was a poker player and appeared in the first three series of the &quot;Late Night Poker&quot; on Channel 4. He won the first series final of the &quot;Celebrity Poker Club&quot; spin-off. Sinclair was an atheist. He had an IQ of 159, and was a member of Mensa, and chairman from 1980 to 1997. He also participated in marathons including several New York City Marathons.

Despite his involvement in computing, Sinclair did not use the Internet, stating that he does not like to have &quot;technical or mechanical things around me&quot; as it distracts from the process of invention. In 2010, he said that he did not use computers, and preferred using the telephone rather than email. In 2014, he predicted, &quot;Once you start to make machines that are rivalling and surpassing humans with intelligence, it&#x27;s going to be very difficult for us to survive. It&#x27;s just an inevitability.&quot;

His first marriage with Ann ended in divorce after twenty years around 1985 due to the pressure from the ongoing financial issues he had with his companies. From his marriage with Ann, he had three children. In 2010 Sinclair married Angie Bowness, a former dancer at a Stringfellows nightclub and who represented England for Miss Europe 1995. This second marriage lasted for seven years before also ending in divorce.

On 16 September 2021, Sinclair died in London following an illness related to cancer that he had for over a decade. He was 81 years old. Sinclair was remembered on his death for his contributions towards computing and video games by numerous people, including Elon Musk, Satya Nadella, the Oliver Twins, Debbie Bestwick, Charles Cecil, and David Braben. A &quot;Times&quot; leader following his death described Sinclair as a tenacious inventor whose career was a triumph of perseverance similar to that of many of Britain&#x27;s greatest inventors, such as James Dyson and Alexander Graham Bell, &#x27;who are a reminder that failure is an essential prelude to success&#x27;.

==Publications==
Sinclair authored electronics constructor books for Bernard Babani publishers:
* Barnards 148 : Practical Transistor Receivers Book 1; 1959. (30 circuits)
* Barnards 149 : Practical Stereo Handbook; 1959.
* Barnards 151 : Transistor Receivers Book 2 - Transistor Superhet Receivers; 1960. (50 circuits)
* Barnards 163 : Transistor Circuits Manual 2; 1960. (13 circuits)
* Barnards 167 : Transistor Circuits Manual 3 - Eleven Tested Transistor Circuits using Prefabricated Circuit Units; 1960. (11 circuits)
* Barnards 168 : Transistor Circuits Manual 4; 1960. (11 circuits)
* Barnards 173 : Practical Transistor Audio Amplifiers for the Home Constructor Book 1; 1961. (32 circuits)
* Barnards 174 : Transistor Subminiature Receivers Handbook for the Home Constructor; 1961.
* Barnards 175 : Transistorized Test Equipment and Servicing Manual; 1961.
* Barnards 176 : Transistor Audio Amplifier Manual; 1962. (32 circuits)
* Barnards 177 : Modern Transistor Circuits for Beginners; 1962. (35 circuits)
* Barnards 179 : Transistor Circuits Manual 5; 1963. (14 circuits)
* Barnards 181 : 22 Tested Circuits Using Micro Alloy Transistors; 1963. (22 circuits)

==References==
==References==

*Adamson, Ian; Kennedy, Richard (1986). &quot;Sinclair and the &quot;Sunrise&quot; Technology&quot;. London: Penguin Books. 224 pp. .


==External links==

*Obituary by Marcus Williamson in &quot;The Independent&quot;
*Sinclair Research website
*&quot;30 Dumb Inventions: Mini Television, 1966&quot; (), &quot;Life&quot; magazine, 1966
*Sir Clive Sinclair at Planet Sinclair website
*&quot;The Rising Star of Cambridge&quot; (column), David Tebbutt, &quot;MicroScope&quot;, 1983
*&quot;Sinclair bows out&quot;, John Gilbert, &quot;Sinclair User&quot;, Issue 51, 1986
*&quot;&#x27;Move over Segway, I&#x27;m planning the C6&#x27;&quot;, Jonathan Duffy, BBC News, 2003
*British Mensa biography of Clive Sinclair
*&quot;Interview – Sir Clive Sinclair: &#x27;I don&#x27;t use a computer at all&#x27;&quot;, Simon Garfield, &quot;The Observer&quot;, 2010
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23889" start="0" end="25" title="Clive Sinclair" label="Sir Clive Marles Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="141" end="159" title="computing industry" label="computing industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q581105" start="220" end="240" title="consumer electronics" label="consumer electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522044" start="374" end="396" title="Sinclair Radionics Ltd" label="Sinclair Radionics Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="461" end="478" title="pocket calculator" label="pocket calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522016" start="484" end="502" title="Sinclair Executive" label="Sinclair Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q473708" start="556" end="569" title="home computer" label="home computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4409" start="584" end="605" title="Sinclair Research Ltd" label="Sinclair Research Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q602406" start="630" end="634" title="ZX80" label="ZX80"/>
<link wikidata="Q263250" start="730" end="734" title="ZX81" label="ZX81"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="736" end="747" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q602253" start="756" end="767" title="Sinclair QL" label="Sinclair QL"/>
<link wikidata="Q13515646" start="936" end="963" title="Video games in the United Kingdom" label="British video game industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288804" start="1046" end="1057" title="Black Watch (wristwatch)" label="Black Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484879" start="1074" end="1091" title="Sinclair Vehicles" label="Sinclair Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429206" start="1092" end="1094" title="Sinclair C5" label="C5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076882" start="1095" end="1119" title="battery electric vehicle" label="battery electric vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739547" start="1147" end="1151" title="TV80" label="TV80"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="1163" end="1166" title="Cathode-ray tube" label="CRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412220" start="1382" end="1388" title="A-bike" label="A-bike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137570" start="1392" end="1407" title="folding bicycle" label="folding bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522065" start="1488" end="1500" title="Sinclair X-1" label="Sinclair X-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="1607" end="1622" title="Knight Bachelor" label="Knight Bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949857" start="1630" end="1651" title="1983 Birthday Honours" label="1983 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220673" start="1858" end="1865" title="Vickers" label="Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136352" start="1905" end="1920" title="naval architect" label="naval architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136251" start="1939" end="1947" title="Paravane (weapon)" label="paravane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821261" start="1957" end="1970" title="mine sweeping" label="mine sweeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2246" end="2258" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q965321" start="2350" end="2368" title="Ministry of Supply" label="Ministry of Supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q83726" start="2462" end="2468" title="Ealing" label="Ealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="2470" end="2479" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="2546" end="2551" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q531311" start="2584" end="2594" title="Teignmouth" label="Teignmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q783210" start="2736" end="2745" title="Bracknell" label="Bracknell"/>
<link wikidata="Q213465" start="2843" end="2870" title="Boxgrove Preparatory School" label="Boxgrove Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300559" start="3263" end="3277" title="Reading School" label="Reading School"/>
<link wikidata="Q646545" start="3297" end="3305" title="General Certificate of Education" label="O-levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560910" start="3309" end="3324" title="Highgate School" label="Highgate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q379609" start="3352" end="3360" title="A-levels" label="A-levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432059" start="3365" end="3373" title="Scholarship level" label="S-levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593159" start="3419" end="3455" title="St. George&amp;#x27;s College, Weybridge" label="St. George&amp;#x27;s College, Weybridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952198" start="3777" end="3784" title="Mullard" label="Mullard"/>
<link wikidata="Q425779" start="4020" end="4030" title="mail order" label="mail order"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981711" start="4195" end="4203" title="Advanced Level (UK)" label="A-levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q11653" start="4257" end="4266" title="electronic component" label="component"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892908" start="5166" end="5180" title="Bernard Babani" label="Bernard Babani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5194" end="5211" title="#Publications" label="constructor books"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="5487" end="5502" title="Venture capital" label="startup capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="5563" end="5566" title="Printed circuit board" label="PCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q506260" start="5642" end="5665" title="Transistor radio" label="transistor pocket radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520588" start="6054" end="6080" title="Planar process" label="silicon planar transistors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="6201" end="6214" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6485" end="6503" title="Semiconductors Ltd" label="Semiconductors Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204713" start="6550" end="6557" title="Plessey" label="Plessey"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="6656" end="6673" title="Battery (electricity)" label="hearing aid cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536502" start="6721" end="6743" title="micro-alloy transistor" label="micro-alloy transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288804" start="7064" end="7075" title="Black Watch (wristwatch)" label="Black Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967090" start="7487" end="7512" title="National Enterprise Board" label="National Enterprise Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035108" start="8209" end="8217" title="Binatone" label="Binatone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15737145" start="8429" end="8445" title="golden handshake" label="golden handshake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112176" start="8642" end="8659" title="Christopher Curry (businessman)" label="Christopher Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="8788" end="8811" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="9109" end="9123" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523796" start="9287" end="9291" title="MK14" label="MK14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457100" start="9319" end="9324" title="National Semiconductor SC/MP" label="SC/MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803761" start="9431" end="9445" title="Hermann Hauser" label="Hermann Hauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q342149" start="9499" end="9514" title="Acorn Computers" label="Acorn Computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q946661" start="9830" end="9843" title="Commodore PET" label="Commodore PET"/>
<link wikidata="Q13639402" start="10144" end="10156" title="Jim Westwood" label="Jim Westwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q602406" start="10244" end="10248" title="ZX80" label="ZX80"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="10630" end="10633" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q263250" start="10882" end="10895" title="Sinclair ZX81" label="Sinclair ZX81"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043357" start="11097" end="11107" title="Acorn Atom" label="Acorn Atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q749976" start="11169" end="11178" title="BBC Micro" label="BBC Micro"/>
<link wikidata="Q899122" start="11409" end="11415" title="Mitsui" label="Mitsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q10959578" start="11537" end="11542" title="Timex Group" label="Timex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976577" start="11650" end="11664" title="Timex Sinclair" label="Timex Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="11680" end="11691" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q918232" start="11940" end="11946" title="VIC-20" label="VIC-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="11952" end="11960" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q918570" start="12356" end="12370" title="British humour" label="British humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q13515646" start="12514" end="12543" title="Video games in the United Kingdom" label="UK&amp;#x27;s video game industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="12752" end="12763" title="Soviet bloc" label="Soviet bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288281" start="12795" end="12801" title="video game clone" label="clones"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="13725" end="13729" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q207826" start="13779" end="13798" title="Time Person of the Year" label="Machine of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429206" start="14507" end="14518" title="Sinclair C5" label="Sinclair C5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739547" start="15118" end="15122" title="TV80" label="TV80"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="15174" end="15190" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427577" start="15288" end="15301" title="Sony Watchman" label="Sony Watchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="15351" end="15354" title="LCD" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q602253" start="15887" end="15898" title="Sinclair QL" label="Sinclair QL"/>
<link wikidata="Q689971" start="15910" end="15922" title="Paradigm shift" label="Quantum Leap"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="15996" end="15999" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q333468" start="16551" end="16565" title="Robert Maxwell" label="Robert Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="16586" end="16602" title="The Daily Mirror" label="The Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375355" start="16619" end="16633" title="Pergamon Press" label="Pergamon Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864" start="16861" end="16873" title="Dixons Retail" label="Dixons Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594302" start="17041" end="17053" title="receivership" label="receivership"/>
<link wikidata="Q478825" start="17137" end="17144" title="Amstrad" label="Amstrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406100" start="17378" end="17401" title="wafer-scale integration" label="wafer-scale integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q219609" start="17432" end="17435" title="Cambridge Z88" label="Z88"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522066" start="17704" end="17708" title="Sinclair Zike" label="Zike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522065" start="18077" end="18089" title="Sinclair X-1" label="Sinclair X-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248352" start="18728" end="18745" title="Doctor of Science" label="Doctor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422458" start="18753" end="18771" title="University of Bath" label="University of Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610024" start="18773" end="18795" title="Heriot-Watt University" label="Heriot-Watt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q865528" start="18800" end="18821" title="University of Warwick" label="University of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="18830" end="18838" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949857" start="18846" end="18885" title="1983 Birthday Honours" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s 1983 Birthday Honours List"/>
<link wikidata="Q189022" start="18915" end="18938" title="Imperial College London" label="Imperial College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="18955" end="18961" title="fellow" label="fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="18986" end="19011" title="National Portrait Gallery, London" label="National Portrait Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495269" start="19202" end="19218" title="Late Night Poker" label="Late Night Poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="19228" end="19237" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057753" start="19282" end="19302" title="Celebrity Poker Club" label="Celebrity Poker Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q170277" start="19354" end="19356" title="IQ" label="IQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q184194" start="19385" end="19390" title="Mensa International" label="Mensa"/>
<link wikidata="Q752138" start="19476" end="19498" title="New York City Marathon" label="New York City Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177153" start="20300" end="20313" title="Peter Stringfellow" label="Stringfellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q38258337" start="20356" end="20372" title="Miss Europe 1995" label="Miss Europe 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q317521" start="20710" end="20719" title="Elon Musk" label="Elon Musk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426870" start="20721" end="20734" title="Satya Nadella" label="Satya Nadella"/>
<link wikidata="Q156603" start="20740" end="20752" title="Oliver Twins" label="Oliver Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q24851863" start="20754" end="20769" title="Debbie Bestwick" label="Debbie Bestwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q983594" start="20771" end="20784" title="Charles Cecil" label="Charles Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173809" start="20790" end="20802" title="David Braben" label="David Braben"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="20812" end="20817" title="The Times" label="Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q871232" start="20824" end="20830" title="Editorial" label="leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346101" start="21007" end="21018" title="James Dyson" label="James Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="21023" end="21044" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892908" start="21196" end="21210" title="Bernard Babani" label="Bernard Babani"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196341" start="22499" end="22516" title="Marcus Williamson" label="Marcus Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="22526" end="22541" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q752796" start="22861" end="22874" title="Sinclair User" label="Sinclair User"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56295" wikidata="Q848609" url="?curid=56295" title="Dagobah">
<text>Dagobah is a fictional planet and eponymous star system appearing in the &quot;Star Wars&quot; films &quot;The Empire Strikes Back&quot;, &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot;, and &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot;, and other media. It is depicted as a world of murky swamps, steaming bayous, and jungles, resembling Earth during the Carboniferous period. Dagobah is 14,410 kilometers in diameter with an orbital period of 341 days. Dagobah&#x27;s climate and atmosphere consists of two seasons: a dry season, where the uplands become too hot for most life forms to survive; and a wet season, consisting of violent lightning storms, dense fog, and long periods of torrential rainfall. The Tash were a sentient species native to Dagobah.

The Dagobah System lies within the Dagobah subsector of the Sluis sector, located in the Outer Rim Territories galactic quadrant region, 50,250 light-years from Coruscant. The sun was called Dagobah Prime. It is noted as being one of the purest places in the galaxy, incredibly strong in the living force, and being chosen by Jedi Yoda as the planet to go into exile on to mask his presence and avoid discovery by the Galactic Empire.

==Depiction==
The similarly mono-thematic &quot;swampy, fog-shrouded planet of Mimban&quot; appearing in the novel &quot;Splinter of the Mind&#x27;s Eye&quot;, published between the films &quot;Star Wars: A New Hope and&quot; The Empire Strikes Back, &quot;might have inspired the production design for Dagobah&quot;.

===Film===
Dagobah was originally featured in the 1980 film &quot;The Empire Strikes Back&quot;. In its first appearance, the main protagonist of the film, Luke Skywalker, is attempting to land his X-wing starfighter on the planet and is met with a dense fog causing him to crash land in a small bayou. Shortly after his landing, the Jedi Master Yoda is introduced during his time in exile. Yoda reluctantly agrees to train Skywalker and during his training many aspects of the planet&#x27;s environment are utilized. Moss-covered rocks are used for training in telekinesis, the undergrowth makes treks through the jungles more challenging, and vines hanging from tall trees are used as means to get across small bodies of water and other obstacles. Skywalker is shown to sense the strength of the Force in a particular cave on the planet which Yoda tells him to go into. Inside the cave, Skywalker is met with a mental challenge the dark side of the Force developed for him.

The planet is also seen briefly in &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot; to depict Yoda&#x27;s death and is featured in a deleted scene from &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot; showing Yoda&#x27;s arrival on the planet. George Lucas reportedly said it was removed so the film would not have &quot;too many endings.&quot; The scene was released under the title &quot;Exile to Dagobah&quot; on the film&#x27;s DVD.

===Other media===
&quot;The Clone Wars&quot; featured Dagobah in a sixth-season episode, in which Yoda traveled to the planet as part of his own training to gain immortality through the Force.

In the &quot;Star Wars&quot; expanded universe, Yoda confronted a Bpfasshi Dark Jedi on Dagobah, some years before the events in &quot;The Empire Strikes Back&quot;, and the cave where the Dark Jedi died became strong in the dark side of the Force. &quot;Star Wars Tales&quot; later retconned this event to take place earlier, with another Jedi of Yoda&#x27;s species named Minch replacing Yoda. Dagobah was also visited by the main characters of the &quot;Galaxy of Fear&quot; series, where it was home for a time to a tribe of cannibals. During the events of &quot;Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy&quot;, a team of Jedi Knights from the New Jedi Order visit Dagobah, to find the cave drained of its former menace.

Dagobah appears as a hub world in &quot;Lego Star Wars: The Skywalker Saga&quot;. 

After the events of &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot;, the New Republic founded a military base on one of the greatest mountains of the planet, named &#x27;Mount Yoda&#x27; after the Jedi Master.

==Description==
Largely looked over by the Galactic Republic, Dagobah is the only habitable planet in the system of the same name within the Sluis sector. A cloudy and swampy world of dense foliage, countless living things of all sizes, including reptiles, amphibians, and swarming insects, fill its environs with a hum of constant noise. All of its creatures appear completely unintelligent. Larger life-forms occupy cave-like hollows formed by petrified forests. Carnivorous &quot;gnarltrees&quot; reproduce as spiderlike mobile creatures which eventually metamorphose into their rooted form. The planet is also noted for being strong with the Force.

==Analysis==
Several scholars have interpreted Dagobah as the station of initiation when applying Joseph Campbell&#x27;s schema of the hero&#x27;s journey, going back to ancient myths, to the character of Luke Skywalker: the hero retreats &quot;from society to a world of more primal symbols where he must conquer his own darkness and return to the social world with a new redemptive knowledge.&quot; Dagobah is described as &quot;like something out of a dream&quot; and corresponds to &quot;a spiritual plane&quot;. This primordial and isolated place of power, which seems hostile to civilization - the technological R2-D2 &quot;is spat out unceremoniously&quot; - is &quot;a sanctuary of nature&quot; and &quot;creates a space, which like no other, influences the conception and development of the hero&quot;. Leah Deyneka linked the teeming nature of Dagobah with the &quot;enchanted forest or sacred grove&quot; which &quot;figures frequently in fairy tales and myths; trees are believed to hold special powers and forests symbolize mastery and transformation.&quot; Miles Booy saw Dagobah as a &quot;richly constructed [...] semiotic environment&quot; which &quot;does not point towards prior films but to widely circulated discourses concerning human consciousness&quot;. Its jungle and &quot;dark swamp infested by reptiles&quot; may be considered an image of the subconscious, with Yoda fulfilling the role of the analyst who &quot;raises to the surface&quot; what has been submerged.

Dan Catalano commented that Dagobah as &quot;an eerie location filled with strange wildlife and shrouded in as much mystery as fog&quot;, removed from the technology-filled galaxy, is a fitting device to underline Yoda&#x27;s status as a &quot;Wise Man archetype&quot; in the tradition of Merlin, who likewise can be found in places of &quot;wild nature&quot; in Arthurian myths.

Booy commented that within &quot;Star Wars&quot; &quot;[n]o other environment attempts such imagery as Dagobah is constructed of&quot; and that &quot;Dagobah would also come to be the basis for [...] the notion that the film constitutes a form of mythology.&quot;

==See also==
* List of &quot;Star Wars&quot; planets and moons
* Carboniferous

==References==
===Sources===

==External links==
* Dagobah in the &quot;Star Wars&quot; Databank</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q848609" start="0" end="7" title="Dagobah" label="Dagobah"/>
<link wikidata="Q595871" start="44" end="55" title="star system" label="star system"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="79" end="88" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q181795" start="107" end="130" title="The Empire Strikes Back" label="The Empire Strikes Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q181803" start="144" end="162" title="Return of the Jedi" label="Return of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="180" end="199" title="Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith" label="Revenge of the Sith"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="259" end="265" title="swamps" label="swamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q812585" start="276" end="282" title="bayous" label="bayous"/>
<link wikidata="Q191086" start="288" end="294" title="jungle" label="jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="325" end="338" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q206717" start="741" end="747" title="planetary system" label="System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491658" start="840" end="857" title="galactic quadrant" label="galactic quadrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q719329" start="890" end="899" title="Coruscant" label="Coruscant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51724" start="1055" end="1059" title="Jedi" label="Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q51730" start="1060" end="1064" title="Yoda" label="Yoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q52347" start="1147" end="1162" title="Galactic Empire (Star Wars)" label="Galactic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262725" start="1286" end="1317" title="Splinter of the Mind&amp;#x27;s Eye" label="Splinter of the Mind&amp;#x27;s Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="1359" end="1380" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars: A New Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q181795" start="1391" end="1414" title="The Empire Strikes Back" label="The Empire Strikes Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q51746" start="1640" end="1654" title="Luke Skywalker" label="Luke Skywalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q842127" start="1682" end="1688" title="X-wing" label="X-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q812585" start="1780" end="1785" title="bayou" label="bayou"/>
<link wikidata="Q51724" start="1818" end="1829" title="Jedi Master" label="Jedi Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q186446" start="2046" end="2057" title="telekinesis" label="telekinesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="2670" end="2682" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2888" end="2902" title="Star Wars: The Clone Wars (2008 TV series)" label="The Clone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551295" start="3065" end="3104" title="Star Wars expanded to other media" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; expanded universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q51724" start="3133" end="3142" title="Dark Jedi" label="Dark Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q979484" start="3313" end="3328" title="Star Wars Tales" label="Star Wars Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326686" start="3406" end="3425" title="Yoda&amp;#x27;s species" label="Yoda&amp;#x27;s species"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518149" start="3515" end="3529" title="Galaxy of Fear" label="Galaxy of Fear"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3625" end="3650" title="Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy" label="Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51724" start="3668" end="3680" title="Jedi" label="Jedi Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743959" start="3690" end="3704" title="New Jedi Order" label="New Jedi Order"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3808" end="3842" title="Lego Star Wars: The Skywalker Saga" label="Lego Star Wars: The Skywalker Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q733195" start="3908" end="3920" title="New Republic (Star Wars)" label="New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q733195" start="4089" end="4106" title="Galactic Republic" label="Galactic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="4293" end="4300" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="4303" end="4312" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192105" start="4424" end="4437" title="Unconscious mind" label="unintelligent"/>
<link wikidata="Q33753" start="4604" end="4616" title="metamorphosis" label="metamorphose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093766" start="4688" end="4697" title="the Force" label="the Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q295516" start="4798" end="4813" title="Joseph Campbell" label="Joseph Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542815" start="4835" end="4854" title="hero&amp;#x27;s journey" label="hero&amp;#x27;s journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375389" start="5577" end="5593" title="enchanted forest" label="enchanted forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q811600" start="5597" end="5609" title="sacred grove" label="sacred grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="5830" end="5838" title="semiotic" label="semiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349934" start="6438" end="6456" title="Wise old man" label="Wise Man archetype"/>
<link wikidata="Q188044" start="6483" end="6489" title="Merlin" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q507738" start="6557" end="6572" title="Matter of Britain" label="Arthurian myths"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="6855" end="6902" title="List of Star Wars planets and moons" label="List of &amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; planets and moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="6905" end="6918" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56298" wikidata="Q2072541" url="?curid=56298" title="Royal Swinkels">
<text>Royal Swinkels (formerly &quot;Swinkels Family Brewers&quot; and &quot;Bavaria Brewery&quot;) is a family business from North Brabant in the Netherlands, that is active in the beer, soft drink and malt sector. The company is fully owned by the Swinkels family for seven generations. The head office is located in Lieshout.

Swinkels Family Brewers is the second largest brewery company in the Netherlands after Heineken and one of the largest producers of malt in Europe. The business has a turnover of more than 1128 million euros per year. The company is commercially active in more than 150 countries. Two-thirds of the turnover is achieved in Europe. The focus is in Western Europe with more than half of the turnover. Outside of the European market, the largest contribution comes from the Middle East/Africa region, where a total of twenty percent of turnover is achieved.

==Products==


Royal Swinkels produces and markets beer, malt and soft drinks.

===Beer===
The business operates eight brewery locations: three in the Netherlands, three in Belgium, one in Ethiopia and one in Cuba. These breweries produced nearly 7 million hectolitres of beer in 2023. The group sells beer under several brand names, including Bavaria, Swinckels&#x27;, La Trappe and Rodenbach.

About 12 percent of the total beer production consists of alcohol-free and low-alcoholic beer (less than 3.5%).

===Malt===
Swinkels Family Brewers owns two malt houses, one in Lieshout and one in Eemshaven. The annual capacity totals 400,000 tons of malt, a third of which is used by Swinkels Family Brewers itself. One third of the production is sold to third parties in Europe and one third goes to countries outside Europe, mainly to Latin America, South America and Japan. Sales of malt contribute to around fifteen percent of Swinkels Family Brewers sales.

===Soft drinks===
The company produces approximately 626,000 hectoliters of soft drinks per annum, of which almost 95 percent as private label products. Swinkels Family Brewers itself uses the brand names 3ES and B52. Negus, a non-alcoholic, coffee-flavoured malt drink is brewed in Ethiopia.

==History==
===Local brewery===
The history of Swinkels Family Brewers can be traced back to 1680. In that year Dirk Vereijken owned a brewery at the Kerkdijk (Church Dike Road) in Lieshout, proof of which can be found in an account of the municipal tax records of that year. This brewery was transferred from father to daughter for three consecutive generations. The names of the new brewing families were Van Moorsel and Moorrees. In 1764 Brigitta Moorrees married Ambrosius Swinkels. After her mother&#x27;s death in 1773, Brigitta and her husband became the full owners of the brewery. Since then, the brewery has been owned by the Swinkels family.

===Regional brewery===
For centuries the brewery only produced beer for the local market. It was not until the fourth generation of Swinkels took charge of the brewery that production was expanded. Jan Swinkels, born in 1851, started distribution to the city of Helmond at from Lieshout in 1890. Sales rose from 988 hectolitres of beer in 1890 to 1,900 hectolitres in 1900. After the First World War distribution was expanded to other towns and villages in North Brabant. By 1923 output had increased to 3,325 hectolitres of beer. By that time the original brewery buildings had become too small so a larger brewery was built in Lieshout. On that occasion three brothers of the fifth generation of Swinkels took over leadership, and adopted the brand name &quot;Bavaria&quot;. This name indicated that the new plant was a bottom fermentation brewery, producing pale lager (Bavarian) beer.

===Nationwide distribution===
Distribution was broadened to include Amsterdam, Rotterdam, The Hague and Utrecht, the four largest cities of the Netherlands. In 1933 the brewery added its own bottling plant, which produced 2,000 bottles an hour. By 1940 a malt house was built. The output of the brewery at the beginning of the Second World War was approximately 40,000 hectolitres per annum, with an almost nationwide coverage in distribution.

In 1955 the company started manufacturing soft drinks under the brand name 3-ES. This name refers to the three Swinkels brothers of the fifth generation. In the postwar years beer consumption in the Netherlands had decreased to a very low level. It took the firm until 1959 to recover in terms of sales volume. In the sixties the company doubled its production capacity.

===World player===
From 1973 onwards the company took an interest in the exporting business, first of all in Southern Europe. In the late seventies the firm introduced alcohol-free beer, that was exported to Islamic countries. By 1981 the total volume reached 1,000,000 hectolitres of beer. From the nineties onwards the business expanded into exclusive and seasonal beers. Moreover, the company started to adapt its drinks to individual markets. Consequently, export grew to cover 130 countries.

In 1999, the Trappist Koningshoeven Abbey, located in Berkel-Enschot, entered into an agreement with the Swinkels family to take over the daily operations of the monks&#x27; brewery within the abbey. The brewery, which operates as &quot;De Koningshoeven NV&quot;, is a subsidiary of Swinkels Family Brewers, whilst the buildings and equipment remain in the ownership of the abbey. The monks remain the ultimate authority on the brewing process while Swinkels Family Brewers manages the commercial business. The beer is sold under the brandname La Trappe.

On 10 May 2016 it was announced that the company N.V. has taken a majority stake in the Belgian brewery Palm. Initially the firm acquired 60% of the shares and this was expanded to 100% in 2021.
In November 2016 the company acquired Latis Imports, establishing a dedicated US presence in one of its &quot;five key regions&quot;.

In June 2018 it was decided to change the name of &quot;Bavaria&quot; to &quot;Swinkels Family Brewers&quot;. In March 2019, Wim van de Donk, Commissioner of the King of the province of Brabant, announced that Swinkels Family Brewers would from now on have the Royal predicate, officially naming the company &#x27;Royal Swinkels Family Brewers&#x27;. It has been gained for the 300th anniversary of the company and their national significance. As from 2024 the name was shortened to Royal Swinkels.

==Price fixing conviction==
On 18 April 2007 the European Commission imposed punitive fines on three major European breweries for operating a price fixing cartel in the Netherlands. The three were Heineken (€219.3m), Grolsch (€31.65m) and Swinkels Family Brewers (€22.85m). A fourth participant in the cartel, InBev (formerly Interbrew), did not receive a penalty because it provided &quot;decisive information&quot; about the cartel&#x27;s operations between 1996 and 1999, as well as about others in the European Union. These four brewers had control of 95% of the Dutch market, with Heineken claiming a half and the three others 15% each.

EU Competition Commissioner Neelie Kroes said she was &quot;very disappointed&quot; that the collusion took place at the very highest (boardroom) level. She stated, &quot;This is simply unacceptable: that major beer suppliers colluded to up prices and to carve up markets among themselves. She added, &quot;Heineken, Grolsch, Bavaria and InBev tried to cover their tracks by using code names and abbreviations for secret meetings to carve up the market for beer sold to supermarkets, hotels, restaurants and cafes. The price fixing extended to cheaper own-brand labels and rebates for bars.

==World Cup Ambush Marketing campaigns==
At the 2006 FIFA World Cup, Swinkels Family Brewers got up to 1,000 fans of the Netherlands national football team to don orange overalls, called Leeuwenhosen, with the brewery&#x27;s logo on them. The Leeuwenhosen were given away with the purchase of Swinkels Family Brewers products prior to the World Cup. However the action was deemed to be an act of ambush marketing by FIFA as Swinkels Family Brewers, which was not a corporate sponsor, had not paid any money to be an official event partner. With pre-warning from FIFA officials, staff at the game versus Ivory Coast asked fans to remove the overalls upon entrance to the game and provided orange replacement shorts without any logo.

During the 2010 FIFA World Cup, 36 women clad in orange miniskirts went to the Netherlands vs Denmark match in Johannesburg, using tickets supplied at least in part by British ITV pundit and ex-footballer Robbie Earle. Tournament officials evicted the group en masse from the stadium upon which they were arrested and held by the Police. They were released upon talks between the management of Swinkels Family Brewers and FIFA.

==Publication==
* Antoon Swinkels &amp; Peter Zwaal: &quot;Bavaria: a biography of the brewery in Lieshout and the family that owns it&quot; (Lieshout: Bavaria, 2008). 

==References==
==External links==
*Royal Swinkels</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2072541" start="0" end="14" title="Royal Swinkels" label="Royal Swinkels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395324" start="99" end="114" title="family business" label="family business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101" start="120" end="133" title="North Brabant" label="North Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="141" end="152" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="176" end="180" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="182" end="192" title="soft drink" label="soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q152024" start="197" end="201" title="malt" label="malt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003031" start="313" end="321" title="Lieshout" label="Lieshout"/>
<link wikidata="Q131734" start="370" end="377" title="brewery" label="brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q180855" start="411" end="419" title="Heineken N.V." label="Heineken"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="464" end="470" title="Europe (continent)" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="491" end="499" title="Revenue" label="turnover"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="931" end="935" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152024" start="937" end="941" title="malt" label="malt"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="946" end="956" title="soft drink" label="soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q130276069" start="1250" end="1259" title="La Trappe (beer)" label="La Trappe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369075" start="1264" end="1273" title="Rodenbach (beer)" label="Rodenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295378" start="1473" end="1482" title="Eemshaven" label="Eemshaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="1714" end="1727" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="1729" end="1742" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1747" end="1752" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q722080" start="1969" end="1982" title="private label" label="private label"/>
<link wikidata="Q9844" start="3050" end="3057" title="Helmond" label="Helmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709638" start="3649" end="3659" title="pale lager" label="pale lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="3661" end="3668" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="3746" end="3755" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="3757" end="3766" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="3768" end="3777" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q803" start="3782" end="3789" title="Utrecht" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q943876" start="3933" end="3943" title="malt house" label="malt house"/>
<link wikidata="Q130276069" start="5015" end="5034" title="De Koningshoeven Brewery" label="Koningshoeven Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567552" start="5653" end="5657" title="Palm Breweries" label="Palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="6428" end="6447" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q179216" start="6521" end="6540" title="cartel" label="price fixing cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="6548" end="6559" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q854383" start="6576" end="6584" title="Heineken" label="Heineken"/>
<link wikidata="Q153075" start="6596" end="6603" title="Grolsch" label="Grolsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416717" start="6689" end="6694" title="InBev" label="InBev"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272191" start="6705" end="6714" title="Interbrew" label="Interbrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q854383" start="6965" end="6973" title="Heineken" label="Heineken"/>
<link wikidata="Q234485" start="7050" end="7062" title="Neelie Kroes" label="Neelie Kroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200230" start="7541" end="7553" title="price fixing" label="price fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q722080" start="7574" end="7583" title="Store brand" label="own-brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995577" start="7595" end="7602" title="Rebate (marketing)" label="rebates"/>
<link wikidata="Q187456" start="7607" end="7611" title="Bar (establishment)" label="bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="7662" end="7681" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="7735" end="7769" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516545" start="7801" end="7813" title="Leeuwenhosen" label="Leeuwenhosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q460153" start="8010" end="8026" title="ambush marketing" label="ambush marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="8030" end="8034" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="8217" end="8228" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q176883" start="8358" end="8377" title="2010 FIFA World Cup" label="2010 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8426" end="8454" title="2010 FIFA World Cup Group E#Matches" label="Netherlands vs Denmark match"/>
<link wikidata="Q163521" start="8458" end="8470" title="Soccer City" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="8515" end="8522" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="8523" end="8526" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q975790" start="8552" end="8564" title="Robbie Earle" label="Robbie Earle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56300" wikidata="Q6964157" url="?curid=56300" title="Nanotech (anthology)">
<text>Nanotech is a 1998 anthology of science fiction short stories revolving around nanotechnology and its effects. It is edited by American writers Jack Dann and Gardner Dozois.

==Contents==
*&quot;Blood Music&quot; by Greg Bear
*&quot;Margin of Error&quot; by Nancy Kress
*&quot;Axiomatic&quot; by Greg Egan
*&quot;Remember&#x27;d Kisses&quot; by Michael F. Flynn
*&quot;Recording Angel&quot; by Ian McDonald
*&quot;Sunflowers&quot; by Kathleen Ann Goonan
*&quot;The Logic Pool&quot; Stephen Baxter
*&quot;Any Major Dude&quot; Paul Di Filippo
*&quot;We Were Out of Our Minds with Joy&quot; by David Marusek
*&quot;Willy in the Nano-lab&quot; by Geoffrey A. Landis 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1474997" start="14" end="18" title="1998 in literature" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="19" end="28" title="anthology" label="anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="32" end="47" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="48" end="61" title="short story" label="short stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="79" end="93" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112002" start="144" end="153" title="Jack Dann" label="Jack Dann"/>
<link wikidata="Q720562" start="158" end="172" title="Gardner Dozois" label="Gardner Dozois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059371" start="195" end="206" title="Blood Music (novel)" label="Blood Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q317491" start="216" end="225" title="Greg Bear" label="Greg Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q238438" start="258" end="269" title="Nancy Kress" label="Nancy Kress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874783" start="277" end="286" title="Axiomatic (short story)" label="Axiomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q316785" start="296" end="305" title="Greg Egan" label="Greg Egan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577687" start="345" end="361" title="Michael F. Flynn" label="Michael F. Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q455228" start="394" end="406" title="Ian McDonald (author)" label="Ian McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194058" start="434" end="453" title="Kathleen Ann Goonan" label="Kathleen Ann Goonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q314416" start="482" end="496" title="Stephen Baxter (author)" label="Stephen Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079223" start="525" end="540" title="Paul Di Filippo" label="Paul Di Filippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237187" start="591" end="604" title="David Marusek" label="David Marusek"/>
<link wikidata="Q918443" start="643" end="661" title="Geoffrey A. Landis" label="Geoffrey A. Landis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56303" wikidata="Q4532732" url="?curid=56303" title="Eskimo bowline">
<text>The Eskimo bowline, Cossack knot (), reverse bowline, or &#x27;anti-bowline&#x27; is in a class of knots known as &#x27;eye knots&#x27; or &#x27;loop knots&#x27;. The eye is formed in the end of the rope to permit attachments/connections. It is quite common in Russia and is often used instead of the bowline (ABoK #1010). In the simple bowline, the collar component forms around the &#x27;standing part&#x27;. In contrast, the collar component of an Eskimo bowline forms around the outgoing eye-leg.

On the first of arctic explorer John Ross&#x27; expeditions (1818) the Inuit (Eskimos) presented him a sled that contained several of these knots, showing that it is a genuine Inuit knot.
The knot is not mentioned in &quot;The Ashley Book of Knots&quot; but in its Russian equivalent, the book &quot;Морские узлы&quot;

(Marine Knots) by Lev Skryagin (1930–2000). The knot is referred to in the Russian book as the Cossack knot, and its slipped version is known as the Kalmyk loop.

The Eskimo bowline is about as strong as and even more secure than the bowline, especially in synthetic lines.

Under cross load (ring loading, transverse loading profile), i.e. when the loop is pulled apart, the shown common Eskimo loop effectively mimics an ends-opposite (and inferior) left-hand sheet bend and thus can slip like the bowline; the less common Eskimo loop variant with the A–C loop (see bowline family diagram) would give a proper same-side sheet bend, thus being much stronger under cross load. Similarly, when the eye of a simple Bowline is subject to a transverse loading profile, it mimics the inferior version of the Lapp bend, and so can slip and untie; the wrongly demeaned left-handed or cowboy bowline becomes the proper Lapp bend, and should hold..

All of the maneuvers to tie this knot are generally in the opposite (or &#x27;anti&#x27; direction) relative to the bowline.
 After forming the &#x27;nipping loop&#x27; with C &amp; D (which can be formed as &#x27;S&#x27; or &#x27;Z&#x27; chirality) the working end is fed through that loop from the same side A as the outgoing eye leg C. This is opposite (or &#x27;anti&#x27;) direction relative to the simple (#1010) Bowline (A–D on opposite sides).


The so called &#x27;Eskimo&#x27; Bowline has also been known as &quot;Boas Bowline&quot; and &quot;Cossack knot&quot; - all of these names referring to the same structure. The Kalmyk loop can be made &#x27;TIB&#x27; (Tiable In the Bight); however, it will not be &#x27;EEL&#x27; (Either End Loadable).

==See also==
*Kalmyk loop

==References==
==External links==
* Скрягин Л. Н. (Lev Skryagin): &quot;Морские узлы&quot; (Marine Knots) as PDF</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4532732" start="4" end="18" title="Eskimo bowline" label="Eskimo bowline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532732" start="20" end="32" title="Eskimo bowline" label="Cossack knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q753705" start="45" end="52" title="bowline" label="bowline"/>
<link wikidata="Q753705" start="68" end="75" title="bowline" label="bowline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624682" start="145" end="149" title="loop (knot)" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="167" end="170" title="List of knot terminology#Eye" label="eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q753705" start="301" end="308" title="bowline" label="bowline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532732" start="350" end="356" title="Eskimo bowline" label="collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q456083" start="534" end="543" title="John Ross (Royal Navy officer)" label="John Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q632290" start="725" end="749" title="The Ashley Book of Knots" label="The Ashley Book of Knots"/>
<link wikidata="" start="840" end="852" title=":ru:Скрягин, Лев Николаевич" label="Lev Skryagin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21808719" start="971" end="982" title="Kalmyk loop" label="Kalmyk loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q753705" start="1056" end="1063" title="bowline" label="bowline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136533" start="1284" end="1294" title="sheet bend" label="sheet bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136533" start="1444" end="1454" title="sheet bend" label="sheet bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q109448249" start="1625" end="1634" title="Lapp bend" label="Lapp bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952374" start="1699" end="1713" title="cowboy bowline" label="cowboy bowline"/>
<link wikidata="Q753705" start="1879" end="1886" title="bowline" label="bowline"/>
<link wikidata="Q21808719" start="2393" end="2404" title="Kalmyk loop" label="Kalmyk loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q21808719" start="2534" end="2545" title="Kalmyk loop" label="Kalmyk loop"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56304" wikidata="Q2896838" url="?curid=56304" title="Beonex Communicator">
<text>Beonex Communicator is a discontinued open-source Internet suite based on the Mozilla Application Suite (MAS) by Ben Bucksch, a German Mozilla developer. It was intended to have a higher security and privacy level than other commercial products. The Internet suite contains a Web browser, an email and news client, an HTML editor (based on Mozilla Composer) and an IRC client (based on ChatZilla).

Beonex Business Services offered the suite for free and provided documentation, easy install routines for third-party plug-ins, and tried to sell support and customer-specific changes on the browser. The main goal was to implement Kerberos, OpenPGP, and LDAP in Beonex, but that was marked as failed in mid-2004. It was discontinued before reaching production release stage.

==History==

Mozilla Organization stated that the Mozilla Application Suite was only for developers and testing purposes and was not meant for end users.

On 5 January 2001 Beonex was included in the Linux distribution kmLinux version S-0.4, but was removed in version S-0.5 released on 23 March 2001. Beonex 0.8 was released in June 2002 received positive reviews about its speed.
Beonex Launcher (BeOL, spoken B-O-L), was an additional upcoming product that never left alpha status; it was a stripped-down version of Beonex Communicator: a Web browser combined with an email client and a chat client.

With a few preview releases of version 0.9 in mid-2002, Bucksch showed some new features he wanted to integrate, but before this version gained a stable status, he announced on 2 March 2004 that no new releases were planned until the Mozilla Foundation decided its future policy. In 2005, the Mozilla Foundation officially changed its policies and created the Mozilla Corporation to provide end-user support.

&quot;Beonex Communicator 0.8.2-stable&quot; has several known security issues. Beonex never received much market share.

In October 2020, the distributor of Beonex joined the Coalition for App Fairness, which defends the rights of app developers.

==Comparison with Netscape and MAS==
The browser does not transmit referrers by default and has the possibility to create a fake referrers. The browser deletes all cookies upon exiting and disables several JavaScript functions which could have served as attack vectors. Beonex also allows changing the user agent.

In the following comparison table not all releases of Netscape and MAS are included. For a more complete table see Gecko (layout engine).
===Differences from Netscape===
In contrast with Netscape, Beonex has included nearly the same features except the proprietary parts like the integrated Net2Phone, and the AOL Instant Messenger. For online chatting, ChatZilla was integrated and the sidebar and the search engines are also pre-configured. Beonex is less resource-intensive than Netscape.

Beonex includes a migration tool to import old profiles from Netscape Communicator.

===Differences from MAS===
Beonex Communicator was not a fork of MAS; rather, it was a separate branch, so no significant changes were made. HTML email and JavaScript are turned off by default and thus, it displays email only in plain text with bold and cursive additions which were added later in MAS 1.1. The search engines is compatible with the Mycroft project and is located in the sidebar providing more features.

==References==
==External links==
* Beonex
* Beonex Communicator Screenshots, Flickr</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2896838" start="0" end="19" title="Beonex Communicator" label="Beonex Communicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="38" end="49" title="open-source software" label="open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q955452" start="50" end="64" title="Internet suite" label="Internet suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q538588" start="78" end="103" title="Mozilla Application Suite" label="Mozilla Application Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q9661" start="135" end="142" title="Mozilla" label="Mozilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="276" end="287" title="Web browser" label="Web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q570871" start="292" end="297" title="email client" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324042" start="302" end="313" title="Newsreader (Usenet)" label="news client"/>
<link wikidata="Q726761" start="318" end="329" title="HTML editor" label="HTML editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703374" start="340" end="356" title="Mozilla Composer" label="Mozilla Composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q73" start="365" end="368" title="Internet Relay Chat" label="IRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q724128" start="386" end="395" title="ChatZilla" label="ChatZilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q184148" start="517" end="525" title="Plug-in (computing)" label="plug-ins"/>
<link wikidata="Q506053" start="630" end="638" title="Kerberos (protocol)" label="Kerberos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227452" start="640" end="647" title="OpenPGP" label="OpenPGP"/>
<link wikidata="Q188816" start="653" end="657" title="LDAP" label="LDAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211457" start="748" end="766" title="Release to manufacturing" label="production release"/>
<link wikidata="Q55672" start="788" end="808" title="Mozilla Organization" label="Mozilla Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q131669" start="975" end="993" title="Linux distribution" label="Linux distribution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="994" end="1001" title="kmLinux" label="kmLinux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211457" start="1246" end="1258" title="alpha status" label="alpha status"/>
<link wikidata="Q55672" start="1613" end="1631" title="Mozilla Foundation" label="Mozilla Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q169925" start="1739" end="1758" title="Mozilla Corporation" label="Mozilla Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101084309" start="1965" end="1991" title="Coalition for App Fairness" label="Coalition for App Fairness"/>
<link wikidata="Q936009" start="2105" end="2114" title="HTTP referer" label="referrers"/>
<link wikidata="Q178995" start="2202" end="2209" title="HTTP cookie" label="cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="2244" end="2254" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q763744" start="2340" end="2350" title="user agent" label="user agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q487834" start="2468" end="2489" title="Gecko (layout engine)" label="Gecko (layout engine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10336417" start="2644" end="2653" title="Net2Phone" label="Net2Phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q58066" start="2663" end="2684" title="AOL Instant Messenger" label="AOL Instant Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q724128" start="2707" end="2716" title="ChatZilla" label="ChatZilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880842" start="2740" end="2747" title="Sidebar (computing)" label="sidebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182287" start="2756" end="2770" title="web search engine" label="search engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410913" start="2907" end="2928" title="Netscape Communicator" label="Netscape Communicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q332903" start="2988" end="2992" title="fork (software)" label="fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q925385" start="3027" end="3033" title="Branching (software)" label="branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636103" start="3072" end="3082" title="HTML email" label="HTML email"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="3146" end="3151" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145976" start="3160" end="3170" title="plain text" label="plain text"/>
<link wikidata="Q103204" start="3430" end="3436" title="Flickr" label="Flickr"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56309" wikidata="Q1165944" url="?curid=56309" title="Land use">
<text>Land use is an umbrella term to describe what happens on a parcel of land. It concerns the benefits derived from using the land, and also the land management actions that humans carry out there. The following categories are used for land use: forest land, cropland (agricultural land), grassland, wetlands, settlements and other lands. The way humans use land, and how land use is changing, has many impacts on the environment. Effects of land use choices and changes by humans include for example urban sprawl, soil erosion, soil degradation, land degradation and desertification. Land use and land management practices have a major impact on natural resources including water, soil, nutrients, plants and animals.

&quot;Land use change&quot; is &quot;the change from one land-use category to another&quot;. Land-use change, together with use of fossil fuels, are the major anthropogenic sources of carbon dioxide, a dominant greenhouse gas. Human activity is the most significant cause of land cover change, and humans are also directly impacted by the environmental consequences of these changes. For example, deforestation (the systematic and permanent conversion of previously forested land for other uses) has historically been a primary facilitator of land use and land cover change.

The study of land change relies on the synthesis of a wide range of data and a diverse range of data collection methods. These include land cover monitoring and assessments, modeling risk and vulnerability, and land change modeling.

== Definition and categories ==
The IPCC defines the term &quot;land use&quot; as the &quot;total of arrangements, activities and inputs applied to a parcel of land&quot;. The same report groups &quot;land use&quot; into the following categories: forest land, cropland (agricultural land), grassland, wetlands, settlements and &quot;other lands&quot;. 

Another definition is that of the United Nations&#x27; Food and Agriculture Organization: &quot;Land use concerns the products and/or benefits obtained from use of the land as well as the land management actions (activities) carried out by humans to produce those products and benefits.&quot; 

As of the early 1990s, about 13% of the Earth was considered arable land, with 26% in pasture, 32% forests and woodland, and 1.5% urban areas.

As of 2015, the total arable land is 10.7% of the land surface, with 1.3% being permanent cropland.

For example, the US Department of Agriculture has identified six major types of land use in the United States. Acreage statistics for each type of land use in the contiguous 48 states in 2017 were as follows:

&quot;Special use&quot; areas in the table above include national parks (29 M acres) and state parks (15 M), wildlife areas (64.4 M), highways (21 M), railroads (3M), military bases (25 M), airports (3M) and a few others. &quot;Miscellaneous&quot; includes cemeteries, golf courses, marshes, deserts, and other areas of &quot;low economic value&quot;. The total land area of the United States is 9.1 M km2 but the total used here refers only to the contiguous 48 states, without Alaska etc.

== Land use change ==
&quot;Land use change&quot; is &quot;the change from one land-use category to another&quot;. Land-use change, together with use of fossil fuels, are the major anthropogenic sources of carbon dioxide, a dominant greenhouse gas.

Human activity is the most significant cause of land cover change, and humans are also directly impacted by the environmental consequences of these changes. Collective land use and land cover changes have fundamentally altered the functioning of key Earth systems. For instance, human changes to land use and land cover have a profound impact on climate at a local and regional level, which in turn contributes to climate change.

Land use by humans has a long history, first emerging more than 10,000 years ago. Human changes to land surfaces have been documented for centuries as having significant impacts on both earth systems and human well-being. Deforestation is an example of large-scale land use change. The deforestation of temperate regions since 1750 has had a major effect on land cover. The reshaping of landscapes to serve human needs, such as the deforestation for farmland, can have long-term effects on earth systems and exacerbate the causes of climate change. 

Although the burning of fossil fuels is the primary driver of present-day climate change, prior to the Industrial Revolution, deforestation and irrigation were the largest sources of human-driven greenhouse gas emissions. Even today, 35% of anthropogenic carbon dioxide contributions can be attributed to land use or land cover changes. Currently, almost 50% of Earth’s non-ice land surface has been transformed by human activities, with approximately 40% of that land used for agriculture, surpassing natural systems as the principal source of nitrogen emissions.

Increasing land conversion by humans in future is not inevitable: In a discussion on response options to climate change mitigation and adaptation an IPCC special report stated that &quot;a number of response options such as increased food productivity, dietary choices and food losses, and waste reduction, can reduce demand for land conversion, thereby potentially freeing land and creating opportunities for enhanced implementation of other response options&quot;.

== Analytical methods ==
Land change science relies heavily on the synthesis of a wide range of data and a diverse range of data collection methods, some of which are detailed below.

=== Land cover monitoring and assessments ===
A primary function of land change science is to document and model long-term patterns of landscape change, which may result from both human activity and natural processes. In the course of monitoring and assessing land cover and land use changes, scientists look at several factors, including where land-cover and land-use are changing, the extent and timescale of changes, and how changes vary through time. To this end, scientists use a variety of tools, including satellite imagery and other sources of remotely sensed data (e.g., aircraft imagery), field observations, historical accounts, and reconstruction modeling. These tools, particularly satellite imagery, allow land change scientists to accurately monitor land-change rates and create a consistent, long-term record to quantify change variability over time. Through observing patterns in land cover changes, scientists can determine the consequences of these changes, predict the impact of future changes, and use this information to inform strategic land management.

=== Modeling risk and vulnerability ===
Modeling risk and vulnerability is also one of land change science&#x27;s practical applications. Accurate predictions of how human activity will influence land cover change over time, as well as the impact that such changes have on the sustainability of ecological and human systems, can inform the creation of policy designed to address these changes.

Studying risk and vulnerability entails the development of quantitative, qualitative, and geospatial models, methods, and support tools. The purpose of these tools is to communicate the vulnerability of both human communities and natural ecosystems to hazard events or long-term land change. Modeling risk and vulnerability requires analyses of community sensitivity to hazards, an understanding of geographic distributions of people and infrastructure, and accurate calculation of the probability of specific disturbances occurring.

=== Land change modeling ===
A key method for studying risk and vulnerability is land change modeling (LCM), which can be used to simulate changes and land use and land cover. LCMs can be used to predict how land use and land cover may change under alternate circumstances, which is useful for risk assessment, in that it allows for the prediction of potential impacts and can be used to inform policy decisions, albeit with some uncertainty.

== Examples of land use change ==

=== Deforestation ===
Deforestation is the systematic and permanent conversion of previously forested land for other uses. It has historically been a primary facilitator of land use and land cover change. Forests are a vital part of the global ecosystem and are essential to carbon capture, ecological processes, and biodiversity. However, since the invention of agriculture, global forest cover has diminished by 35%. 

There is rarely one direct or underlying cause for deforestation. Rather, deforestation is the result of intertwining systemic forces working simultaneously or sequentially to change land cover. Deforestation occurs for many interconnected reasons. For instance, mass deforestation is often viewed as the product of industrial agriculture, yet a considerable portion old-growth forest deforestation is the result of small-scale migrant farming. As forest cover is removed, forest resources become exhausted and increasing populations lead to scarcity, which prompts people to move again to previously undisturbed forest, restarting the process of deforestation. There are several reasons behind this continued migration: poverty-driven lack of available farmland and high costs may lead to an increase in farming intensity on existing farmland. This leads to the overexploitation of farmland, and down the line results in desertification, another land cover change, which renders soil unusable and unprofitable, requiring farmers to seek out untouched and unpopulated old-growth forests.

In addition to rural migration and subsistence farming, economic development can also play a substantial role in deforestation. For example, road and railway expansions designed to increase quality of life have resulted in significant deforestation in the Amazon and Central America. Moreover, the underlying drivers of economic development are often linked to global economic engagement, ranging from increased exports to a foreign debt.

=== Urbanization ===

Broadly, urbanization is the increasing number of people who live in urban areas. Urbanization refers to both urban population growth and the physical growth of urban areas. According to the United Nations, the global urban population has increased rapidly since 1950, from 751 million to 4.2 billion in 2018, and current trends predict this number will continue to grow. Accompanying this population shift are significant changes in economic flow, culture and lifestyle, and spatial population distribution. Although urbanized areas cover just 3% of the Earth&#x27;s surface, they nevertheless have a significant impact on land use and land cover change.

Urbanization is important to land use and land cover change for a variety of reasons. In particular, urbanization affects land change elsewhere through the shifting of &quot;urban-rural linkages,&quot; or the ecological footprint of the transfer of goods and services between urban and rural areas. Increases in urbanization lead to increases in consumption, which puts increased pressure on surrounding rural lands. The outward spread of urban areas can also take over adjacent land formerly used for crop cultivation.

Urbanization additionally affects land cover through the urban heat island effect. Heat islands occur when, due to high concentrations of structures, such as buildings and roads, that absorb and re-emit solar radiation, and low concentrations of vegetative cover, urban areas experience higher temperatures than surrounding areas. The high temperatures associated with heat islands can compromise human health, particularly in low-income areas.

=== Decline of the Aral Sea ===

The rapid decline of the Aral Sea is an example how local-scale land use and land change can have compounded impacts on regional climate systems, particularly when human activities heavily disrupt natural climatic cycles, how land change science can be used to map and study such changes. In 1960, the Aral Sea, located in Central Asia, was the world&#x27;s fourth largest lake. However, a water diversion project, undertaken by the Soviet Union to irrigate arid plains in what is now Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan, resulted in the Aral Sea losing 85% of its land cover and 90% of its volume. The loss of the Aral Sea has had a significant effect on human-environment interactions in the region, including the decimation of the sea&#x27;s fishing industry and the salinization of agricultural lands by the wind-spread of dried sea salt beds. 

Additionally, scientists have been able to use technology such as NASA&#x27;s Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) to track changes to the Aral Sea and its surrounding climate over time. This use of modeling and satellite imagery to track human-caused land cover change is characteristic of the scope of land change science.

== Regulation ==
Commonly, political jurisdictions will undertake land-use planning and regulate the use of land in an attempt to avoid land-use conflicts. Land use plans are implemented through land division and use ordinances and regulations, such as zoning regulations.

The urban growth boundary is one form of land-use regulation. For example, Portland, Oregon is required to have an urban growth boundary which contains at least of vacant land. Additionally, Oregon restricts the development of farmland. The regulations are controversial, but an economic analysis concluded that farmland appreciated similarly to the other land.

=== United States ===

In colonial America, few regulations were originally put into place regarding the usage of land. As society shifted from rural to urban, public land regulation became important, especially to city governments trying to control industry, commerce, and housing within their boundaries. The first zoning ordinance was passed in New York City in 1916, and, by the 1930s, most states had adopted zoning laws. In the 1970s, concerns about the environment and historic preservation led to further regulation.

Today, federal, state, and local governments regulate growth and development through statutory law. The majority of controls on land, however, stem from the actions of private developers and individuals. Judicial decisions and enforcement of private land-use arrangements can reinforce public regulation, and achieve forms and levels of control that regulatory zoning cannot. There is growing concern that land use regulation is a direct cause of housing segregation in the United States today.

Two major federal laws passed in the 1960s limit the use of land significantly. These are the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (today embodied in 16 U.S.C. 461 et seq.) and the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.).

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1165944" start="0" end="8" title="Land use" label="Land use"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081619" start="69" end="73" title="land" label="land"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001056" start="142" end="157" title="land management" label="land management"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="243" end="254" title="forest land" label="forest land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395383" start="266" end="283" title="agricultural land" label="agricultural land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="286" end="295" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="297" end="305" title="Wetland" label="wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q486972" start="307" end="318" title="Human settlement" label="settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="400" end="426" title="Human impact on the environment" label="impacts on the environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="498" end="510" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q889503" start="512" end="524" title="soil erosion" label="soil erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045071" start="526" end="542" title="soil degradation" label="soil degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497778" start="544" end="560" title="land degradation" label="land degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="565" end="580" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001056" start="595" end="610" title="land management" label="land management"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="644" end="661" title="natural resources" label="natural resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="672" end="677" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="679" end="683" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="685" end="693" title="nutrient" label="nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="696" end="701" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="707" end="713" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="848" end="859" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="876" end="889" title="Human impact on the environment" label="anthropogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="928" end="942" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="1114" end="1127" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q106696937" start="1297" end="1317" title="Land change science" label="study of land change"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693224" start="1504" end="1524" title="land change modeling" label="land change modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="1563" end="1567" title="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" label="IPCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="1774" end="1785" title="forest land" label="forest land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395383" start="1797" end="1814" title="agricultural land" label="agricultural land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="1817" end="1826" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="1828" end="1836" title="Wetland" label="wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q486972" start="1838" end="1849" title="Human settlement" label="settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1915" end="1929" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="1936" end="1969" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001056" start="2069" end="2084" title="land management" label="land management"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="2216" end="2221" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="2342" end="2353" title="arable land" label="arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="2438" end="2466" title="US Department of Agriculture" label="US Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="2584" end="2604" title="Contiguous United States" label="contiguous 48 states"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="3276" end="3287" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="3304" end="3317" title="Human impact on the environment" label="anthropogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="3356" end="3370" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046459" start="3623" end="3636" title="Earth system science" label="Earth systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="3787" end="3801" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046459" start="3990" end="4003" title="Earth system science" label="earth systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="4026" end="4039" title="Deforestation" label="Deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="4107" end="4123" title="temperate region" label="temperate region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001793" start="4162" end="4172" title="land cover" label="land cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395383" start="4254" end="4262" title="Agricultural land" label="farmland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="4458" end="4479" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="4481" end="4494" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="4499" end="4509" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="4551" end="4575" title="greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="4833" end="4844" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q898653" start="5026" end="5051" title="climate change mitigation" label="climate change mitigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q260607" start="5056" end="5066" title="Climate change adaptation" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q66310618" start="5070" end="5089" title="Special Report on Climate Change and Land" label="IPCC special report"/>
<link wikidata="Q63950371" start="5174" end="5189" title="Planetary health diet" label="dietary choices"/>
<link wikidata="Q106696937" start="5414" end="5433" title="Land change science" label="Land change science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001793" start="5918" end="5928" title="Land cover" label="land-cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q725252" start="6086" end="6103" title="satellite imagery" label="satellite imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="6125" end="6145" title="Remote sensing" label="remotely sensed data"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001056" start="6633" end="6648" title="land management" label="land management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058438" start="6700" end="6704" title="risk assessment" label="risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400839" start="6709" end="6722" title="Vulnerability assessment" label="vulnerability"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001793" start="6847" end="6857" title="land cover" label="land cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q730675" start="7105" end="7117" title="Quantitative research" label="quantitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q839486" start="7119" end="7130" title="Qualitative research" label="qualitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q121809790" start="7136" end="7146" title="geospatial" label="geospatial"/>
<link wikidata="Q966490" start="7556" end="7568" title="Disturbance (ecology)" label="disturbances"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693224" start="7662" end="7682" title="land change modeling" label="land change modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="8082" end="8095" title="Deforestation" label="Deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41491" start="8335" end="8349" title="Carbon capture and storage" label="carbon capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="8377" end="8389" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="8848" end="8865" title="old-growth forest" label="old-growth forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="9403" end="9418" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="9826" end="9832" title="Amazon rainforest" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="9837" end="9852" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q182722" start="9982" end="9989" title="Export" label="exports"/>
<link wikidata="Q461319" start="9995" end="10007" title="External debt" label="foreign debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="10041" end="10053" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="10223" end="10237" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q234173" start="10898" end="10918" title="ecological footprint" label="ecological footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897903" start="10938" end="10956" title="goods and services" label="goods and services"/>
<link wikidata="Q215712" start="11267" end="11292" title="Urban heat island" label="urban heat island effect."/>
<link wikidata="Q35883" start="11714" end="11722" title="Aral Sea" label="Aral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="12122" end="12134" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="12174" end="12184" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="12186" end="12196" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="12202" end="12214" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="12464" end="12476" title="Soil salinity" label="salinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="12610" end="12614" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q676840" start="12622" end="12675" title="Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer" label="Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="12924" end="12936" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738778" start="12953" end="12970" title="land-use planning" label="land-use planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483832" start="13023" end="13040" title="land-use conflict" label="land-use conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="13140" end="13158" title="zoning regulations" label="zoning regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900123" start="13165" end="13186" title="urban growth boundary" label="urban growth boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="13236" end="13252" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="13872" end="13885" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="13938" end="13944" title="zoning" label="zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484056" start="14115" end="14126" title="land development" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="14135" end="14148" title="statutory law" label="statutory law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973378" start="14640" end="14682" title="National Historic Preservation Act of 1966" label="National Historic Preservation Act of 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972479" start="14733" end="14766" title="National Environmental Policy Act" label="National Environmental Policy Act"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56310" wikidata="Q115556" url="?curid=56310" title="Douglas County, Colorado">
<text>Douglas County is a county located in the U.S. state of Colorado. As of the 2020 Census, the population was 357,978. The county is named in honor of U.S. Senator Stephen A. Douglas. The county seat is Castle Rock.

Douglas County is part of the Denver–Aurora–Lakewood metropolitan statistical area. It is located midway between Colorado&#x27;s two largest cities, Denver and Colorado Springs, and contains a portion of Aurora, the state&#x27;s third-largest city. Douglas County has the highest median household income of any Colorado county or statistical equivalent. It is ranked seventh nationally in that category.

==Overview==
Douglas County is lightly wooded, mostly with ponderosa pine, with broken terrain characterized by mesas, foothills, and small streams. Cherry Creek and Plum Creek rise in Douglas County and flow north toward Denver and into the South Platte River. Both were subject to flash flooding in the past, Plum Creek being partially responsible for the Denver flood of 1965. Cherry Creek and Plum Creek are now dammed.

Most residents commute to workplaces elsewhere in the metropolitan area outside of the county. Suburban development is supplementing the traditional ranching economy of the county.

==History==
Douglas County was one of the original 17 counties created in the Colorado Territory by the Colorado Territorial Legislature on November 1, 1861. The county was named in honor of U.S. Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois, who died five months before the county was created. The county seat was originally Franktown, but was moved to California Ranch in 1863, and then to Castle Rock in 1874. Although the county&#x27;s boundaries originally extended eastward to the Kansas state border, in 1874, most of the eastern portion of the county became part of Elbert County.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which are land and (0.3%) are covered by water.

===Adjacent counties===
*Jefferson County, Colorado – west
*Arapahoe County, Colorado – north
*Elbert County, Colorado – east
*El Paso County, Colorado – south
*Teller County, Colorado – southwest

===Major highways===
* Interstate 25
* U.S. Highway 85
* U.S. Highway 87
* State Highway 67
* State Highway 83
* State Highway 86
* State Highway 105
* State Highway 121
* State Highway 470
* E-470 tollway

===Parks and recreational areas===
Three state parks fall within Douglas County: Castlewood Canyon State Park, Chatfield State Park and Roxborough State Park. Parts of the county lie within the Pike National Forest and were crossed by the historic South Platte Trail.

Recreation trails in the county include:
*American Discovery Trail
*Colorado Trail
*Devils Head National Recreation Trail
*Highline Canal National Recreation Trail
*Platte River Greenway National Recreation Trail
*Ridgeline Open Space Trail
*Bluffs Regional Park Trail

The Rueter–Hess Reservoir, when filled, may provide significant recreation, including fishing, hiking, and nonmotorized boating. If filled to capacity, surface size would be 1,140 acres, making this a fairly significant reservoir in Colorado and Douglas County&#x27;s largest body of water.

Cherokee Ranch and Castle is a 3,400-acre privately owned property which forms a 12,000-acre open space with the Highlands Ranch Backcountry and Daniels Park. The area is host to a variety of animals and the Cherokee Ranch petrified forest.
The Prairie Canyon Ranch, at 4620 CO-83, about south of Franktown, is a Douglas County Open Space. It is a working cattle ranch on , open to the public on special events.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, 175,766 people, 60,924 households, and 49,835 families were residing in the county. The population density was . The 63,333 housing units averaged . The racial makeup of the county was 92.77% White, 2.51% Asian, 0.95% African American, 0.41% Native American, 1.49% from other races, and 1.88% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race made up 5.06% of the population.

Of the 60,924 households, 47.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 73.8% were married couples living together, 5.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 18.2% were not families. About 13.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 1.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.88, and the average family size was 3.19.

In the county, the population distribution was 31.6% under the age of 18, 4.8% from 18 to 24, 37.9% from 25 to 44, 21.6% from 45 to 64, and 4.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 99.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.4 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $82,929, and for a family was $88,482 (these figures had risen to $93,819 and $102,767, respectively, as of a 2007 estimate). Males had a median income of $60,729 versus $38,965 for females. The per capita income for the county was $34,848. About 1.6% of families and 2.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 1.9% of those under age 18 and 3.7% of those age 65 or over.

Douglas County had the highest median household income of any Colorado county or statistical equivalent in 2000. In 2008, it ranked eighth in the United States in that category; it was one of two in the top 15 not in the vicinity of New York or Washington.

===Health and longevity===
In 2021, Douglas County was judged by the &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; to be the second healthiest of 3,143 counties and county-equivalents of the United States based on 84 different factors. Residents of the county lived 84.0 years on the average compared to the U.S. average of 77.5 years.

==Politics==
As a primarily exurban county, Douglas County has long been known as a Republican stronghold. In the 2012 election, Mitt Romney won 62% of the vote. However, Douglas County has become more competitive in recent years, with Donald Trump winning 55% of the county&#x27;s vote in 2016 and only 52% of the vote in 2020 and 2024. In 2020, Joe Biden achieved the highest vote share for a Democratic presidential nominee in the county since 1964. In 2022, incumbent Democratic governor Jared Polis lost the county by a razor-thin margin, winning nearly 49% of the vote. However, Democratic strength is mostly limited to northern Douglas County, including Highlands Ranch, Lone Tree, and Meridian, while the rest of the county is still strongly Republican.













==Education==
Douglas County is served by Douglas County School District RE-1, which covers the entire county. It is the third-largest school district in Colorado. In addition to traditional neighborhood schools, the district includes sixteen charter schools, four option schools, and an online school . Schools are rated generally high in the area.

The University Center at Chaparral in Parker offers courses through Arapahoe Community College, the University of Colorado Denver, University College of the University of Denver, and the Douglas County School District. The University of Phoenix has a campus in Lone Tree.

The county was home to its own university, the University of Colorado South Denver in Lone Tree, but it permanently closed in 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and financial concerns.

===Libraries===
The Douglas County Libraries system has seven branches throughout the county. The library also houses the Douglas County History Research Center, which collects and preserves the history of Douglas County, the High Plains, the Divide area of the Front Range and the State of Colorado, to provide historical research resources to the public.

==Economy==

===Top employers===
According to the county&#x27;s 2015 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers in the county are:

==Recognition==
Douglas County has been recognized by a number of national periodicals:
* &quot;Money&quot; magazine ranked Douglas County number five in the United States for “Job Growth over the Last Eight Years”, August 18, 2009 
* &quot;American City Business Journals&quot; (ACBJ) ranked Douglas County fourth in the nation for “Quality of Life”, May 2004 
*&quot;SchoolDigger.com&quot; ranked Douglas County School District at number one in the Denver metropolitan area and number 12 in Colorado based on 2009 test scores. (School district rankings were determined by averaging the rankings of individual schools within each of the 122 districts evaluated.)

==Communities==
===Cities===
*Aurora (part)
*Castle Pines
*Littleton (part)
*Lone Tree

===Towns===

* Castle Rock
*Larkspur
*Parker

=== Census-designated places ===

*Acres Green
*Castle Pines Village
*Franktown
*Grand View Estates
*Highlands Ranch
*Louviers
*Meridian
*Meridian Village
*Perry Park
*Roxborough Park
*Sedalia
*Sierra Ridge
*Stepping Stone
*Sterling Ranch
*Stonegate
*The Pinery
*Westcreek
=== Other unincorporated communities ===
*Dakan
*Deckers
*Greenland

===Former census-designated places===
*Carriage Club (now part of Lone Tree)
*Cottonwood (now part of Parker)
*Heritage Hills (now part of Lone Tree)

==See also==

*Bibliography of Colorado
*Geography of Colorado
*History of Colorado
**Arapahoe County, Kansas Territory
**National Register of Historic Places listings in Douglas County, Colorado
*Index of Colorado-related articles
*List of Colorado-related lists
**List of counties in Colorado
**List of statistical areas in Colorado
*Outline of Colorado
**Douglas County search and rescue
**Front Range Urban Corridor
==References==
==External links==
*Douglas County website Douglas County Website
*Douglas County School Information Douglas County Schools
*Douglas County Sheriff Department website DCSO
*DCSO Recruiting website Join DCSO
*YourHub.com/DouglasCounty Web Archived Website 
*Colorado Historical Society Colorado Historical Society
*Colorado County Evolution by Don Stanwyck
*Douglas County Libraries Douglas County Libraries
*DCL Archives &amp; Local History DCL Archives &amp; Local History
*Our Douglas County Colorado News and Events - Web Archived Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q115556" start="0" end="14" title="Douglas County, Colorado" label="Douglas County"/>
<link wikidata="Q28575" start="20" end="26" title="county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="42" end="52" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="56" end="64" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="76" end="87" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q433174" start="162" end="180" title="Stephen A. Douglas" label="Stephen A. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q994457" start="201" end="212" title="Castle Rock, Colorado" label="Castle Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="245" end="251" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q49246" start="252" end="258" title="Aurora, Colorado" label="Aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q462804" start="259" end="267" title="Lakewood, Colorado" label="Lakewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750084" start="268" end="297" title="Denver metropolitan area" label="metropolitan statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="375" end="391" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622417" start="487" end="518" title="List of highest-income counties in the United States" label="highest median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q460523" start="679" end="693" title="ponderosa pine" label="ponderosa pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354045" start="739" end="748" title="foothills" label="foothills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962773" start="769" end="781" title="Cherry Creek (Colorado)" label="Cherry Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q38252087" start="786" end="796" title="Plum Creek (Douglas County, Colorado)" label="Plum Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q130892" start="862" end="880" title="South Platte River" label="South Platte River"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="1194" end="1202" title="ranching" label="ranching"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="1418" end="1430" title="U.S. Senator" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q433174" start="1431" end="1449" title="Stephen A. Douglas" label="Stephen A. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="1453" end="1461" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q266632" start="1546" end="1555" title="Franktown, Colorado" label="Franktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q266632" start="1574" end="1590" title="California Ranch, Colorado" label="California Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="1707" end="1713" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q115563" start="1794" end="1807" title="Elbert County, Colorado" label="Elbert County"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1841" end="1859" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q127978" start="1971" end="1997" title="Jefferson County, Colorado" label="Jefferson County, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q311904" start="2006" end="2031" title="Arapahoe County, Colorado" label="Arapahoe County, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q115563" start="2041" end="2064" title="Elbert County, Colorado" label="Elbert County, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q111774" start="2073" end="2097" title="El Paso County, Colorado" label="El Paso County, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q312746" start="2107" end="2130" title="Teller County, Colorado" label="Teller County, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139231" start="2167" end="2180" title="Interstate 25 (Colorado)" label="Interstate 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q43080096" start="2183" end="2198" title="U.S. Highway 85 (Colorado)" label="U.S. Highway 85"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139231" start="2201" end="2216" title="U.S. Highway 87 (Colorado)" label="U.S. Highway 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113438" start="2219" end="2235" title="Colorado State Highway 67" label="State Highway 67"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111500" start="2238" end="2254" title="Colorado State Highway 83" label="State Highway 83"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113564" start="2257" end="2273" title="Colorado State Highway 86" label="State Highway 86"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113780" start="2276" end="2293" title="Colorado State Highway 105" label="State Highway 105"/>
<link wikidata="Q978295" start="2296" end="2313" title="Colorado State Highway 121" label="State Highway 121"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139118" start="2316" end="2333" title="Colorado State Highway 470" label="State Highway 470"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139154" start="2336" end="2349" title="E-470" label="E-470 tollway"/>
<link wikidata="Q285490" start="2432" end="2460" title="Castlewood Canyon State Park" label="Castlewood Canyon State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087601" start="2462" end="2482" title="Chatfield State Park" label="Chatfield State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170717" start="2487" end="2508" title="Roxborough State Park" label="Roxborough State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193594" start="2545" end="2565" title="Pike National Forest" label="Pike National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q54933175" start="2599" end="2617" title="South Platte Trail" label="South Platte Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q463893" start="2662" end="2686" title="American Discovery Trail" label="American Discovery Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148975" start="2688" end="2702" title="Colorado Trail" label="Colorado Trail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2704" end="2741" title="Devils Head National Recreation Trail" label="Devils Head National Recreation Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755864" start="2743" end="2783" title="Highline Canal National Recreation Trail" label="Highline Canal National Recreation Trail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2785" end="2832" title="Platte River Greenway National Recreation Trail" label="Platte River Greenway National Recreation Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332767" start="2834" end="2860" title="Ridgeline Open Space" label="Ridgeline Open Space Trail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2862" end="2888" title="Bluffs Regional Park Trail" label="Bluffs Regional Park Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377863" start="2894" end="2915" title="Rueter–Hess Reservoir" label="Rueter–Hess Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751783" start="3182" end="3207" title="Cherokee Ranch" label="Cherokee Ranch and Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841249" start="3275" end="3285" title="Open space reserve" label="open space"/>
<link wikidata="Q110542859" start="3327" end="3339" title="Daniels Park" label="Daniels Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q120951369" start="3390" end="3421" title="Cherokee Ranch petrified forest" label="Cherokee Ranch petrified forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111500" start="3457" end="3462" title="Colorado State Highway 83" label="CO-83"/>
<link wikidata="Q266632" start="3479" end="3488" title="Franktown, Colorado" label="Franktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3622" end="3628" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="3726" end="3744" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3791" end="3804" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5001" end="5018" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5112" end="5124" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5323" end="5336" title="Highest-income counties in the United States#25 highest-income counties by median household income (2006–08)" label="ranked eighth"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="5431" end="5439" title="New York metropolitan area" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="5443" end="5453" title="Washington Metropolitan Area" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="5531" end="5559" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360157" start="5603" end="5655" title="counties and county-equivalents of the United States" label="counties and county-equivalents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901706" start="6244" end="6248" title="2022 Colorado gubernatorial election" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q750935" start="6449" end="6464" title="Highlands Ranch, Colorado" label="Highlands Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278155" start="6466" end="6475" title="Lone Tree, Colorado" label="Lone Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132317" start="6481" end="6489" title="Meridian, Colorado" label="Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301378" start="6605" end="6640" title="Douglas County School District RE-1" label="Douglas County School District RE-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784195" start="6982" end="7008" title="Arapahoe Community College" label="Arapahoe Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468161" start="7014" end="7043" title="University of Colorado Denver" label="University of Colorado Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q519427" start="7071" end="7091" title="University of Denver" label="University of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889100" start="7137" end="7158" title="University of Phoenix" label="University of Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774961" start="7234" end="7269" title="University of Colorado South Denver" label="University of Colorado South Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="7329" end="7346" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991992" start="7392" end="7416" title="Douglas County Libraries" label="Douglas County Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301378" start="8275" end="8305" title="Douglas County School District RE-1" label="Douglas County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q49246" start="8571" end="8577" title="Aurora, Colorado" label="Aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068090" start="8586" end="8598" title="Castle Pines, Colorado" label="Castle Pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q953583" start="8600" end="8609" title="Littleton, Colorado" label="Littleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278155" start="8618" end="8627" title="Lone Tree, Colorado" label="Lone Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q994457" start="8644" end="8655" title="Castle Rock, Colorado" label="Castle Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456193" start="8657" end="8665" title="Larkspur, Colorado" label="Larkspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q385825" start="8667" end="8673" title="Parker, Colorado" label="Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868131" start="8710" end="8721" title="Acres Green, Colorado" label="Acres Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050231" start="8723" end="8743" title="Castle Pines Village, Colorado" label="Castle Pines Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q266632" start="8745" end="8754" title="Franktown, Colorado" label="Franktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564202" start="8756" end="8774" title="Grand View Estates, Colorado" label="Grand View Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q750935" start="8776" end="8791" title="Highlands Ranch, Colorado" label="Highlands Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119403" start="8793" end="8801" title="Louviers, Colorado" label="Louviers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132317" start="8803" end="8811" title="Meridian, Colorado" label="Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880123" start="8813" end="8829" title="Meridian Village, Colorado" label="Meridian Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1843374" start="8831" end="8841" title="Perry Park, Colorado" label="Perry Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q973688" start="8843" end="8858" title="Roxborough Park, Colorado" label="Roxborough Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995206" start="8860" end="8867" title="Sedalia, Colorado" label="Sedalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880125" start="8869" end="8881" title="Sierra Ridge, Colorado" label="Sierra Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880126" start="8883" end="8897" title="Stepping Stone, Colorado" label="Stepping Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611457" start="8899" end="8913" title="Sterling Ranch, Colorado" label="Sterling Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345850" start="8915" end="8924" title="Stonegate, Colorado" label="Stonegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q534029" start="8926" end="8936" title="The Pinery, Colorado" label="The Pinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715497" start="8938" end="8947" title="Westcreek, Colorado" label="Westcreek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209918" start="8990" end="8995" title="Dakan, Colorado" label="Dakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249303" start="8997" end="9004" title="Deckers, Colorado" label="Deckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604197" start="9006" end="9015" title="Greenland, Colorado" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044988" start="9056" end="9069" title="Carriage Club, Colorado" label="Carriage Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q531213" start="9095" end="9105" title="Cottonwood, Colorado" label="Cottonwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214037" start="9128" end="9142" title="Heritage Hills, Colorado" label="Heritage Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903338" start="9183" end="9207" title="Bibliography of Colorado" label="Bibliography of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535134" start="9209" end="9230" title="Geography of Colorado" label="Geography of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775740" start="9232" end="9251" title="History of Colorado" label="History of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q626137" start="9254" end="9287" title="Arapahoe County, Kansas Territory" label="Arapahoe County, Kansas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975942" start="9290" end="9363" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Douglas County, Colorado" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Douglas County, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018029" start="9365" end="9399" title="Index of Colorado-related articles" label="Index of Colorado-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q118131324" start="9401" end="9431" title="List of Colorado-related lists" label="List of Colorado-related lists"/>
<link wikidata="Q839602" start="9434" end="9462" title="List of counties in Colorado" label="List of counties in Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149013" start="9465" end="9502" title="List of statistical areas in Colorado" label="List of statistical areas in Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112232" start="9504" end="9523" title="Outline of Colorado" label="Outline of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q24534718" start="9526" end="9558" title="Douglas County search and rescue" label="Douglas County search and rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067421" start="9561" end="9587" title="Front Range Urban Corridor" label="Front Range Urban Corridor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56311" wikidata="Q994457" url="?curid=56311" title="Castle Rock, Colorado">
<text>Castle Rock is a home-rule town that is the county seat and the most-populous municipality of Douglas County, Colorado, United States. The town’s population was 73,158 at the 2020 census, a 51.68% increase since the 2010 census. Castle Rock is the most-populous Colorado town (rather than city) and the 14th-most populous Colorado municipality. Castle Rock is a part of the Denver-Aurora-Lakewood, CO metropolitan statistical area and the Front Range urban corridor.

The town is named for the prominent, castle-shaped butte near the center of town.

==History==

The region in and around Castle Rock was originally home to the Arapaho and Cheyenne peoples. They occupied the land between the Arkansas and South Platte Rivers.

White settlers were drawn to the area by rumors of gold and by land opened through the Homestead Act of 1862. The discovery of rhyolite stone, though, not gold, ultimately led to the settlement of Castle Rock.

Castle Rock was founded in 1874 when the eastern Douglas County border was redrawn to its present location. Castle Rock was chosen as the county seat because of its central location.

One of the first homesteaders in the area near today&#x27;s Castle Rock was Jeremiah Gould. He owned about to the south of &quot;the (Castle) Rock&quot;. At that time, the settlement consisted of just a few buildings for prospectors, workers, and cowboys. In 1874, Gould donated to the new town, which was also now home to the Douglas County government. Six streets named Elbert, Jerry, Wilcox, Perry, Castle, and Front were laid out to build the actual town of Castle Rock. The courthouse square was defined and about 77 lots, each , were auctioned off for a total profit of US$3,400.

A new train depot brought the Denver and Rio Grande Railway to the area.

During the late 1800s and early 1900s, Castle Rock had a very active rhyolite-quarrying industry. Many immigrants arrived in the area to work in the quarries.

In 1936, the town received a donation of land that included its namesake geographical feature. Men employed by the Works Progress Administration constructed a star atop the butte shortly after Castle Rock received that donation. The star was lit every year from 1936 to 1941. After World War II began, the star was left unlit as a symbol of sacrifice in support of the war effort. On August 14, 1945, shortly after V-J Day, the star was modified into a V-for-victory symbol. On December 7, 1945, the star was lit for the holiday season. It has been lit every year since around the same time.

The town&#x27;s historic county courthouse, which was built in 1889–1890, burned down on March 11, 1978, the result of arson.

Castle Rock&#x27;s municipal government experienced significant financial difficulties during the early 1980s. In 1984, the town&#x27;s voters approved a charter amendment that authorized the creation of a home-rule charter commission. The home-rule charter was finalized in 1987.

The original Douglas County courthouse was one of seven buildings in Castle Rock that have been added to the National Register of Historic Places. The other buildings include Castle Rock Depot, Castle Rock Elementary School, First National Bank of Douglas County, Samuel Dyer House, Benjamin Hammer House, and Keystone Hotel.

A dispute about whether the Castle Rock Police Department was required to enforce a civil restraining order was decided by the U.S. Supreme Court in 2005. The court held, in &quot;Town of Castle Rock v. Gonzales&quot;, that a municipality cannot be held liable under a federal civil-rights statute, 42 U.S.C. § 1983, for failing to enforce civil restraining orders. The case had arisen from a 1999 murder of three young girls by their father outside the Castle Rock Police Department building. The children were abducted by their father, in violation of the restraining order that had been obtained by their mother, within several hours of being killed. The mother had asked the Castle Rock police to enforce the restraining order by finding and apprehending the father after he removed the children from her home and before the murders. Castle Rock police officers declined to do so, refusing even to contact the Denver Police Department after the mother notified them that the father had taken the children to an amusement park in that city.

==Geography==

Castle Rock is located at (39.372212, −104.856090) at an elevation of 6,224 feet (1,897 m). Castle Rock is in central Colorado at the junction of Interstate 25 and State Highway 86, south of downtown Denver and north of Colorado Springs.

The town lies a few miles east of the Rampart Range of the Rocky Mountains on the western edge of the Great Plains. Castle Rock, the butte for which the town is named, is just north of the town center. Other prominent landforms visible from Castle Rock include Dawson Butte, Devils Head, Mount Blue Sky, and Pikes Peak.

East Plum Creek, a stream within the South Platte River watershed, flows generally north through Castle Rock. Hangman&#x27;s Gulch, which runs northwest then west around the north side of the town center, drains into East Plum Creek, as do multiple unnamed gulches in the southern and western areas of town. McMurdo Gulch and Mitchell Gulch run north then northeast through eastern Castle Rock and drain into Cherry Creek east of town.

Castle Rock is in the Colorado Foothills life zone. The hillsides are covered with meadows of grass, small plants, scattered juniper trees, and open ponderosa pine woodlands. Other trees common in the area include Gambel oak (scrub oak or oak brush) and pinyon pine. Local wildlife includes the American badger, American black bear, bobcat, coyote, Colorado chipmunk, crow, garter snakes, gray fox, mountain cottontail rabbit, mountain lion, mule deer, pocket gopher, porcupine, skunk, and tadpoles. Birds found in the area include the golden eagle, peregrine falcon, sharp-shinned hawk, black-billed magpie, red-tailed hawk, pinyon jay, and western tanager.

The town had a total area of , all land in 2023.

Lying within the Front Range urban corridor, the town is part of the greater Denver metropolitan area. Castle Rock borders three communities, all to its north; from west to east, they are Castle Pines Village, the city of Castle Pines, and The Pinery. Other nearby communities include Franktown to the east, Larkspur to the south, Perry Park to the southwest, and Sedalia to the northwest.

===Climate===
Castle Rock has a semiarid climate (Köppen &quot;BSk&quot;) with cold, dry, snowy winters, and hot, wetter summers. January is the coldest month, July the hottest, and August the month with the most precipitation.

Statewide, Colorado has experienced an average temperature increase of about over the past half-century. Given its location in the center of the state, Castle Rock is expected to experience continuing warming and higher average temperatures through the 21st century, as the effects of climate change continue to be felt. Daily minimum temperatures are also expected to continue rising, as they have for the past 30 years.

===Neighborhoods===
Castle Rock&#x27;s ZIP codes include many neighborhoods:

North of Downtown / West of I-25
* The Meadows
* Castle Pines Village

Castle Rock encompasses about , with a population of more than 73,000.

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
As of the 2010 census, 48,231 people, 16,688 households, and 12,974 families were residing in the town. The population density was . The 17,626 housing units had an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 90.7% White, 1.7% Asian, 1.1% African American, 0.6% American Indian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 2.9% from other races, and 2.8% from two or more races. Hispanics and Latinos of any race were 10.0% of the population.

Of the 16,688 households, 48.4% had children under 18 living with them, 65.4% were married couples living together, 3.9% had a male householder with no wife present, 8.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 22.3% were not families. About 17.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.0% had someone living alone who was 65 or older. The average household size was 2.86, and the average family size was 3.27.

In the town, the age distribution was 32.4% under 18, 5.8% from 18 to 24, 33.0% from 25 to 44, 22.6% from 45 to 64, and 6.2% who were 65 or older. The median age was 33.8 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.5 males. For every 100 females 18 and over, there were 95.5 males 18 and over.

The median income for a household in the town was $85,461, and for a family was $95,973. Males had a median income of $66,993 versus $47,087 for females. The per capita income for the town was $34,089. About 4.0% of families and 6.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 8.2% of those under 18 and 6.2% of those 65 or over.

Castle Rock is the 16th-most populous municipality in Colorado and is the center of the burgeoning urbanization of the county.
==Economy==
Because of its Front Range location between Denver and its inner suburbs and Colorado Springs, many of Castle Rock&#x27;s residents commute nearly 20 miles to northern Colorado Springs or the Denver Technological Center, better known as the Denver Tech Center, which is an 18-mile drive north on I-25, with downtown Denver roughly 30 miles north, and Denver International Airport about 45 miles north.

About 80% of Castle Rock residents commute out of town to work. The average one-way commute time for a Castle Rock resident is about 29 minutes, longer than the U.S. average. One reason for this is that the town has not yet attracted the variety or extent of employers needed to significantly lower the number of commuters to work outside Castle Rock. The town has relatively little land zoned for industrial or light industrial use, with the vast majority of the land within town limits dedicated to residential construction only.

As of 2011, 78.2% of the population over the age of 16 was in the labor force, 0.4% was in the armed forces, and 77.7% was in the civilian labor force, with 72.6% employed and 5.1% unemployed. The employed civilian labor force was 48.0% in management, business, science, and arts; 25.8% in sales and office occupations; 14.7% in service occupations; 6.4% in natural resources, construction, and maintenance; and 5.2% in production, transportation, and material moving. The three industries employing the largest proportion of the working civilian labor force were educational services, health care, and social assistance (15.5%); professional, scientific, and management, and administrative and waste management services (13.2%); and finance and insurance, and real estate and rental and leasing (12.6%).

Castle Rock&#x27;s cost of living is above average. Compared to a U.S. average of 100, the cost of living index for the town is 137.2.

As of mid-2019, the median home value in the town was $427,537. The median gross monthly rent for an apartment was about $1,461.

The town&#x27;s housing base continues to grow. About 1,400 permits to build new homes were issued in 2018.

==Government and politics==

Castle Rock is a home-rule municipality with a council–manager form of government. The town&#x27;s governing body is the town council, made up of seven members including the mayor and mayor pro-tem. Each councilmember is elected to represent an election district, and the mayor is elected to represent the town at large. One member, appointed by the council, serves as the mayor pro-tem. Castle Rock voters approved a change to the town charter that authorized an at-large mayor in 2017.

The mayor presides over council meetings and casts one vote, like other councilmembers. The council sets policy for the town, adopts ordinances, approves the town budget, makes major land-use decisions, and appoints key town government staff, including the town manager, town attorney, municipal judge, and members of town boards and commissions.

The town manager supervises all departments, prepares and implements the town budget, and works with the council to develop policies and propose new plans.

Tax revenues are used to provide general government, fire, police, parks maintenance and programs, street maintenance and operations, support for recreation, and planning and code enforcement services. The town also provides development services, golf, water, and sewer services to residents through self-supporting enterprise funds. The average annual municipal property tax bill of a Castle Rock resident is $40.66. That is in addition to property taxes assessed by Douglas County and other entities.

As the county seat, Castle Rock is the administrative center of Douglas County. The county courthouse, the Douglas County Justice Center, is north of downtown, and most departments of the county government base their operations in the town.

, Castle Rock lies within Colorado&#x27;s 4th U.S. Congressional District. The town is in the 4th district of the Colorado Senate and the 45th district of the Colorado House of Representatives.

Castle Rock is the county seat of Douglas County, a Republican stronghold in Colorado.

==Education==

===Primary and secondary education===
Douglas County School District, based in Castle Rock, operates 18 public schools in the town. These include 10 elementary schools, two middle schools, two charter schools, one magnet school, one alternative high school, and two high schools: Castle View High School and Douglas County High School. In addition, there are three private primary schools in Castle Rock.

School-board elections in Douglas County are held in odd-numbered years. In recent years, the community has experienced a spirited debate between supporters of significant change in the management of local schools and those who oppose such changes or believe they should advance at a slower pace.

===Libraries===
The Douglas County Libraries public library system is based in Castle Rock, co-located with the local branch library, the Philip S. Miller Library, south of downtown. The Miller Library includes archives and local history and offers several educational and recreational programs to the public. Also, it includes Little Free Library places scattered throughout, such as in the festival park.

==Infrastructure==

===Transportation===
Interstate 25 and U.S. Route 87 run concurrently north-south through Castle Rock. U.S. Route 85, also a north-south route, enters the town from the northwest, meeting I-25 at Exit 184; south of the exit, it runs concurrently with I-25 and U.S. 87. Colorado State Highway 86, an east-west route, enters Castle Rock from the east, then turns north and west as Founders Parkway, terminating at its junction with I-25 at Exit 184.

For local transportation within Castle Rock, the town government sponsors a voucher program for reduced-fare taxi service. This service is available to town residents who are disabled or who do not have access to a vehicle. In addition, the Castle Rock Senior Center offers a shuttle service for resident senior citizens.

Castle Rock does not participate in the Denver metropolitan area&#x27;s Regional Transportation District. Municipal voters decided in November 2005 to opt the town out of the district. As a result, neither bus nor light-rail service to Denver or any of its other suburbs is available from Castle Rock.

BNSF Railway and Union Pacific Railroad each have a freight rail line that runs through Castle Rock. Both lines run parallel to U.S. 85.

===Utilities and water===
CORE Electric Cooperative, based in nearby Sedalia, provides electric power. Black Hills Energy provides natural-gas service. Waste Management and other businesses provide trash removal.

The town government&#x27;s Utilities Department oversees water provision, distribution, and infrastructure maintenance. Historically, nearly all of the water needed by Castle Rock residents was pumped from aquifers below the ground, including the Denver Basin aquifer. Beginning in 2013, when the town developed its first strategic plan for the management of water, Castle Rock has moved toward more use of surface water. Between 2006 and 2018, daily per capita water use in Castle Rock declined from 137 gallons to 115 gallons.

Starting in 2020, Castle Rock expected to begin treating sink, tap, and toilet water to potable water quality standards so that it can be reused. The town aimed to achieve a goal of reliance upon renewable water resources for 75% of municipal needs by 2050 and, by 2020, about one-third of all water used in Castle Rock was expected to be from a reusable source.

As of July 2019 Castle Rock, Denver, and Pitkin County are the first three Colorado municipal or county governments to adopt a state regulation governing greywater reuse.

===Health care===
Castle Rock has several medical offices, an urgent-care facility, and an emergency room. Castle Rock Adventist Hospital, a full-service hospital, opened on August 1, 2013. The 50-bed hospital offers comprehensive health care to the Douglas County area, with labor and delivery suites, NICU, orthopedic surgery, ICU, and medical imaging.

==Media==
Castle Rock has a weekly newspaper, &quot;The Douglas County News-Press&quot;.

Castle Rock is part of the Denver radio and television market. Radio station KJMN is licensed to Castle Rock, but broadcasts from Denver playing a Spanish adult hits format on 92.1 FM. Denver radio station 850 KOA, which broadcasts a news/talk and sports format, operates its 50,000-watt transmitter from a site 10 miles northeast of downtown Castle Rock, in the town of Parker. Another Denver station, KAMP (1430 AM), a CBS Sports Radio affiliate with a sports radio format, operates its transmitter from Highlands Ranch, 13 miles north of downtown Castle Rock.

NPR programming can be heard on Colorado Public Radio&#x27;s KCFR-FM. Castle Rock is also served by the AM signal of KGNU, a noncommercial affiliate of PRI, Pacifica, and the BBC World Service, and which also provides diverse music programming.

Television station KETD, an affiliate of the Estrella TV network, broadcasts on digital channel 46. Licensed to Castle Rock, the station is located near Centennial, Colorado.

==Parks and recreation==
Castle Rock&#x27;s open space and parks comprise 27% the town&#x27;s total land area ( of parks and open space / total land area). Additionally, there are nearly of soft-surface and paved trails.

==Culture==
===Points of interest===
Philip S. Miller Park is the largest park project in Castle Rock. &quot;Phase One&quot; of the park was opened to the public on October 25, 2014. It remains under construction. The park is named after a local banker and philanthropist, who with his wife Jerry, left trust monies to Castle Rock in the mid-1990s. The Phillip S. Miller Activity Center is included in the park&#x27;s 300 acres.

The Castle Rock Historical Museum is in the former Denver and Rio Grande Railway depot building on Elbert Street. This building is purported to have been built in 1875. It is made of rhyolite taken from local quarries. The museum depicts how Castle Rock has changed over the years.

===Sports===
From 1986 through 2006, a professional golf tournament was held in Castle Pines Village. The International, a PGA Tour event, was held in August at the Castle Pines Golf Club.

===Events===
====Castle Rock star lighting====
Since 1936, every Saturday before Thanksgiving, the Town of Castle Rock lights the electric star upon Castle Rock. A lighting event is held downtown that night and is usually accompanied by a fireworks display. The star remains lit from the week before Thanksgiving to the end of the National Western Stock Show in January. This has changed multiple times; following World War II, it was changed to a V, also, the same year as the Denver Broncos being in the Super Bowl, it was changed to orange and blue. Throughout part of the lockdown in early 2020 due to COVID-19, the star was relit as a symbol of unity.

==Notable people==
Notable individuals who were born in or have lived in Castle Rock include:
* Amy Adams (born 1974), actress
* Kirsten Bomblies (born 1973), biologist
* Kat Cammack - United States Representative for Florida&#x27;s 3rd Congressional District
* Jim Cottrell (born 1983), NFL linebacker
* Gary Hallberg (born 1958), professional golfer
* Beth Malone (born 1969), actress
* Christian McCaffrey (born 1996), professional football player (running back)
* Max McCaffrey (born 1994), professional football player (wide receiver)
* Joe Oltmann, political activist and conspiracy theorist
* Will Owen (born 1995), racing driver
* Nelson Rangell (born 1960), jazz musician
* Edward Seidensticker (1921–2007), Japanologist
* Ann Strother (born 1983), WNBA player, coach

==Gallery==

==See also==

* List of municipalities in Colorado
* List of statistical areas in Colorado

==References==
==External links==

* Town of Castle Rock website
* CDOT map of the Town of Castle Rock
* Visit Castle Rock</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q994457" start="0" end="11" title="Castle Rock, Colorado" label="Castle Rock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17" end="31" title="List of municipalities in Colorado#Home rule municipality" label="home-rule town"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="44" end="55" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q257955" start="64" end="90" title="List of municipalities in Colorado" label="most-populous municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q115556" start="94" end="118" title="Douglas County, Colorado" label="Douglas County, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="175" end="186" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="216" end="227" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750084" start="374" end="430" title="Denver-Aurora-Lakewood, CO Metropolitan Statistical Area" label="Denver-Aurora-Lakewood, CO metropolitan statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067421" start="439" end="465" title="Front Range urban corridor" label="Front Range urban corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15207880" start="494" end="524" title="Castle Rock (Colorado)" label="prominent, castle-shaped butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q626136" start="628" end="635" title="Arapaho" label="Arapaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="640" end="648" title="Cheyenne" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8319" start="693" end="701" title="Arkansas River" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q130892" start="706" end="718" title="South Platte River" label="South Platte"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="815" end="836" title="Homestead Act of 1862" label="Homestead Act of 1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q190727" start="855" end="863" title="rhyolite" label="rhyolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="1699" end="1702" title="US$" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190006" start="1740" end="1769" title="Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad" label="Denver and Rio Grande Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="2059" end="2088" title="Works Progress Administration" label="Works Progress Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q618979" start="2359" end="2366" title="Victory over Japan Day" label="V-J Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888675" start="2870" end="2879" title="Home rule in the United States" label="home-rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="3055" end="3091" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q106910945" start="3121" end="3138" title="Castle Rock Depot" label="Castle Rock Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="3400" end="3418" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16828998" start="3453" end="3484" title="Town of Castle Rock v. Gonzales" label="Town of Castle Rock v. Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649437" start="3572" end="3588" title="Third Enforcement Act" label="42 U.S.C. § 1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139231" start="4479" end="4492" title="Interstate 25 in Colorado" label="Interstate 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113564" start="4497" end="4513" title="State Highway 86 (Colorado)" label="State Highway 86"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290020" start="4610" end="4623" title="Rampart Range" label="Rampart Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="4631" end="4646" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="4674" end="4686" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q28912631" start="4833" end="4845" title="Dawson Butte" label="Dawson Butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267408" start="4847" end="4858" title="Devils Head (summit)" label="Devils Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950460" start="4860" end="4874" title="Mount Blue Sky" label="Mount Blue Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q665321" start="4880" end="4890" title="Pikes Peak" label="Pikes Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q130892" start="4930" end="4948" title="South Platte River" label="South Platte River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962773" start="5302" end="5314" title="Cherry Creek (Colorado)" label="Cherry Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q460523" start="5479" end="5493" title="ponderosa pine" label="ponderosa pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266358" start="5544" end="5554" title="Gambel oak" label="Gambel oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476258" start="5584" end="5595" title="pinyon pine" label="pinyon pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q232129" start="5625" end="5640" title="American badger" label="American badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="5642" end="5661" title="American black bear" label="American black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q131907" start="5663" end="5669" title="bobcat" label="bobcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="5671" end="5677" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769110" start="5679" end="5696" title="Colorado chipmunk" label="Colorado chipmunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q388450" start="5698" end="5702" title="crow" label="crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149509" start="5704" end="5717" title="garter snakes" label="garter snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q215250" start="5719" end="5727" title="gray fox" label="gray fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q748448" start="5738" end="5755" title="cottontail rabbit" label="cottontail rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="5757" end="5770" title="mountain lion" label="mountain lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q338831" start="5772" end="5781" title="mule deer" label="mule deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q756901" start="5783" end="5796" title="pocket gopher" label="pocket gopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223829" start="5798" end="5807" title="porcupine" label="porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43604020" start="5809" end="5814" title="skunk" label="skunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q168525" start="5820" end="5828" title="tadpoles" label="tadpoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="5866" end="5878" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="5880" end="5896" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q386569" start="5898" end="5916" title="sharp-shinned hawk" label="sharp-shinned hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q254057" start="5918" end="5937" title="black-billed magpie" label="black-billed magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q457471" start="5939" end="5954" title="red-tailed hawk" label="red-tailed hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q374328" start="5956" end="5966" title="pinyon jay" label="pinyon jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q384342" start="5972" end="5987" title="western tanager" label="western tanager"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067421" start="6057" end="6083" title="Front Range urban corridor" label="Front Range urban corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259818" start="6117" end="6141" title="Denver–Aurora–Boulder Combined Statistical Area" label="Denver metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050231" start="6228" end="6248" title="Castle Pines Village, Colorado" label="Castle Pines Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068090" start="6262" end="6274" title="Castle Pines, Colorado" label="Castle Pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q534029" start="6280" end="6290" title="The Pinery, Colorado" label="The Pinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q266632" start="6325" end="6334" title="Franktown, Colorado" label="Franktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456193" start="6348" end="6356" title="Larkspur, Colorado" label="Larkspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1843374" start="6371" end="6381" title="Perry Park, Colorado" label="Perry Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995206" start="6404" end="6411" title="Sedalia, Colorado" label="Sedalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="6463" end="6479" title="semiarid climate" label="semiarid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="6481" end="6487" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750784" start="7196" end="7207" title="The Meadows, Castle Rock, Colorado" label="The Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050231" start="7210" end="7230" title="Castle Pines Village" label="Castle Pines Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="7349" end="7360" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="7565" end="7570" title="White American" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="7577" end="7582" title="Asian American" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="7589" end="7605" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="7612" end="7627" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="American Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065556" start="7634" end="7650" title="Pacific Islander" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="7708" end="7729" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanics and Latinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="8666" end="8683" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="8775" end="8787" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q257955" start="8872" end="8903" title="Colorado municipalities by population" label="16th-most populous municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="8952" end="8964" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="9160" end="9176" title="Colorado Springs" label="Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259787" start="9184" end="9211" title="Denver Technological Center" label="Denver Technological Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139231" start="9288" end="9292" title="Interstate 25 in Colorado" label="I-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="9308" end="9314" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q330015" start="9343" end="9371" title="Denver International Airport" label="Denver International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11155" end="11177" title="Colorado municipalities#Home rule municipality" label="home-rule municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="11185" end="11200" title="Council–manager government" label="council–manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q696776" start="11884" end="11896" title="city manager" label="town manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123536" start="11898" end="11911" title="city attorney" label="town attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="12643" end="12654" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148664" start="12904" end="12951" title="Colorado&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district" label="Colorado&amp;#x27;s 4th U.S. Congressional District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494453" start="12992" end="13007" title="Colorado Senate" label="Colorado Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494548" start="13037" end="13070" title="Colorado House of Representatives" label="Colorado House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301378" start="13214" end="13244" title="Douglas County School District RE-1" label="Douglas County School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13280" end="13294" title="Public school (government funded)#United States" label="public schools"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13409" end="13432" title="Alternative school#United States" label="alternative high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050333" start="13456" end="13479" title="Castle View High School" label="Castle View High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301368" start="13484" end="13510" title="Douglas County High School (Castle Rock, Colorado)" label="Douglas County High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991992" start="13900" end="13924" title="Douglas County Libraries" label="Douglas County Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6650101" start="14208" end="14227" title="Little Free Library" label="Little Free Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q93801" start="14329" end="14342" title="Interstate 25" label="Interstate 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q410730" start="14347" end="14360" title="U.S. Route 87" label="U.S. Route 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q410716" start="14411" end="14424" title="U.S. Route 85" label="U.S. Route 85"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113564" start="14577" end="14602" title="State Highway 86 (Colorado)" label="Colorado State Highway 86"/>
<link wikidata="Q689044" start="14833" end="14840" title="voucher" label="voucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309183" start="15152" end="15184" title="Regional Transportation District" label="Regional Transportation District"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="15383" end="15395" title="BNSF Railway" label="BNSF Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="15400" end="15422" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q880296" start="15624" end="15642" title="Black Hills Energy" label="Black Hills Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552219" start="15673" end="15689" title="Waste Management, Inc" label="Waste Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075169" start="16783" end="16792" title="greywater" label="greywater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295316" start="16892" end="16906" title="emergency room" label="emergency room"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="17192" end="17201" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="17310" end="17323" title="Radio station" label="Radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331520" start="17324" end="17328" title="KJMN" label="KJMN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545675" start="17332" end="17340" title="city of license" label="licensed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="17394" end="17401" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510800" start="17402" end="17412" title="adult hits" label="adult hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="17428" end="17430" title="FM broadcasting" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334770" start="17453" end="17460" title="KOA (AM)" label="850 KOA"/>
<link wikidata="Q502319" start="17481" end="17490" title="news/talk" label="news/talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q385825" start="17618" end="17624" title="Parker, Colorado" label="Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6328832" start="17650" end="17654" title="KAMP (AM)" label="KAMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009272" start="17668" end="17684" title="CBS Sports Radio" label="CBS Sports Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004870" start="17702" end="17714" title="sports radio" label="sports radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="17811" end="17814" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148861" start="17843" end="17871" title="Colorado Public Radio" label="Colorado Public Radio&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326740" start="17872" end="17879" title="KCFR-FM" label="KCFR-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6329787" start="17928" end="17932" title="KGNU" label="KGNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116341" start="17963" end="17966" title="Public Radio International" label="PRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045587" start="17968" end="17976" title="Pacifica Radio" label="Pacifica"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="17986" end="18003" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616075" start="18057" end="18075" title="Television station" label="Television station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6328673" start="18076" end="18080" title="KETD" label="KETD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059054" start="18102" end="18113" title="Estrella TV" label="Estrella TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q387322" start="18210" end="18230" title="Centennial, Colorado" label="Centennial, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841249" start="18277" end="18287" title="Open space reserve" label="open space"/>
<link wikidata="Q106910945" start="18936" end="18980" title="Castle Rock Depot" label="Denver and Rio Grande Railway depot building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050231" start="19248" end="19268" title="Castle Pines Village" label="Castle Pines Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771965" start="19270" end="19287" title="The International (golf)" label="The International"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="19291" end="19299" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="19836" end="19850" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q481832" start="20112" end="20121" title="Amy Adams" label="Amy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416066" start="20145" end="20161" title="Kirsten Bomblies" label="Kirsten Bomblies"/>
<link wikidata="Q98523243" start="20187" end="20198" title="Kat Cammack" label="Kat Cammack"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194372" start="20278" end="20290" title="Jim Cottrell" label="Jim Cottrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="20304" end="20307" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q528145" start="20308" end="20318" title="linebacker" label="linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758501" start="20321" end="20334" title="Gary Hallberg" label="Gary Hallberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="20361" end="20365" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q19850869" start="20370" end="20381" title="Beth Malone" label="Beth Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621996" start="20405" end="20424" title="Christian McCaffrey" label="Christian McCaffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="20451" end="20459" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q24248245" start="20484" end="20497" title="Max McCaffrey" label="Max McCaffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q124038546" start="20558" end="20569" title="Joe Oltmann" label="Joe Oltmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q56512115" start="20616" end="20625" title="Will Owen (racing driver)" label="Will Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710391" start="20655" end="20669" title="Nelson Rangell" label="Nelson Rangell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272933" start="20699" end="20719" title="Edward Seidensticker" label="Edward Seidensticker"/>
<link wikidata="Q875592" start="20733" end="20745" title="Japanese studies" label="Japanologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q293240" start="20748" end="20760" title="Ann Strother" label="Ann Strother"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="20774" end="20778" title="WNBA" label="WNBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q257955" start="20823" end="20857" title="List of municipalities in Colorado" label="List of municipalities in Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149013" start="20860" end="20897" title="List of statistical areas in Colorado" label="List of statistical areas in Colorado"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56312" wikidata="Q93801" url="?curid=56312" title="Interstate 25">
<text>Interstate 25 (I-25), also known as the Pan-American Freeway, is a major Interstate Highway in the western United States. It is primarily a north–south highway, serving as the main route through New Mexico, Colorado, and Wyoming. I-25 stretches from I-10 at Las Cruces, New Mexico (approximately north of El Paso, Texas) to I-90 in Buffalo, Wyoming (approximately south of the Montana–Wyoming border). It passes through or near Albuquerque, New Mexico; Pueblo, Colorado; Colorado Springs, Colorado; Denver, Colorado; Fort Collins, Colorado; and Cheyenne, Wyoming. The I-25 corridor is mainly rural, especially in Wyoming, excluding the Albuquerque metropolitan area and the Front Range urban corridor from Pueblo to Cheyenne.

The part of I-25 in Colorado passes just east of the Front Range of the Rocky Mountains. That stretch was involved in a large-scale renovation named the Transportation Expansion (T-REX) Project in Denver and the Colorado Springs Metropolitan Interstate Expansion (COSMIX). These projects, and others in New Mexico, were necessary because these stretches of I-25 were originally inadequately designed and constructed (the pavement was deteriorating rapidly) and also because urban areas, like Albuquerque, Colorado Springs, and Denver, had tripled and quadrupled in population much earlier than anyone had anticipated back in the 1950s and 1960s. Major highway work for the T-REX project ended on August 22, 2006. The COSMIX project was completed in December 2007. Several other smaller improvement projects for I-25 are still ongoing within New Mexico and Colorado.

==Route description==
|NM
|-
|CO
|-
|WY
|-
|Total
|}
===New Mexico===

I-25 begins at I-10&#x27;s exit 144 in Las Cruces, just south of the New Mexico State University campus. I-25 runs concurrently with US Route 85 (US 85) at this point and carries this concurrency for the entire length of its run in New Mexico. Immediately, three exits provide access to the city, including one for US 70. When I-25 reaches Truth or Consequences, it is parallel to Elephant Butte Lake State Park. From Las Cruces to Santa Fe, I-25 follows the route of the Camino Real de Tierra Adentro.

As I-25 nears Albuquerque, it has interchanges with highways, such as US 380, and a concurrency with US 60. Further north, State Road 6 (NM 6), former US 66, meets up with I-25 in Los Lunas. Through Albuquerque, I-25 is named the Pan American Freeway, and there are frequent exits to city streets. A major interchange with I-40 (which is styled as the Coronado Freeway in the city) is named the Big I. It was given an honorable mention by the US Department of Transportation and the Federal Highway Administration for excellence in urban highway design in 2002.

Leaving Albuquerque to the north, I-25 curves to the northeast as it approaches Santa Fe. Continuing &#x27;northbound&#x27; at Santa Fe, I-25 heads southeast for approximately traveling through the Santa Fe National Forest and crossing Glorieta Pass (elevation ). It turns north again at Blanchard toward Las Vegas. The highway maintains a north and northeast orientation as it leaves New Mexico traversing Raton Pass () and enters Colorado. Due to its elevation and frequent winter snowstorms, I-25 is sometimes impassible and closed in both directions at Raton Pass during winter months. From Santa Fe to Trinidad, Colorado, I-25 approximates part of the route of the Santa Fe Trail. For its entire length in the state, I-25 shares its alignment with US 85, although the latter is unsigned.

===Colorado===

I-25 has many nicknames through the state&#x27;s larger cities. In Denver, it is called the Valley Highway, as the highway parallels the course of the South Platte River throughout the downtown area and is often sunken below ground level. The section in El Paso County is named the Ronald Reagan Highway, and, through Pueblo, it is named the John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway. 

In the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1973, a transcontinental highway was named after President Dwight D. Eisenhower, in commemoration of the route of the US Army&#x27;s 1919 convoy. This route, rather than following a single highway, spans several, including I-25 in Denver. This combination of routes was intended to approximate the original 1919 convoy route.

The designation of this highway, while clear in intent, has not seen widespread adoption in terms of signage or recognition, likely due to the irregular nature of the route. Despite this, a commemorative sign was installed in 1986 in the tourist information center off I-70 in Kansas City, Kansas. Congress attempted to honor Eisenhower&#x27;s contributions to the Interstate System once more in 1990, leading to the renaming of the Interstate System as the &quot;Dwight D. Eisenhower System of Interstate and Defense Highways&quot;.

I-25 enters Colorado south of the city of Trinidad. It is the main north–south route through Colorado with a length of . The Interstate exits Colorado in the north about south of Cheyenne, Wyoming. I-25 serves all the major cities in Colorado that are east of the Rocky Mountains, such as Denver, Colorado Springs, Pueblo, Fort Collins, and Greeley. For the entire distance in Colorado, from the north to the south, the Rocky Mountains are clearly visible.

There are also several important military and air bases and institutions along this route, such as Buckley Space Force Base, the Cheyenne Mountain Complex headquarters of NORAD, Fort Carson, Peterson Space Force Base, and the United States Air Force Academy.

I-25 crosses the Palmer Divide between Denver and Colorado Springs, providing some of the highway&#x27;s most scenic views of the Rocky Mountains and its foothills. Blizzards and high winds on this stretch (particularly over Monument Hill) are notorious for causing traffic problems during the winter months.

The section of I-25 that is between the northern border of Pueblo County and the New Mexico state line is named the &quot;John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway&quot; in honor of President Kennedy&#x27;s support of water resources development in the Arkansas River Valley.

===Wyoming===

I-25 enters Wyoming south of the state capital, Cheyenne. After traveling through Cheyenne, I-25 continues north to Douglas, passing many plateaus and also railroad tracks. Commonly, very long trains can be seen slowly moving alongside this highway. Around Douglas, this Interstate Highway curves somewhat to the west toward Casper. Once through Casper, I-25 turns due north, and it goes as far as Buffalo, where it ends at an interchange with I-90. I-90 then provides the connection to Montana.

==History==
The section in New Mexico between Romeroville and Los Lunas closely follows the original alignment of US 66, which was later shortened and realigned to run due west from Santa Rosa. Now, that has been replaced with I-40.

==Junction list==
;New Mexico
: on the Las Cruces–University Park line. I-25/US 85 share an unsigned concurrency to Fountain, Colorado.
: in Las Cruces
: west of San Antonio
: in Socorro. The highways travel concurrently to south-southwest of Abeytas.
: in Albuquerque
: in Bernalillo
: south of Santa Fe. I-25/US 84 travels concurrently to Romeroville. I-25/US 285 travels concurrently to Eldorado at Santa Fe. These are wrong-way concurrencies; driving east, one is on I-25 North and US 84 and 285 South.
: south of Raton. The highways travel concurrently to Raton.
: in Raton. I-25/US 87 travels concurrently to southeast of Glenrock, Wyoming.
;Colorado
: in Trinidad. The highways travel concurrently to Walsenburg.
: in Pueblo. The highways travel concurrently through Pueblo.
: in Colorado Springs. The highways travel concurrently through Colorado Springs.
: in Colorado Springs
: in Colorado Springs. The highways travel concurrently to Castle Rock.
: in Denver
: in Denver
: in Denver. The highways travel concurrently through Denver.
: in Denver. The highways travel concurrently through Denver.
: in Denver
: in Denver
: southeast of Twin Lakes
: on the Twin Lakes–Sherrelwood–Welby line
: in Loveland
;Wyoming
: south-southwest of Cheyenne
: southwest of Cheyenne
: in Cheyenne. The highways travel concurrently to Ranchettes.
: west-southwest of Dwyer Junction. The highways travel concurrently to southeast of Glenrock.
: in Orin. I-25/US 20 travels concurrently to southeast of Glenrock.
: in Casper. I-25/US 20/US 26 travels concurrently to the Casper–Bar Nunn city line. I-25/US 87 travels concurrently to north-northeast of Buffalo.
: in Buffalo
: north-northeast of Buffalo
==Related routes==
* Business routes of Interstate 25
* Interstate 225

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Interstate 25 by Matthew Salek</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q93801" start="0" end="13" title="Interstate 25" label="Interstate 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q93801" start="15" end="19" title="Interstate 25" label="I-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q93801" start="40" end="60" title="Interstate 25" label="Pan-American Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="73" end="91" title="Interstate Highway" label="Interstate Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="107" end="120" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="195" end="205" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="207" end="215" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="221" end="228" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q79914" start="250" end="254" title="Interstate 10" label="I-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q33264" start="258" end="280" title="Las Cruces, New Mexico" label="Las Cruces, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="305" end="319" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q94958" start="324" end="328" title="Interstate 90" label="I-90"/>
<link wikidata="Q983453" start="332" end="348" title="Buffalo, Wyoming" label="Buffalo, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="377" end="384" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="428" end="451" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q675576" start="453" end="469" title="Pueblo, Colorado" label="Pueblo, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="471" end="497" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="499" end="515" title="Denver" label="Denver, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q490732" start="517" end="539" title="Fort Collins, Colorado" label="Fort Collins, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q39042" start="545" end="562" title="Cheyenne, Wyoming" label="Cheyenne, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712839" start="636" end="665" title="Albuquerque metropolitan area" label="Albuquerque metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067421" start="674" end="700" title="Front Range urban corridor" label="Front Range urban corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470027" start="780" end="791" title="Front Range" label="Front Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="799" end="814" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139131" start="880" end="920" title="Transportation Expansion Project" label="Transportation Expansion (T-REX) Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q981638" start="1617" end="1619" title="Interstate 25 in New Mexico" label="NM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139231" start="1624" end="1626" title="Interstate 25 in Colorado" label="CO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733221" start="1631" end="1633" title="Interstate 25 in Wyoming" label="WY"/>
<link wikidata="Q79914" start="1680" end="1684" title="Interstate 10" label="I-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353248" start="1734" end="1761" title="New Mexico State University" label="New Mexico State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159092" start="1775" end="1792" title="concurrency (road)" label="runs concurrently"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1798" end="1809" title="U.S. Route 85" label="US Route 85"/>
<link wikidata="Q410063" start="1980" end="1985" title="U.S. Route 70" label="US 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q431932" start="2005" end="2026" title="Truth or Consequences, New Mexico" label="Truth or Consequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359305" start="2046" end="2076" title="Elephant Butte Lake State Park" label="Elephant Butte Lake State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q911953" start="2137" end="2166" title="Camino Real de Tierra Adentro" label="Camino Real de Tierra Adentro"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="2183" end="2194" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q981610" start="2239" end="2245" title="U.S. Route 380" label="US 380"/>
<link wikidata="Q409952" start="2270" end="2275" title="U.S. Route 60" label="US 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250279" start="2292" end="2304" title="New Mexico State Road 6" label="State Road 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q79934" start="2320" end="2325" title="U.S. Route 66" label="US 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q549516" start="2349" end="2358" title="Los Lunas, New Mexico" label="Los Lunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q94209" start="2492" end="2496" title="Interstate 40" label="I-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250967" start="2564" end="2569" title="Big I" label="Big I"/>
<link wikidata="Q852211" start="2612" end="2643" title="US Department of Transportation" label="US Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q800112" start="2652" end="2682" title="Federal Highway Administration" label="Federal Highway Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="2812" end="2820" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419545" start="2930" end="2954" title="Santa Fe National Forest" label="Santa Fe National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916895" start="2968" end="2981" title="Glorieta Pass" label="Glorieta Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q676171" start="3037" end="3046" title="Las Vegas, New Mexico" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q569988" start="3139" end="3149" title="Raton Pass" label="Raton Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q74198" start="3339" end="3357" title="Trinidad, Colorado" label="Trinidad, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856887" start="3402" end="3416" title="Santa Fe Trail" label="Santa Fe Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="3609" end="3615" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q130892" start="3693" end="3711" title="South Platte River" label="South Platte River"/>
<link wikidata="Q111774" start="3796" end="3810" title="El Paso County, Colorado" label="El Paso County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365202" start="3824" end="3845" title="Ronald Reagan Highway" label="Ronald Reagan Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q675576" start="3860" end="3866" title="Pueblo, Colorado" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q800081" start="3927" end="3958" title="Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1973" label="Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="4013" end="4033" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560653" start="4072" end="4098" title="1919 Motor Transport Corps convoy" label="US Army&amp;#x27;s 1919 convoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q94632" start="4550" end="4554" title="Interstate 70" label="I-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q486472" start="4558" end="4577" title="Kansas City, Kansas" label="Kansas City, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="4828" end="4836" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q74198" start="4858" end="4866" title="Trinidad, Colorado" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q39042" start="4995" end="5012" title="Cheyenne, Wyoming" label="Cheyenne, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="5080" end="5095" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="5113" end="5129" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q490732" start="5139" end="5151" title="Fort Collins, Colorado" label="Fort Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q94274" start="5157" end="5164" title="Greeley, Colorado" label="Greeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499338" start="5373" end="5397" title="Buckley Space Force Base" label="Buckley Space Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q21767547" start="5403" end="5428" title="Cheyenne Mountain Complex" label="Cheyenne Mountain Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q748010" start="5445" end="5450" title="NORAD" label="NORAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q602739" start="5452" end="5463" title="Fort Carson" label="Fort Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q772391" start="5465" end="5490" title="Peterson Space Force Base" label="Peterson Space Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="5500" end="5531" title="United States Air Force Academy" label="United States Air Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128226" start="5551" end="5564" title="Palmer Divide" label="Palmer Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q312731" start="5903" end="5916" title="Pueblo County, Colorado" label="Pueblo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="5925" end="5935" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16161386" start="6088" end="6109" title="Arkansas River Valley" label="Arkansas River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q39042" start="6175" end="6183" title="Cheyenne, Wyoming" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q983438" start="6243" end="6250" title="Douglas, Wyoming" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q223177" start="6452" end="6458" title="Casper, Wyoming" label="Casper"/>
<link wikidata="Q983453" start="6525" end="6532" title="Buffalo, Wyoming" label="Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q94958" start="6571" end="6575" title="Interstate 90" label="I-90"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="6614" end="6621" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q549516" start="6686" end="6695" title="Los Lunas, New Mexico" label="Los Lunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q79934" start="6738" end="6743" title="U.S. Route 66" label="US 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q610649" start="6806" end="6816" title="Santa Rosa, New Mexico" label="Santa Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q94209" start="6851" end="6855" title="Interstate 40" label="I-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q33264" start="6897" end="6907" title="Las Cruces, New Mexico" label="Las Cruces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460069" start="6908" end="6923" title="University Park, New Mexico" label="University Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897470" start="6950" end="6958" title="Unsigned highway" label="unsigned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003250" start="6974" end="6992" title="Fountain, Colorado" label="Fountain, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q516415" start="7020" end="7031" title="San Antonio, New Mexico" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q503818" start="7037" end="7044" title="Socorro, New Mexico" label="Socorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667262" start="7101" end="7108" title="Abeytas, New Mexico" label="Abeytas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="7115" end="7126" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q822204" start="7132" end="7142" title="Bernalillo, New Mexico" label="Bernalillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="7154" end="7162" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7199" end="7210" title="Romeroville, New Mexico" label="Romeroville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399343" start="7248" end="7268" title="Eldorado at Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Eldorado at Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7280" end="7303" title="Concurrency (road)#Wrong-way concurrencies" label="wrong-way concurrencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q990990" start="7376" end="7381" title="Raton, New Mexico" label="Raton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028734" start="7486" end="7503" title="Glenrock, Wyoming" label="Glenrock, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q74198" start="7520" end="7528" title="Trinidad, Colorado" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778949" start="7566" end="7576" title="Walsenburg, Colorado" label="Walsenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q675576" start="7583" end="7589" title="Pueblo, Colorado" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="7645" end="7661" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q994457" start="7803" end="7814" title="Castle Rock, Colorado" label="Castle Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="7821" end="7827" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901403" start="8003" end="8013" title="Twin Lakes, Adams County, Colorado" label="Twin Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729611" start="8034" end="8045" title="Sherrelwood, Colorado" label="Sherrelwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161532" start="8046" end="8051" title="Welby, Colorado" label="Welby"/>
<link wikidata="Q876195" start="8062" end="8070" title="Loveland, Colorado" label="Loveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q39042" start="8101" end="8109" title="Cheyenne, Wyoming" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942363" start="8185" end="8195" title="Ranchettes, Wyoming" label="Ranchettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714705" start="8217" end="8231" title="Dwyer Junction, Wyoming" label="Dwyer Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4452078" start="8297" end="8301" title="Orin, Wyoming" label="Orin"/>
<link wikidata="Q223177" start="8366" end="8372" title="Casper, Wyoming" label="Casper"/>
<link wikidata="Q983453" start="8500" end="8507" title="Buffalo, Wyoming" label="Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112752" start="8572" end="8604" title="Business routes of Interstate 25" label="Business routes of Interstate 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139251" start="8607" end="8621" title="Interstate 225" label="Interstate 225"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56313" wikidata="Q702232" url="?curid=56313" title="Zoning">
<text>In urban planning, zoning is a method in which a municipality or other tier of government divides land into &quot;zones&quot;, each of which has a set of regulations for new development that differs from other zones. Zones may be defined for a single use (e.g. residential, industrial), they may combine several compatible activities by use, or in the case of form-based zoning, the differing regulations may govern the density, size and shape of allowed buildings whatever their use. The planning rules for each zone determine whether planning permission for a given development may be granted. Zoning may specify a variety of outright and conditional uses of land. It may indicate the size and dimensions of lots that land may be subdivided into, or the form and scale of buildings. These guidelines are set in order to guide urban growth and development.

Zoning is the most common regulatory urban planning method used by local governments in developed countries. Exceptions include the United Kingdom and the City of Houston, Texas.
Most zoning systems have a procedure for granting variances (exceptions to the zoning rules), usually because of some perceived hardship caused by the particular nature of the property in question.

== History ==
The origins of zoning districts can be traced back to antiquity. The ancient walled city was the predecessor for classifying and regulating land, based on use. Outside the city walls were the undesirable functions, which were usually based on noise and smell. The space between the walls is where unsanitary and dangerous activities occurred such as butchering, waste disposal, and brick-firing. Within the walls were civic and religious places, and where the majority of people lived.

Beyond distinguishing between urban and non-urban land, most ancient cities further classified land types and uses inside their walls. This was practiced in many regions of the world – for example, in China during the Zhou Dynasty (1046 – 256 BC), in India during the Vedic Era (1500 – 500 BC), and in the military camps that spread throughout the Roman Empire (31 BC – 476 AD).

Throughout the Age of Enlightenment and Industrial Revolution, cultural and socio-economic shifts led to the rapid increase in the enforcement and invention of urban regulations. The shifts were informed by a new scientific rationality, the advent of mass production and complex manufacturing, and the subsequent onset of urbanisation. Industry leaving the home reshaped modern cities. The definition of home was tied to the definition of economy, which caused a much greater mixing of uses within the residential quarters of cities.

Separation between uses is a feature of many planned cities designed before the advent of zoning. A notable example is Adelaide in South Australia, whose city centre, along with the suburb of North Adelaide, is surrounded on all sides by a park, the Adelaide Park Lands. The park was designed by Colonel William Light in 1836 in order to physically separate the city centre from its suburbs. Low density residential areas surround the park, providing a pleasant walk between work in the city within and the family homes outside.

Sir Ebenezer Howard, founder of the garden city movement, cited Adelaide as an example of how green open space could be used to prevent cities from expanding beyond their boundaries and coalescing. His design for an ideal city, published in his 1902 book Garden Cities of To-morrow, envisaged separate concentric rings of public buildings, parks, retail space, residential areas and industrial areas, all surrounded by open space and farmland. All retail activity was to be conducted within a single glass-roofed building, an early concept for the modern shopping centre inspired by the Crystal Palace. 

However, these planned or ideal cities were static designs embodied in a single masterplan. What was lacking was a regulatory mechanism to allow the city to develop over time, setting guidelines to developers and private citizens over what could be built where. The first modern zoning systems were applied in the United States with the Los Angeles zoning ordinances of 1904 and the New York City 1916 Zoning Resolution.

== Types ==
There are a great variety of zoning types, some of which focus on regulating building form and the relation of buildings to the street with mixed uses, known as form-based, others with separating land uses, known as use-based, or a combination thereof. Use-based zoning systems can comprise single-use zones, mixed-use zones - where a compatible group of uses are allowed to co-exist - or a combination of both single and mixed-use zones in one system.

The main approaches include use-based, form-based, performance and incentive zoning. There are also several additional zoning provisions used in combination with the main approaches. 

=== Main approaches to zoning ===

==== Use-based zoning ====

Use-based or functional zoning systems can comprise single-use zones, mixed-use zones—where a compatible group of uses are allowed to co-exist —or a combination of both single- and mixed-use zones in one system.

===== Single-use zoning =====

The primary purpose of single-use zoning is to geographically separate uses that are thought to be incompatible. In practice, zoning is also used to prevent new development from interfering with existing uses and/or to preserve the character of a community.

Single-use zoning is where only one kind of use is allowed per zone, or district. It is also known as exclusionary zoning or, in the United States, as &quot;Euclidean zoning&quot; because of a court case in Euclid, Ohio, &quot;Village of Euclid, Ohio v. Ambler Realty Co.&quot; , which established its constitutionality. It has been the dominant system of zoning in North America, especially the United States, since its first implementation.

Commonly defined single-use districts include: residential, commercial, and industrial. Each category can have a number of sub-categories, for example, within the commercial category there may be separate districts for small retail, large retail, office use, lodging and others, while industrial may be subdivided into heavy manufacturing, light assembly and warehouse uses. Special districts may also be created for purposes like public facilities, recreational amenities, and green space.

The application of single-use zoning has led to the distinctive form of many cities in the United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, in which a very dense urban core, often containing skyscrapers, is surrounded by low density residential suburbs, characterised by large gardens and leafy streets. Some metropolitan areas such as Minneapolis–Saint Paul and Sydney have several such cores.

===== Mixed-use zoning =====
Mixed-use zoning combines residential, commercial, office, and public uses into a single space. Mixed-use zoning can be vertical, within a single building, or horizontal, involving multiple buildings. 

Planning and community activist Jane Jacobs wrote extensively on the connections between the separation of uses and the failure of urban renewal projects in New York City. She advocated dense mixed-use developments and walkable streets. In contrast to villages and towns, in which many residents know one another, and low-density outer suburbs that attract few visitors, cities and inner city areas have the problem of maintaining order between strangers. This order is maintained when, throughout the day and evening, there are sufficient people present with eyes on the street. This can be accomplished in successful urban districts that have a great diversity of uses, creating interest and attracting visitors. Jacobs&#x27; writings, along with increasing concerns about urban sprawl, are often credited with inspiring the New Urbanism movement.

To accommodate the New Urbanist vision of walkable communities combining cafés, restaurants, offices and residential development in a single area, mixed-use zones have been created within some zoning systems. These still use the basic regulatory mechanisms of zoning, excluding incompatible uses such as heavy industry or sewage farms, while allowing compatible uses such as residential, commercial and retail activities so that people can live, work and socialise within a compact geographic area.

The mixing of land uses is common throughout the world. Mixed-use zoning has particular relevance in the United States, where it is proposed as a remedy to the problems caused by widespread single-use zoning.

==== Form-based zoning ====
Form-based or intensity zoning regulates not the type of land use, but the form that land use may take. For instance, form-based zoning in a dense area may insist on low setbacks, high density, and pedestrian accessibility. Form-based codes (FBCs) are designed to directly respond to the physical structure of a community in order to create more walkable and adaptable environments.
Form-based zoning codes have five main elements: a regulating plan, public standards, building standards, and precise definitions of technical terms. Form-based codes recognize the interrelated nature of all components of land-use planning—zoning, subdivision, and public works—and integrate them to define districts based on the community&#x27;s desired character and intensity of development.

The French planning system is mostly form-based; zones in French cities generally allow many types of uses. The city of Paris has used its zoning system to concentrate high-density office buildings in the district of La Défense rather than allow heritage buildings across the city to be demolished to make way for them, as is often the case in London or New York. The construction of the Montparnasse Tower in 1973 led to an outcry. As a result, two years after its completion the construction of buildings over seven storeys high in the city centre was banned.

==== Performance zoning ====
Performance zoning, also known as flexible or impact zoning or effects-based planning, was first advocated by Lane Kendig in 1973. It uses performance-based or goal-oriented criteria to establish review parameters for proposed development projects. Performance zoning may use a menu of compliance options where a property developer can earn points or credits for limiting environmental impacts, including affordable housing units, or providing public amenities. In addition to the menu and points system, there may be additional discretionary criteria included in the review process. Performance zoning may be applied only to a specific type of development, such as housing, and may be combined with a system of use-based districts. 

Performance zoning is flexible, logical, and transparent while offering a form of accountability. These qualities are in contrast with the seemingly arbitrary nature of use-based zoning. Performance zoning can also fairly balance a region&#x27;s environmental and housing needs across local jurisdictions. Performance zoning balances principles of markets and private property rights with environmental protection goals. However, performance zoning can be extremely difficult to implement due to the complexity of preparing an impact study for each project, and can require the supervising authority to exercise a lot of discretion. Performance zoning has not been adopted widely in the US. 

==== Incentive zoning ====
Incentive zoning allows property developers to develop land more intensively, such as with greater density or taller buildings, in exchange for providing some public benefits, such as environmental amenities or affordable housing units. The public benefits most often incentivised by US cities are &quot;mixed-use development, open space conservation, walkability, affordable housing, and public parks.&quot; 

Incentive zoning allows for a high degree of flexibility, but may be complex to administer. The more a proposed development takes advantage of incentive criteria, the more closely it has to be reviewed on a discretionary basis. The initial creation of the incentive structure in order to best serve planning priorities also may be challenging and often requires extensive ongoing revision to maintain balance between incentive magnitude and value given to developers. Incentive zoning may be most effective in communities with well-established standards and where demand for both land and for specific amenities is high. However, hidden costs may still offset its benefits. Incentive zoning has also been criticized for increasing traffic, reducing natural light, and offering developers larger rewards than those reaped by the public.

=== Additional provisions ===
Additional zoning provisions exist that are not their own distinct types of zoning but seek to improve existing varieties through the incorporation of flexible practices and other elements such as information and communication technologies (ICTs).

==== Smart zoning ====
Smart zoning is a broad term that consists of several alternatives to use-based zoning that incorporate information and communication technologies. There are a number of different techniques to accomplish smart zoning. Floating zones, cluster zoning, and planned unit developments (PUDs) are possible—even as the conventional use-based code exists—or the conventional code may be completely replaced by a smart performance or form-based code, as the city of Miami did in 2019. The incorporation of ICTs to measure metrics such as walkability, and the flexibility and adaptability that smart zoning can provide, have been cited as advantages of smart zoning over &quot;non-smart&quot; performance or form-based codes.

==== Floating zones ====
Floating zones describe a zoning district&#x27;s characteristics and codify requirements for its establishment, but its location remains unspecified until conditions exist to implement that type of zoning district. When the criteria for implementation of a floating zone are met, the floating zone ceases &quot;to float&quot; and its location is established by a zoning amendment. 

==== Cluster zoning ====
Cluster zoning permits residential uses to be clustered more closely together than normally allowed, thereby leaving substantial land area to be devoted to open space. Cluster zoning has been favored for its preservation of open space and reduction in construction and utility costs via consolidation, although existing residents may often disapprove due to a reduction in lot sizes.

==== Planned unit development (PUD) ====

The term planned unit development (PUD) can refer either to the regulatory process or to the development itself. A PUD groups multiple compatible land uses within a single unified development. A PUD can be residential, mixed-use, or a larger master-planned community. Rather than being governed by standard zoning ordinances, the developer negotiates terms with the local government. At best, a PUD provides flexibility to create convenient ways for residents to access commercial and other amenities. In the US, residents of a PUD have an ongoing role in management of the development through a homeowner&#x27;s association.

==== Pattern zoning ====
Pattern zoning is a zoning technique in which a municipality provides licensed, pre-approved building designs, typically with an expedited permitting process. Pattern zoning is used to reduce barriers to housing development, create more affordable housing, reduce burdens on permit-review staff, and create quality housing designs within a certain neighborhood or jurisdiction. Pattern zoning may also be used to promote certain building types such as missing middle housing and affordable small-scale commercial properties. In some cases, a municipality purchases design patterns and constructs the properties themselves while in other cases the municipality offers the patterns for private development.

==== Hybrid zoning ====
A hybrid zoning code combines two or more approaches, often use-based and form-based zoning. Hybrid zoning can be used to introduce form and design considerations into an existing community&#x27;s zoning without completely rewriting the zoning ordinance.

Composite zoning is a particular type of hybrid zoning that combines use, form, and site design components: 

* the use component establishes how land can be used within a district, as in use-based or functional zoning;
* the form (also known as architectural) component sets standards for building design, such as height and facades; 
* the site design component specifies how buildings are situated on the site, such as setbacks and open space.

An advantage of composite zoning is the ability to create flexible zoning districts for smoother transitions between adjacent properties with different uses.

==== Inclusionary zoning ====

Inclusionary zoning refers to policies to increase the number of housing units within a development that are affordable to low and middle-income households. These policies can be mandatory as part of performance zoning or based on voluntary incentives, such as allowing greater density of development.

==== Overlay zoning ====
An overlay zone is a zoning district that overlaps one or more zoning districts to address a particular concern or feature of that area, such as wetlands, historic buildings or transit-oriented development. Overlay zoning has the advantage of providing targeted regulation to address a specific issue, such as a natural hazard, without having to significantly rewrite an existing zoning ordinance. However, development of overlay zoning regulation often requires significant technical expertise.

==== Transferable development rights ====
Transferable development rights, also known as transfer of development credits and transferable development units, are based on the concept that with land ownership comes the right of use of land, or land development. These land-based development rights can, in some jurisdictions, be used, unused, sold, or otherwise transferred by the owner of a parcel. These are typically used to transfer development rights from rural areas (sending sites) to urban areas (receiving sites) with more demand and infrastructure to support development.

==== Spot zoning ====
Spot zoning is a controversial practice in which a small part of a larger zoning district is rezoned in a way that is not consistent with the community&#x27;s broader planning process. While a jurisdiction can rezone even a single parcel of land in some cases, spot zoning is often disallowed when the change would conflict with the policies and objectives of existing land-use plans. Other factors that may be considered in these cases are the size of the parcel, the zoning categories involved, how adjacent properties are zoned and used, and expected benefits and harms to the landowner, neighbors, and community.

==== Conditional zoning ====
Conditional zoning is a legislative process in which site-specific standards and conditions become part of the zoning ordinance at the request of the property owner. The conditions may be more or less restrictive than the standard zoning. Conditional zoning can be considered spot zoning and can be challenged on those grounds.

Conditional zoning should not be confused with conditional-use permits (also called special-use permits), a quasi-judicial process that enables land uses that, because of their special nature, may be suitable only in certain locations, or when arranged or operated in a particular manner. Uses which might be disallowed under current zoning, such as a school or a community center, can be permitted via conditional-use permits.

==== Contract zoning ====
Contract zoning is a controversial practice in which there is a bilateral agreement between a property owner and a local government to rezone a property in exchange for a commitment from the developer. It typically involves loosening restrictions on how the property can be used. Contract zoning is controversial and sometimes prohibited because it deviates from the broader planning process and has been considered an illegal bargaining away of the government&#x27;s police powers to enforce zoning.

==== Fiscal zoning ====
Fiscal zoning is a controversial practice in which local governments use land use regulation, including zoning, to encourage land uses that generate high tax revenue and exclude uses that place a high demand on public services.

==Effectiveness and criticism==
Environmental activists argue that putting everyday uses out of walking distance of each other leads to an increase in traffic, since people have to own cars in order to live a normal life where their basic human needs are met, and get in their cars and drive to meet their needs throughout the day. Single-use zoning and urban sprawl have also been criticized as making work–family balance more difficult to achieve, as greater distances need to be covered in order to integrate the different life domains. These issues are especially acute in the United States, with its high level of car usage combined with insufficient or poorly maintained urban rail and metro systems.

Some economists claim that zoning laws work against economic efficiency, reduce responsiveness to consumer demands and hinder development in a free economy, as poor zoning restrictions hinder the more efficient usage of a given area. Even without zoning restrictions, a landfill, for example, would likely gravitate to cheaper land and not a residential area. Single-use zoning laws can get in the way of creative developments like mixed-use buildings and can even stop harmless activities like yard sales. The Houston example of &quot;non-zoning&quot; or &quot;private zoning&quot; with no restriction on particular land use but with other development code shows a combination of private and public planning.

Other critics of zoning argue that zoning laws are a disincentive to provide housing which results in an increase in housing costs and a decrease in productive economic output. For example, A 2017 study showed that if all states deregulated their zoning laws only halfway to the level of Texas, a state known for low zoning regulations, their GDP would increase by 12 percent due to more productive workers and opportunity. Furthermore, critics note that it impedes the ability of those that wish to provide charitable housing from doing so. For example, in 2022, Gloversville&#x27;s Free Methodist Church in New York wished to provide 40 beds for the homeless population in -4 degree weather and were inhibited from doing so. 

Corruption is a challenge for zoning. Some have argued that zoning laws increase economic inequality. Empirical effectiveness estimates show some zoning approaches can contribute to housing crisis.

==Alternatives==
In Houston, Texas, the lack of a local zoning ordinance means that property owners make heavy use of deed restrictions to prevent unwanted development. This practice is sometimes known as &quot;private zoning&quot;. Non-zoned land regulations can still include requirements like minimum lot size and setbacks.

==By country==

===Australia===
The legal framework for land use zoning in Australia is established by States and Territories, hence each State or Territory has different zoning rules. Land use zones are generally defined at local government level, and most often called Planning Schemes. In reality, however in all cases the state governments have an absolute ability to overrule the local decision-making. There are administrative appeal processes such as VCAT to challenge decisions.

Statutory planning, otherwise known as town planning, development control or development management, refers to the part of the planning process that is concerned with the regulation and management of changes to land use and development. Planning and zoning have a great political dimension, with governments often criticized for favouring developers; also nimbyism is very prevalent.

===Canada===

In Canada, land-use control is a provincial responsibility deriving from the constitutional authority over property and civil rights. This authority had been granted to the provinces under the British North America Acts of 1867 and was carried forward in the Constitution Act, 1982. The zoning power relates to &quot;real property&quot;, or land and the improvements constructed thereon that become part of the land itself (in Québec, &quot;immeubles&quot;). The provinces empowered the municipalities and regions to control the use of land within their boundaries, letting the municipalities establish their own zoning by-laws. There are provisions for control of land use in unorganized areas of the provinces. Provincial tribunals are the ultimate authority for appeals and reviews.

=== France ===

In France, the Code of Urbanism or Code de l’urbanisme (called the Town Planning Code), a national law, guides regional and local planning and outlines procedures for obtaining building permits. Unlike England where planners must use their discretion to allow use or building type changes, private development in France is permitted as long as the developer follows the legally-binding regulations.

=== Japan ===
Zoning districts are classified into twelve use zones. Each zone determines a building&#x27;s shape and permitted uses. A building&#x27;s shape is controlled by zonal restrictions on allowable floor area ratio and height (in absolute terms and in relation with adjacent buildings and roads). These controls are intended to allow adequate light and ventilation between buildings and on roads. Instead of single-use zoning, zones are defined by the &quot;most intense&quot; use permitted. Uses of lesser intensity are permitted in zones where higher intensity uses are permitted but higher intensity uses are not allowed in lower intensity zones.
===New Zealand===
New Zealand&#x27;s planning system is grounded in effects-based Performance Zoning under the Resource Management Act.

===Philippines===
Zoning and land use planning in the Philippines is governed by the Department of Human Settlements and Urban Development (DHSUD) and previously by the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB), which lays out national zoning guidelines and regulations, and oversees the preparation and implementation of comprehensive land use plans (CLUPs) and zoning ordinances by city and municipal governments under their mandate in the Local Government Code of 1991 (Republic Act No. 7160).

The present zoning scheme used in the Philippines is detailed in the HLURB&#x27;s Model Zoning Ordinance published in 2014, which outlines 26 basic zone types based on primary usage and building regulations (as defined in the National Building Code), and also includes public domain and water bodies within the municipality&#x27;s jurisdiction. Local governments may also add overlays identifying special use zones such as areas prone to natural disasters, ancestral lands of indigenous peoples (IPs), heritage zones, ecotourism areas, transit-oriented developments (TODs), and scenic corridors. Residential and commercial zones are further subdivided into subclasses defined by density, commercial zones also allow for residential uses, and industrial zones are subdivided by their intensity and the environmental impact of the uses allowed. Regulations on residential, commercial, and industrial zones may differ between municipalities, so one municipality may permit 4-storey buildings on medium-density residential zones, while another may only permit 2-storey buildings.

===Singapore===
The framework for governing land uses in Singapore is administered by the Urban Redevelopment Authority (URA) through the Master Plan. The Master Plan is a statutory document divided into two sections: the plans and the Written Statement. The plans show the land use zoning allowed across Singapore, while the Written Statement provides a written explanation of the zones available and their allowed uses.

===South Africa===
There are five (5) zoning categories in South Africa; residential, business, industrial, agricultural, and open space zoning. These five categories are further classified into subcategories. The zoning categories are governed by the Spatial Planning and Land Use Management Act enacted in 2016. To change a land use from one zone to another requires a process of rezoning.

===United Kingdom===
The United Kingdom does not use zoning as a technique for controlling land use. British land use control began its modern phase after the Town and Country Planning Act of 1947. Rather than dividing municipal maps into land use zones, English planning law places all development under the control of local and regional governments, effectively abolishing the ability to develop land by-right. However, existing development allows land use by-right as long as the use does not constitute a change in the type of land use. A property owner must apply to change land use type of any existing building, and such changes must be consistent with the local and regional land use plans.

Development control or planning control is the element of the United Kingdom&#x27;s system of town and country planning through which local government regulates land use and new building. There are 421 Local Planning Authorities (LPAs) in the United Kingdom. Generally they are the local borough or district council or a unitary authority. They each use a discretionary &quot;plan-led system&quot; whereby development plans are formed and the public consulted. Subsequent development requires planning permission, which will be granted or refused with reference to the development plan as a material consideration.

The plan does not provide specific guidance on what type of buildings will be allowed in a given location, rather it provides general principles for development and goals for the management of urban change. Because planning committees (made up of directly elected local councillors) or in some cases planning officers themselves (via delegated decisions) have discretion on each application for development or change of use made, the system is considered a &#x27;discretionary&#x27; one.

Planning applications can differ greatly in scale, from airports and new towns to minor modifications to individual houses. In order to prevent local authorities from being overwhelmed by high volumes of small-scale applications from individual householders, a separate system of permitted development has been introduced. Permitted development rules are largely form-based, but in the absence of zoning, are applied at the national level. Examples include allowing a two-storey extension up to three metres at the rear of a property, extensions up to 50% of the original width at each side, and certain types of outbuildings in the garden, provided that no more than 50% of the land area is built over. These are appropriately sized for a typical three bedroom semi-detached property, but must be applied across a wide variety of housing types, from small terraces, to larger detached properties and manor houses.

In August 2020, the UK Government published a consultation document called Planning for the Future. The proposals hinted at a move toward zoning in England, with areas given a Growth, Renewal or Protected designation, with the possibility of &quot;sub-areas within each category&quot;, although the document did not elaborate on what the details of these might have been. Nothing was done with these proposals and following the 2024 general election there are no plans for the UK to adopt zoning within its planning system.

===United States===


Under the police power rights, state governments may exercise over private real property. With this power, special laws and regulations have long been made restricting the places where particular types of business can be carried on. In 1904, Los Angeles established the nation&#x27;s first land-use restrictions for a portion of the city. New York City adopted the first zoning regulations to apply city-wide in 1916.

The constitutionality of zoning ordinances was upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court in the 1926 case Village of Euclid, Ohio v. Ambler Realty Co. Among large populated cities in the United States, Houston is unique in having no zoning ordinances. The city instead has a proliferation of private deed restrictions and retains government regulations like minimum lot size and setbacks. 

====Scale====
Early zoning practices were subtle and often debated. Some claim the practices started in the 1920s while others suggest the birth of zoning occurred in New York in 1916. Both of these examples for the start of zoning, however, were urban cases. Zoning becomes an increasing legal force as it continues to expand in its geographical range through its introduction in other urban centres and use in larger political and geographical boundaries. Regional zoning was the next step in increased geographical size of areas under zoning laws. A major difference between urban zoning and regional zoning was that &quot;regional areas consequently seldom bear direct relationship to arbitrary political boundaries&quot;. This form of zoning also included rural areas which was counter-intuitive to the theory that zoning was a result of population density. Finally, zoning also expanded again but back to a political boundary again with state zoning.

====Types in use in the United States====
Use-based zoning, especially single-use zoning, is by far the most common type of zoning in the US, where it is known as Euclidean zoning, after Euclid, Ohio&#x27;s role in a landmark U.S. Supreme Court case, Village of Euclid v. Ambler Realty Co. 

====Single-use zoning in the United States====
Single-use zoning takes two forms, flat and hierarchical, also known as cumulative or pyramidal. Under flat zoning, each district is strictly designated for one use. In a simple hierarchical zoning system, districts are organized with residential (the most sensitive and least disruptive category) at the top, followed by commercial and industrial. Residential and commercial buildings are allowed in industrial zones and residential buildings are allowed in commercial zones. More complex hierarchical systems account for multiple levels within categories, such as multiple types of residential buildings in multifamily residential districts. Hierarchical zoning generally fell out of favor in the United States in the mid-twentieth century, with flat zoning becoming more popular, although many municipalities still incorporate some degree of hierarchy in their zoning ordinances.

Single-use zoning is used by many municipalities due to its ease of implementation (one set of explicit, prescriptive rules), long-established legal precedent, and familiarity to planners and design professionals. Single-use zoning has been criticized, however, for its lack of flexibility. Separation of uses can contribute to urban sprawl, loss of open space, heavy infrastructure costs, and automobile dependency. In particular, single-family zoning, residential districts where only single-family homes can be built, has been widely criticized as a cause of sprawl and racial segregation.

====Social problems in the United States====
The United States suffers from greater levels of deurbanization and urban decay than other developed countries, and additional problems such as urban prairies that do not occur elsewhere. Jonathan Rothwell has argued that zoning encourages racial segregation. He claims a strong relationship exists between an area&#x27;s allowance of building housing at higher density and racial integration between blacks and whites in the United States. The relationship between segregation and density is explained by Rothwell and Massey as the restrictive density zoning producing higher housing prices in white areas and limiting opportunities for people with modest incomes to leave segregated areas. Between 1980 and 2000, racial integration occurred faster in areas that did not have strict density regulations than those that did. Rothwell and Massey suggest homeowners and business interests are the two key players in density regulations that emerge from a political economy. They propose that in older states where rural jurisdictions are primarily composed of homeowners, it is the narrow interests of homeowners to block development because tax rates are lower in rural areas, and taxation is more likely to fall on the median homeowner. Business interests are unable to counteract the homeowners&#x27; interests in rural areas because business interests are weaker and business ownership is rarely controlled by people living outside the community. This translates into rural communities that have a tendency to resist development by using density regulations to make business opportunities less attractive. Density zoning regulations in the U.S increase residential segregation in metropolitan areas by reducing the availability of affordable housing in some jurisdictions; other zoning regulations like school infrastructure regulations and growth controls are also variables associated with higher segregation. With more permissive zoning regulations there are lower levels of segregation; desegregation is higher in places with more liberal regulations on zoning, allowing the residents to integrate racially. Metropolitan areas that allowed higher density development moved rapidly toward racial integration than their counterparts with strict density limitations. The greater the allowable density, the lower the level of racial segregation.

Zoning laws that limit the construction of new housing (like single-family zoning) are associated with reduced affordability and are a major factor in residential segregation in the United States by income and race.

==See also==

* Activity centre
* Agricultural protection zoning
* Context theory
* Ekistics
* Exclusionary zoning
* Fenceline community
* Form-based codes
* Greenspace (disambiguation)
** Open space reserve
** Urban open space
* Inclusionary zoning
* Locally unwanted land use
* Mixed use development
* New urbanism
* NIMBY
* Non-conforming use
* Planning permission
* Police power
* Principles of Intelligent Urbanism
* Reverse sensitivity
* Road
* Single-use zoning
* Spot zoning
* Statutory planning
* Subdivision (land)
* Traffic
* Variance (land use)
* YIMBY
* Zoning district
* Zoning in the United States
== References ==


==Further reading==
*Taylor, George &quot;Town Planning for Australia (Studies in International Planning History)&quot;, Routledge, 2018, .
*Gurran, N., Gallent, N. and Chiu, R.L.H. &quot;Politics, Planning and Housing Supply in Australia, England and Hong Kong (Routledge Research in Planning and Urban Design)&quot;, Routledge, 2016.
*Bassett, E.M. &quot;The master plan, with a discussion of the theory of community land planning legislation.&quot; New York: Russell Sage foundation, 1938.
*Bassett, E. M. &quot;Zoning.&quot; New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1940
* Hirt, Sonia. &quot;Zoned in the USA: The Origins and Implications of American Land-Use Regulation&quot; (Cornell University Press, 2014) 245 pp. online review
* Stephani, Carl J. and Marilyn C. &quot;ZONING 101, originally published in 1993 by the National League of Cities, now available in a Third Edition, 2012.&quot;

==External links==
*ZoningPoint – A searchable database of zoning maps and zoning codes for every county and municipality in the United States.
*Crenex – Zoning Maps – Links to zoning maps and planning commissions of 50 most populous cities in the US.
* New York City Department of City Planning – Zoning History
* Michigan State University Extension Planning &amp; Zoning information
* Schindler&#x27;s Land Use Page (Michigan State University Extension Land Use Team)
* Zoning Compliance and Zoning Certification - Analysis and Reporting
* Land Policy Institute at Michigan State University
* By Bradley C. Karkkainen (1994). Zoning: A Reply To The Critics, Journal of Land Use &amp; Environmental Law</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="3" end="17" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="19" end="25" title="Zoning" label="zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="49" end="61" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="79" end="89" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q674950" start="261" end="272" title="residential area" label="residential"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="274" end="284" title="Manufacturing" label="industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q683595" start="710" end="714" title="land lot" label="lots"/>
<link wikidata="Q449111" start="732" end="742" title="Subdivision (land)" label="subdivided"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000360" start="991" end="1005" title="town and country planning in the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="1014" end="1029" title="Houston" label="City of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="1031" end="1036" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045021" start="1088" end="1096" title="Variance (land use)" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="1305" end="1314" title="ancient history" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="1956" end="1968" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="2006" end="2015" title="Vedic period" label="Vedic Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2086" end="2098" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="2133" end="2153" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="2158" end="2179" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="2698" end="2712" title="planned_community" label="planned cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="2772" end="2780" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="2784" end="2799" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053663" start="2845" end="2859" title="North Adelaide" label="North Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681756" start="2903" end="2922" title="Adelaide Park Lands" label="Adelaide Park Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067103" start="2949" end="2970" title="William_Light" label="Colonel William Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766" start="3183" end="3202" title="Sir Ebenezer Howard" label="Sir Ebenezer Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q660088" start="3219" end="3239" title="garden city movement" label="garden city movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522190" start="3438" end="3464" title="Garden Cities of To-morrow" label="Garden Cities of To-morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11315" start="3738" end="3753" title="shopping_center" label="shopping centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q202902" start="3766" end="3784" title="the Crystal Palace" label="the Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907895" start="3868" end="3878" title="Comprehensive_planning" label="masterplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073994" start="4102" end="4115" title="Zoning in the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="4125" end="4136" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4171" end="4184" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q219955" start="4185" end="4207" title="1916 Zoning Resolution" label="1916 Zoning Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q457109" start="4937" end="4954" title="functional zoning" label="functional zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073994" start="5584" end="5600" title="Euclidean zoning" label="Euclidean zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q983758" start="5634" end="5646" title="Euclid, Ohio" label="Euclid, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930727" start="5654" end="5698" title="Village of Euclid, Ohio v. Ambler Realty Co." label="Village of Euclid, Ohio v. Ambler Realty Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q8073994" start="5823" end="5836" title="Zoning in the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6454" end="6467" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="6469" end="6475" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="6477" end="6486" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="6492" end="6503" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q738570" start="6527" end="6537" title="Central business district" label="urban core"/>
<link wikidata="Q11303" start="6556" end="6566" title="skyscraper" label="skyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="6610" end="6616" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107656" start="6642" end="6648" title="garden" label="garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543083" start="6654" end="6667" title="Avenue (landscape)" label="leafy streets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480013" start="6701" end="6723" title="Minneapolis–Saint Paul" label="Minneapolis–Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="6728" end="6734" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q234335" start="7025" end="7036" title="Jane Jacobs" label="Jane Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="7124" end="7137" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298922" start="7185" end="7207" title="Mixed-use development" label="mixed-use developments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822691" start="7212" end="7228" title="Walkability" label="walkable streets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980792" start="7553" end="7571" title="Natural surveillance" label="eyes on the street"/>
<link wikidata="Q735901" start="7820" end="7832" title="New Urbanism" label="New Urbanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30022" start="7917" end="7922" title="Coffeehouse" label="cafés"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="7924" end="7935" title="Restaurant" label="restaurants"/>
<link wikidata="Q182060" start="7937" end="7944" title="Office" label="offices"/>
<link wikidata="Q622662" start="8148" end="8162" title="heavy industry" label="heavy industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351470" start="8166" end="8178" title="Sewage farm" label="sewage farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469875" start="8806" end="8822" title="Form-based code" label="Form-based codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="9481" end="9486" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q987729" start="9578" end="9588" title="La Défense" label="La Défense"/>
<link wikidata="Q323767" start="9749" end="9767" title="Tour Montparnasse" label="Montparnasse Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="12883" end="12925" title="Information and communications technology" label="information and communication technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822691" start="13488" end="13499" title="walkability" label="walkability"/>
<link wikidata="Q706636" start="15132" end="15160" title="Homeowner association" label="homeowner&amp;#x27;s association"/>
<link wikidata="Q23133443" start="15640" end="15662" title="missing middle housing" label="missing middle housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q374221" start="17317" end="17345" title="transit-oriented development" label="transit-oriented development"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484056" start="17879" end="17895" title="land development" label="land development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494193" start="19163" end="19174" title="spot zoning" label="spot zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574442" start="19300" end="19319" title="Special-use permit" label="special-use permits"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="20780" end="20792" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q786949" start="21045" end="21054" title="economics of car use" label="car usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491904" start="21103" end="21113" title="urban rail transit" label="urban rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="21118" end="21123" title="rapid transit" label="metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q366" start="22574" end="22584" title="Corruption" label="Corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="22655" end="22674" title="economic inequality" label="economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q41796509" start="22756" end="22770" title="housing crisis" label="housing crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="22793" end="22807" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335929" start="22891" end="22907" title="deed restriction" label="deed restriction"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="23204" end="23226" title="states and territories of Australia" label="States and Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="23326" end="23348" title="local government in Australia" label="local government level"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927191" start="23559" end="23563" title="Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal" label="VCAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="23589" end="23607" title="Urban planning" label="Statutory planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q849024" start="23945" end="23953" title="nimbyism" label="nimbyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q919906" start="24181" end="24207" title="British North America Acts" label="British North America Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q868875" start="24247" end="24269" title="Constitution Act, 1982" label="Constitution Act, 1982"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24826" end="24845" title=":fr:Code de l&amp;#x27;urbanisme (France)" label="Code de l’urbanisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370687" start="25398" end="25414" title="floor area ratio" label="floor area ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q65075105" start="26072" end="26125" title="Department of Human Settlements and Urban Development" label="Department of Human Settlements and Urban Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185330" start="26433" end="26462" title="Local Government Code of 1991" label="Local Government Code of 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871222" start="26758" end="26771" title="Public domain (land)" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065" start="26927" end="26943" title="natural disaster" label="natural disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012358" start="26946" end="26960" title="ancestral land" label="ancestral land"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484042" start="26965" end="26983" title="Indigenous peoples of the Philippines" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="27007" end="27017" title="ecotourism" label="ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q374221" start="27025" end="27053" title="transit-oriented development" label="transit-oriented development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899994" start="27656" end="27685" title="Urban Redevelopment Authority" label="Urban Redevelopment Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830037" start="28541" end="28578" title="Town and Country Planning Act 1947" label="Town and Country Planning Act of 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000360" start="29176" end="29201" title="Town and country planning in the United Kingdom" label="town and country planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q853171" start="29216" end="29232" title="Local government in the United Kingdom" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165944" start="29243" end="29251" title="land use" label="land use"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664495" start="29284" end="29310" title="Local Planning Authority" label="Local Planning Authorities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29370" end="29377" title="Borough status in the United Kingdom#Modern borough status" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29381" end="29397" title="Districts of England#Types" label="district council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="29403" end="29420" title="unitary authority" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266783" start="29488" end="29504" title="development plan" label="development plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571373" start="29575" end="29594" title="planning permission" label="planning permission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="30243" end="30250" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="30256" end="30264" title="new town" label="new town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169353" start="30467" end="30488" title="permitted development" label="permitted development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419624" start="30949" end="30962" title="semi-detached" label="semi-detached"/>
<link wikidata="Q23583477" start="31038" end="31052" title="Two-up two-down" label="small terraces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307276" start="31064" end="31083" title="Single-family detached home" label="detached properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="31088" end="31099" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="31531" end="31552" title="2024_United_Kingdom_general_election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389196" start="31660" end="31672" title="Police power (United States constitutional law)" label="police power"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494269" start="31725" end="31738" title="real property" label="real property"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="31892" end="31903" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="31989" end="32002" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q219955" start="32015" end="32039" title="1916 Zoning Resolution" label="first zoning regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="32130" end="32148" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930727" start="32166" end="32210" title="Village of Euclid, Ohio v. Ambler Realty Co." label="Village of Euclid, Ohio v. Ambler Realty Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="32262" end="32269" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q843713" start="32300" end="32310" title="local ordinance" label="ordinances"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335929" start="32360" end="32376" title="deed restriction" label="deed restriction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930727" start="33660" end="33698" title="Village of Euclid v. Ambler Realty Co." label="Village of Euclid v. Ambler Realty Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="34960" end="34972" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q786773" start="35026" end="35047" title="automobile dependency" label="automobile dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q106617159" start="35064" end="35084" title="single-family zoning" label="single-family zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q280958" start="35320" end="35334" title="deurbanization" label="deurbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039238" start="35339" end="35350" title="urban decay" label="urban decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900150" start="35415" end="35428" title="urban prairie" label="urban prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="35511" end="35529" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="35986" end="36004" title="racial integration" label="racial integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q60447937" start="36926" end="36949" title="residential segregation in the United States" label="residential segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q106617159" start="37681" end="37701" title="single-family zoning" label="single-family zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q60447937" start="37771" end="37815" title="residential segregation in the United States" label="residential segregation in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575768" start="37853" end="37868" title="Activity centre" label="Activity centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693980" start="37871" end="37901" title="Agricultural protection zoning" label="Agricultural protection zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402719" start="37904" end="37918" title="Context theory" label="Context theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076155" start="37921" end="37929" title="Ekistics" label="Ekistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419676" start="37932" end="37951" title="Exclusionary zoning" label="Exclusionary zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442990" start="37954" end="37973" title="Fenceline community" label="Fenceline community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469875" start="37976" end="37992" title="Form-based codes" label="Form-based codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604552" start="37995" end="38022" title="Greenspace (disambiguation)" label="Greenspace (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841249" start="38026" end="38044" title="Open space reserve" label="Open space reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q22652" start="38048" end="38064" title="Urban open space" label="Urban open space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014890" start="38067" end="38086" title="Inclusionary zoning" label="Inclusionary zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664707" start="38089" end="38114" title="Locally unwanted land use" label="Locally unwanted land use"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298922" start="38117" end="38138" title="Mixed use development" label="Mixed use development"/>
<link wikidata="Q735901" start="38141" end="38153" title="New urbanism" label="New urbanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q849024" start="38156" end="38161" title="NIMBY" label="NIMBY"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049234" start="38164" end="38182" title="Non-conforming use" label="Non-conforming use"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571373" start="38185" end="38204" title="Planning permission" label="Planning permission"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389196" start="38207" end="38219" title="Police power (United States constitutional law)" label="Police power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245186" start="38222" end="38256" title="Principles of Intelligent Urbanism" label="Principles of Intelligent Urbanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048370" start="38259" end="38278" title="Reverse sensitivity" label="Reverse sensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="38281" end="38285" title="Road" label="Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="38288" end="38305" title="Single-use zoning" label="Single-use zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494193" start="38308" end="38319" title="Spot zoning" label="Spot zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="38322" end="38340" title="Statutory planning" label="Statutory planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q449111" start="38343" end="38361" title="Subdivision (land)" label="Subdivision (land)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4323994" start="38364" end="38371" title="Traffic" label="Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045021" start="38374" end="38393" title="Variance (land use)" label="Variance (land use)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366698" start="38396" end="38401" title="YIMBY" label="YIMBY"/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="38404" end="38419" title="Zoning district" label="Zoning district"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073994" start="38422" end="38449" title="Zoning in the United States" label="Zoning in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56314" wikidata="Q5069944" url="?curid=56314" title="Champerty and maintenance">
<text>Champerty and maintenance are doctrines in common law jurisdictions that aim to preclude frivolous litigation: 
*Maintenance is the intermeddling of a disinterested party to encourage a lawsuit. It is: &quot;A taking in hand, a bearing up or upholding of quarrels or sides, to the disturbance of the common right.&quot; 
*Champerty (from Old French &quot;champart&quot;) is the financial support, by a party not naturally concerned in the suit, of a plaintiff that allows them to prosecute a lawsuit on condition that, if it be brought to a successful issue, the plaintiff will repay them with a share of the proceed from the suit.

In &quot;Giles v Thompson&quot; Lord Justice Steyn declared: &quot;In modern idiom maintenance is the support of litigation by a stranger without just cause. Champerty is an aggravated form of maintenance. The distinguishing feature of champerty is the support of litigation by a stranger in return for a share of the proceeds.&quot;

At common law, maintenance and champerty were both crimes and torts, as was barratry (the bringing of vexatious litigation). This is generally no longer so as, during the nineteenth century, the development of legal ethics tended to obviate the risks to the public, particularly after the scandal of the Swynfen will case (1856–1864). However, the principles are relevant to modern contingent fee agreements between a lawyer and a client and to the assignment by a plaintiff of his rights in a lawsuit to someone with no connection to the case. Champertous contracts, such as third-party litigation funding agreements, can still, depending on jurisdiction, be void for public policy or attract liability for costs.

==History==
The restrictions arose to combat abuses in medieval England. Unscrupulous nobles and royal officials would lend their names to bolster the credibility of doubtful and fraudulent claims in return for a share of the property recovered. Speaking extrajudicially in the early seventeenth century, Lord Chief Justice Coke described the origins of maintenance in this way:

The comments were made in context of the court previously having been anxious to prevent a wide range of maintenance; the term &quot;maintenance&quot; had been used to apply not just to those who gave support in civil claims, but also to those who sought to maintain robbers, heretics and even &quot;a new sect coming from beyond the sea, clad in white garments&quot;. Judicial independence was gradually established, however, and by the early 19th century Jeremy Bentham wrote:

==By jurisdiction==

===Australia===
In Australia, champerty and maintenance as common law causes of action (as either a crime or a tort) have mostly been abolished by statute. 
In New South Wales, champerty and maintenance were abolished by the Maintenance, Champerty and Barratry Abolition Act 1993. 
In Victoria, champerty and maintenance was abolished as a tort by section 32 of the Wrongs Act 1958, and as a crime by section 332A of the Crimes Act 1958.

=== Canada ===
In Canada, the common law crimes of champerty and maintenance were abolished, alongside all remaining common law offences except contempt of court, by the 1953 consolidation of the Criminal Code. However, champerty and maintenance remain torts in some Canadian jurisdictions.

In Ontario, champertous agreements are invalid under the Champerty Act, RSO 1897, c. 327.

===England and Wales===
Maintenance and champerty have not been crimes or torts since the passing of the Criminal Law Act 1967. However, the 1967 Act stated:

There are circumstances in which a non-party who funds litigation can be liable for costs, if the action fails.

For instance, in &quot;Re Oasis Merchandising Services Ltd&quot; the Court of Appeal reincarnated the tort against the assignment of a wrongful trading claim by a liquidator to a specialist litigation company to pursuing directors for wrongful trading. This has come under criticism given that claims against directors are enforced sub-optimally as company liquidators, typically accountants, are cautious to take on risks rather than save as much of the company as possible.

===Hong Kong===
In Hong Kong, champerty and maintenance were long thought to be obsolete both as a crime and a tort, but these two principles have been revived in recent years in response to the prevalence of recovery agents which present problems quite different from the mischief which historically these rules intended to combat.

The recovery agents typically perform &quot;ambulance chasing&quot; on accident victims, offering to arrange lawyers to handle their claims on a &quot;no win no fee&quot; basis. If the claim succeeds the recovery agents share a portion of the damages. This is seen as deception on uneducated victims who are ignorant to the availability of legal aid. The division of the damages in effect deprives the victims of the just compensation that they are entitled to for their bodily injury. The intermeddling of recovery agents in the lawsuit also presents ethical problems to lawyers, who may have undermined impartiality in advising on settlement. In response, the Department of Justice and the Law Society of Hong Kong carried out a massive publicity campaign aiming at educating the public to refuse recovery agents, citing that maintenance and champerty are criminal offences under the laws of Hong Kong.

In 2008, 21 people were arrested for champerty, maintenance and conspiracy. They were recovery agents &quot;helping&quot; accident victims on a &quot;no win no fee&quot; basis. One of the people arrested was a lawyer. Champerty and maintenance carries a sentence of up to seven years in Hong Kong.

On 25 June 2009, Winnie Lo Wai Yan, a solicitor, was convicted for conspiracy to maintain and a recovery agent was convicted for conspiracy to champer. She was found to have agreed to share 25% from the damages paid to the next friend of an 18-year-old traffic accident victim who suffered from permanent total loss of earning capacity. On 10 July 2009, Lo was sentenced to 15 months&#x27; imprisonment and the recovery agent was sentenced to 16 months&#x27; imprisonment (Case number: DCCC 610/2008). Lo appealed in the same year and on 3 December 2010, her appeal was dismissed by the Court of Appeal (Case number: CACC 254/2009).

On 30 January 2012, Lo&#x27;s conviction was quashed in the Court of Final Appeal (Case number: FACC 2/2011). The Reasons for Judgment, published on 23 February 2012, stated that there is a serious problem with the finding made and endorsed by the trial judge and the Court of Appeal respectively that Lo knew that there had been champerty involved. Although the judge found maintenance and champerty are constitutional, he questioned whether criminal liability for maintenance should be retained in Hong Kong as liability for both maintenance and champerty were abolished in places such as England and South Australia.

On 26 March 2013, Louie Mui Kwok-keung, a barrister, was sentenced in the District Court to 3.5 years of imprisonment. He pleaded not guilty on 18 February 2013, to five counts of champerty and maintenance, allegedly committed between 1999 and 2008. He was the first barrister in the city to be convicted of such crimes (Case number: DCCC 890/2012).

===Ireland===
The Maintenance and Embracery Act 1634 passed by the Parliament of Ireland provides that &quot;all statutes heretofore made in England concerning maintenance, champerty and embracery, or any of them now standing and being in their full strength and force, shall be put in due execution in this realme of Ireland&quot;. Poynings&#x27; Law had already imported all English statutes up to 1495; the 1634 act additionally imported the Maintenance and Embracery Act 1540. The 1634 and 1540 acts are still in force in the Republic of Ireland. In 2015 Persona, which lost to Esat Digifone in a 1997 telecoms bidding process criticised by the Moriarty Tribunal, applied to launch a lawsuit against those involved in the 1997 bidding, to be funded by a UK company, Harbour Litigation Funding, in return for part of any damages awarded. In 2016, the High Court ruled that such third-party funding constituted champerty prohibited by the 1634 act; Persona said it would have to drop the case, being unable to afford the €10m expenses.

===New Zealand===
Maintenance and champerty are torts, not crimes, under New Zealand law. Despite calls for their abolition, the New Zealand Law Commission recommended their preservation in a 2001 report titled &quot;Subsidising Litigation&quot;.

===United States===
This concept exists in American jurisprudence but is disdained by &quot;fans of entrepreneurial lawyering in the academy and elsewhere&quot;. There has been recent common usage of the term in the media in Nevada and Ohio. In &quot;NAACP v. Button&quot;, laws that overburden free speech rights in the name of preventing champerty were found to be unconstitutional. Courts in Florida have found that the causes of action for maintenance and champerty are no longer viable in Florida, but have been superseded by laws related to abuse of process, malicious prosecution, and wrongful initiation of litigation. Florida courts have held that champerty and maintenance may continue to exist as affirmative defenses, but only as to the enforceability of the champertous contract itself.

==See also==
* Litigation funding
* Subpoena ad testificandum

==Notes==
==References==

* &quot;Rancman v. Interim Settlement Funding Corp.&quot;, 99 Ohio St.3d 121 (2003)
* &quot;VENTURE CAPITALISM FOR LAWSUITS? Why It Doesn&#x27;t Exist, And What Alternatives For Financing Exist Instead&quot;
* &quot;The Continuing Struggle Over Litigation Funding&quot;
* &quot;Defense of champerty no longer valid in South Carolina&quot;
* &quot;kiriazi maintenance&quot;
* &quot;&quot;Broad prohibition, thin rationale: The &quot;&#x27;acquisition of an interest and financial assistance in litigation&#x27; rules&quot;&quot;
* &quot; Selling Your Torts:Creating a Market for Tort Claims and Liability&quot; 33 Hofstra L. Rev. 1543
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5069944" start="0" end="25" title="Champerty and maintenance" label="Champerty and maintenance"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="43" end="53" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="54" end="66" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356840" start="89" end="109" title="frivolous litigation" label="frivolous litigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069944" start="113" end="124" title="Champerty and maintenance" label="Maintenance"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="186" end="193" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069944" start="322" end="331" title="Champerty and maintenance" label="Champerty"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="338" end="348" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607623" start="355" end="363" title="champart" label="champart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537073" start="665" end="683" title="Johan Steyn, Baron Steyn" label="Lord Justice Steyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="1019" end="1024" title="crime" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q158970" start="1030" end="1034" title="tort" label="tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q807282" start="1044" end="1052" title="Barratry (common law)" label="barratry"/>
<link wikidata="Q828975" start="1070" end="1090" title="vexatious litigation" label="vexatious litigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655952" start="1178" end="1190" title="legal ethics" label="legal ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659384" start="1272" end="1289" title="Swynfen will case" label="Swynfen will case"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165361" start="1350" end="1364" title="contingent fee" label="contingent fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="1386" end="1392" title="lawyer" label="lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q315364" start="1417" end="1427" title="Assignment (law)" label="assignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="1433" end="1442" title="plaintiff" label="plaintiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q696606" start="1628" end="1632" title="void (law)" label="void"/>
<link wikidata="Q294199" start="1637" end="1650" title="Public policy (law)" label="public policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404417" start="1662" end="1671" title="legal liability" label="liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q881731" start="1676" end="1681" title="Costs (law)" label="costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1739" end="1747" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="1770" end="1775" title="Nobility" label="noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134237" start="1781" end="1795" title="royal court" label="royal official"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="1863" end="1868" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q332435" start="1989" end="2012" title="Edward Coke" label="Lord Chief Justice Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059233" start="2433" end="2454" title="Judicial independence" label="Judicial independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q60887" start="2521" end="2535" title="Jeremy Bentham" label="Jeremy Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768566" start="2635" end="2651" title="cause of action" label="causes of action"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="2665" end="2670" title="crime" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q158970" start="2676" end="2680" title="tort" label="tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="2725" end="2740" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="2850" end="2858" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q20065289" start="2986" end="3001" title="Crimes Act 1958" label="Crimes Act 1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q708562" start="3148" end="3165" title="contempt of court" label="contempt of court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091694" start="3200" end="3213" title="Criminal Code of Canada" label="Criminal Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="3299" end="3306" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318435" start="3368" end="3371" title="Revised Statutes of Ontario" label="RSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185582" start="3492" end="3513" title="Criminal Law Act 1967" label="Criminal Law Act 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q881731" start="3630" end="3635" title="costs (English law)" label="costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300105" start="3682" end="3717" title="Re Oasis Merchandising Services Ltd" label="Re Oasis Merchandising Services Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038642" start="3794" end="3810" title="wrongful trading" label="wrongful trading"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7299" end="7333" title="Maintenance and Embracery Act 1634" label="Maintenance and Embracery Act 1634"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889821" start="7348" end="7369" title="Parliament of Ireland" label="Parliament of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370152" start="7468" end="7477" title="embracery" label="embracery"/>
<link wikidata="Q86753808" start="7614" end="7632" title="Poynings&amp;#x27; Law (confirmation of English statutes)" label="Poynings&amp;#x27; Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736793" start="7726" end="7760" title="Maintenance and Embracery Act 1540" label="Maintenance and Embracery Act 1540"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="7811" end="7830" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072246" start="7863" end="7876" title="Esat Digifone" label="Esat Digifone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7912" end="7947" title="Moriarty Tribunal#Volume II" label="criticised by the Moriarty Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q671721" start="8135" end="8145" title="High Court (Ireland)" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517508" start="8162" end="8181" title="third-party funding" label="third-party funding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="8304" end="8305" title="Euro" label="€"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503412" start="8393" end="8408" title="New Zealand law" label="New Zealand law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015466" start="8449" end="8475" title="New Zealand Law Commission" label="New Zealand Law Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="8793" end="8799" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="8804" end="8808" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952108" start="8819" end="8834" title="NAACP v. Button" label="NAACP v. Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q667933" start="9115" end="9131" title="abuse of process" label="abuse of process"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273016" start="9133" end="9154" title="malicious prosecution" label="malicious prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517508" start="9384" end="9402" title="Litigation funding" label="Litigation funding"/>
<link wikidata="Q883270" start="9405" end="9430" title="Subpoena ad testificandum" label="Subpoena ad testificandum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56315" wikidata="Q169" url="?curid=56315" title="Mango">
<text>A mango is an edible stone fruit produced by the tropical tree &quot;Mangifera indica&quot;. It originated from the region between northwestern Myanmar, Bangladesh, and northeastern India. &quot;M. indica&quot; has been cultivated in South and Southeast Asia since ancient times resulting in two types of modern mango cultivars: the &quot;Indian type&quot; and the &quot;Southeast Asian type&quot;. Other species in the genus &quot;Mangifera&quot; also produce edible fruits that are also called &quot;mangoes&quot;, the majority of which are found in the Malesian ecoregion.

Worldwide, there are several hundred cultivars of mango. Depending on the cultivar, mango fruit varies in size, shape, sweetness, skin color, and flesh color, which may be pale yellow, gold, green, or orange. Mango is the national fruit of India, Pakistan and the Philippines, while the mango tree is the national tree of Bangladesh.

== Etymology ==
The English word &quot;mango&quot; (plural &quot;mangoes&quot; or &quot;mangos&quot;) originated in the 16th century from the Portuguese word , from the Malay , and ultimately from the Tamil (, &#x27;mango tree&#x27;) + (, &#x27;unripe fruit/vegetable&#x27;) or the Malayalam (, &#x27;mango tree&#x27;) + (, &#x27;unripe fruit&#x27;). The scientific name, &quot;Mangifera indica&quot;, refers to a plant bearing mangoes in India.

== Description ==

Mango trees grow to tall, with a crown radius of . The trees are long-lived, as some specimens still fruit after 300 years.

In deep soil, the taproot descends to a depth of , with profuse, wide-spreading feeder roots and anchor roots penetrating deeply into the soil. The leaves are evergreen, alternate, simple, long, and broad; when the leaves are young they are orange-pink, rapidly changing to a dark, glossy red, then dark green as they mature. The flowers are produced in terminal panicles long; each flower is small and white with five petals long, with a mild, sweet fragrance. Over 500 varieties of mangoes are known, many of which ripen in summer, while some give a double crop. The fruit takes four to five months from flowering to ripening.

The ripe fruit varies according to cultivar in size, shape, color, sweetness, and eating quality. Depending on the cultivar, fruits are variously yellow, orange, red, or green. The fruit has a single flat, oblong pit that can be fibrous or hairy on the surface and does not separate easily from the pulp. The fruits may be somewhat round, oval, or kidney-shaped, ranging from in length and from to in weight per individual fruit. The skin is leather-like, waxy, smooth, and fragrant, with colors ranging from green to yellow, yellow-orange, yellow-red, or blushed with various shades of red, purple, pink, or yellow when fully ripe.

Ripe intact mangoes give off a distinctive resinous, sweet smell. Inside the pit thick is a thin lining covering a single seed, long. Mangoes have recalcitrant seeds which do not survive freezing and drying. Mango trees grow readily from seeds, with germination success highest when seeds are obtained from mature fruits.

== Taxonomy ==

Mangoes originated from the region between northwestern Myanmar, Bangladesh, and northeastern India. The mango is considered an evolutionary anachronism, whereby seed dispersal was once accomplished by a now-extinct evolutionary forager, such as a megafauna mammal.

From their center of origin, mangoes diverged into two genetically distinct populations: the subtropical Indian group and the tropical Southeast Asian group. The Indian group is characterized by having monoembryonic fruits, while polyembryonic fruits characterize the Southeast Asian group.

It was previously believed that mangoes originated from a single domestication event in South Asia before being spread to Southeast Asia, but a 2019 study found no evidence of a center of diversity in India. Instead, it identified a higher unique genetic diversity in Southeast Asian cultivars than in Indian cultivars, indicating that mangoes may have originally been domesticated first in Southeast Asia before being introduced to South Asia. However, the authors also cautioned that the diversity in Southeast Asian mangoes might be the result of other reasons (like interspecific hybridization with other &quot;Mangifera&quot; species native to the Malesian ecoregion). Nevertheless, the existence of two distinct genetic populations also identified by the study indicates that the domestication of the mango is more complex than previously assumed and would at least indicate multiple domestication events in Southeast Asia and South Asia.

=== Cultivars ===
There are hundreds of named mango cultivars. In mango orchards, several cultivars are often grown to improve pollination. Many desired cultivars are monoembryonic and must be propagated by grafting, or they do not breed true. A common monoembryonic cultivar is &#x27;Alphonso&#x27;, an important export product, considered &quot;the king of mangoes&quot;.

Cultivars that excel in one climate may fail elsewhere. For example, Indian cultivars such as &#x27;Julie,&#x27; a prolific cultivar in Jamaica, require annual fungicide treatments to escape the lethal fungal disease anthracnose in Florida. Asian mangoes are resistant to anthracnose.

The current world market is dominated by the cultivar &#x27;Tommy Atkins&#x27;, a seedling of &#x27;Haden&#x27; that first fruited in 1940 in southern Florida and was initially rejected commercially by Florida researchers. Growers and importers worldwide have embraced the cultivar for its excellent productivity and disease resistance, shelf life, transportability, size, and appealing color. Although the Tommy Atkins cultivar is commercially successful, other cultivars may be preferred by consumers for eating pleasure, such as Alphonso.

Generally, ripe mangoes have an orange-yellow or reddish peel and are juicy for eating, while exported fruit are often picked while underripe with green peels. Although producing ethylene while ripening, unripened exported mangoes do not have the same juiciness or flavor as fresh fruit.

== Distribution and habitat ==
From tropical Asia, mangoes were introduced to East Africa by Arab and Persian traders in the ninth to tenth centuries. The 14th-century Moroccan traveler Ibn Battuta reported it at Mogadishu. It was spread further into other areas around the world during the Colonial Era. The Portuguese Empire spread the mango from their colony in Goa to East and West Africa. From West Africa, they introduced it to Brazil from the 16th to the 17th centuries. From Brazil, it spread northwards to the Caribbean and eastern Mexico by the mid to late 18th century. The Spanish Empire also introduced mangoes directly from the Philippines to western Mexico via the Manila galleons from at least the 16th century. Mangoes were only introduced to Florida by 1833.

== Cultivation ==
The mango is now cultivated in most frost-free tropical and warmer subtropical climates. It is cultivated extensively in South Asia, Southeast Asia, East and West Africa, the tropical and subtropical Americas, and the Caribbean. Mangoes are also grown in Andalusia, Spain (mainly in Málaga province), as its coastal subtropical climate is one of the few places in mainland Europe that permits the growth of tropical plants and fruit trees. The Canary Islands are another notable Spanish producer of the fruit. Other minor cultivators include North America (in South Florida and the California Coachella Valley), Hawai&#x27;i, and Australia.

Many commercial cultivars are grafted onto the cold-hardy rootstock of the &quot;Gomera-1&quot; mango cultivar, originally from Cuba. Its root system is well adapted to a coastal Mediterranean climate. Many of the 1,000+ mango cultivars are easily cultivated using grafted saplings, ranging from the &quot;turpentine mango&quot; (named for its strong taste of turpentine) to the Bullock&#x27;s Heart. Dwarf or semidwarf varieties serve as ornamental plants and can be grown in containers. A wide variety of diseases can afflict mangoes.

A breakthrough in mango cultivation was the use of potassium nitrate and ethrel to induce flowering in mangoes. The discovery was made by Filipino horticulturist Ramon Barba in 1974 and was developed from the unique traditional method of inducing mango flowering using smoke in the Philippines. It allowed mango plantations to induce regular flowering and fruiting year-round. Previously, mangoes were seasonal because they only flowered every 16 to 18 months. The method is now used in most mango-producing countries.

== Production ==
In 2022, world production of mangoes (report includes mangosteens and guavas) was 59 million tonnes, led by India with 44% of the total (table).

== Uses ==
=== Culinary ===
Mangoes are generally sweet, although the taste and texture of the flesh vary across cultivars; some, such as Alphonso, have a soft, pulpy, juicy texture similar to an overripe plum, while others, such as Tommy Atkins, are firmer with a fibrous texture.

The skin of unripe, pickled, or cooked mango can be eaten, but it has the potential to cause contact dermatitis of the lips, gingiva, or tongue in susceptible people.

Mangoes are used in many cuisines. Sour, unripe mangoes are used in chutneys (i.e., mango chutney), pickles, daals and other side dishes in Indian cuisine. A summer drink called &quot;aam panna&quot; is made with mangoes. Mango pulp made into jelly or cooked with red gram &quot;dhal&quot; and green chilies may be served with cooked rice. Mango lassi is consumed throughout South Asia, prepared by mixing ripe mangoes or mango pulp with buttermilk and sugar. Ripe mangoes are also used to make curries. &quot;Aamras&quot; is a thick juice made of mangoes with sugar or milk and is consumed with &quot;chapatis&quot; or &quot;pooris&quot;. The pulp from ripe mangoes is also used to make jam called &quot;mangada&quot;. &quot; Andhra aavakaaya&quot; is a pickle made from raw, unripe, pulpy, and sour mango mixed with chili powder, fenugreek seeds, mustard powder, salt, and groundnut oil. Mango is also used to make &quot;dahl&quot; and &quot;chunda&quot; (a sweet and spicy, grated mango delicacy). In Indonesian cuisine, unripe mango is processed into &quot;asinan&quot;, &quot;rujak&quot; and &quot;sambal pencit/mangga muda&quot;, or eaten with edible salt.

Mangoes are used to make &quot;murabba&quot; (fruit preserves), &quot;muramba&quot; (a sweet, grated mango delicacy), &quot;amchur&quot; (dried and powdered unripe mango), and pickles, including a spicy mustard-oil pickle and alcohol. Ripe mangoes are cut into thin layers, desiccated, folded, and then cut. The fruit is also added to cereal products such as muesli and oat granola.

Mango is used to make juices, smoothies, ice cream, fruit bars, &quot;raspados&quot;, &quot;aguas frescas&quot;, pies, and sweet chili sauce, or mixed with &quot;chamoy&quot;, a sweet and spicy chili paste. In Central America, mango is either eaten green, mixed with salt, vinegar, black pepper, and hot sauce, or ripe in various forms.

Pieces of mango can be mashed and used as a topping on ice cream or blended with milk and ice as milkshakes. Sweet glutinous rice is flavored with coconut, then served with sliced mango as mango sticky rice. In other parts of Southeast Asia, mangoes are pickled with fish sauce and rice vinegar. Green mangoes can be used in mango salad with fish sauce and dried shrimp. Mango with condensed milk may be used as a topping for shaved ice.

Raw green mangoes can be sliced and eaten like a salad. In most parts of Southeast Asia, they are commonly eaten with fish sauce, vinegar, soy sauce, or with a dash of salt (plain or spicy)a combination usually known as &quot;mango salad&quot; in English.
In the Philippines, green mangoes are also commonly eaten with &quot;bagoong&quot; (salty fish or shrimp paste), salt, soy sauce, vinegar, or chilis. Mango float and mango cake, which use slices of ripe mangoes, are eaten in the Philippines. Dried strips of sweet, ripe mango (sometimes combined with seedless tamarind to form &quot;mangorind&quot;) are also consumed. Mangoes may be used to make juices, mango nectar, and as a flavoring and major ingredient in mango ice cream and &quot;sorbetes&quot;.

== Phytochemistry ==

Numerous phytochemicals are present in mango peel and pulp, such as the triterpene lupeol. Mango peel pigments under study include carotenoids, such as the provitamin A compound, beta-carotene, lutein and alpha-carotene, and polyphenols, such as quercetin, kaempferol, gallic acid, caffeic acid, catechins and tannins. Mango contains a unique xanthonoid called mangiferin.

Phytochemical and nutrient content appears to vary across mango cultivars. Up to 25 different carotenoids have been isolated from mango pulp, the densest of which was beta-carotene, which accounts for the yellow-orange pigmentation of most mango cultivars. Mango leaves also have significant polyphenol content, including xanthonoids, mangiferin and gallic acid.

=== Flavor ===
The flavor of mango fruits is conferred by several volatile organic chemicals mainly belonging to terpene, furanone, lactone, and ester classes. Different varieties or cultivars of mangoes can have flavors made up of different volatile chemicals or the same volatile chemicals in different quantities. In general, New World mango cultivars are characterized by the dominance of δ-3-carene, a monoterpene flavorant; whereas, high concentration of other monoterpenes such as (Z)-ocimene and myrcene, as well as the presence of lactones and furanones, is the unique feature of Old World cultivars. In India, &#x27;Alphonso&#x27; is one of the most popular cultivars. In &#x27;Alphonso&#x27; mango, the lactones, and furanones are synthesized during ripening, whereas terpenes and the other flavorants are present in both the developing (immature) and ripening fruits. Ethylene, a ripening-related hormone well known to be involved in ripening of mango fruits, causes changes in the flavor composition of mango fruits upon exogenous application, as well. In contrast to the huge amount of information available on the chemical composition of mango flavor, the biosynthesis of these chemicals has not been studied in depth; only a handful of genes encoding the enzymes of flavor biosynthetic pathways have been characterized to date.

===Toxicity===
Contact with oils in mango leaves, stems, sap, and skin can cause dermatitis and anaphylaxis in susceptible individuals. Those with a history of contact dermatitis induced by urushiol (an allergen found in poison ivy, poison oak, or poison sumac) may be most at risk for mango contact dermatitis. Other mango compounds potentially responsible for dermatitis or allergic reactions include mangiferin. Cross-reactions may occur between mango allergens and urushiol. Sensitized individuals may not be able to eat peeled mangos or drink mango juice safely.

When mango trees are flowering in spring, local people with allergies may experience breathing difficulty, itching of the eyes, or facial swelling, even before flower pollen becomes airborne. In this case, the irritant is likely to be the vaporized essential oil from flowers. During the primary ripening season of mangoes, contact with mango plant parts – primarily sap, leaves, and fruit skin – is the most common cause of plant dermatitis in Hawaii.

==Nutrition==

A raw mango is 84% water, 15% carbohydrates, 1% protein, and has negligible fat (table). In a reference amount of , raw mango supplies 60 calories and is a rich source of vitamin C (44% of the Daily Value, DV) with moderate amounts of folate (11% DV) and copper (12% DV), while other micronutrients are low in content (table).

== Culture ==
The mango is the national fruit of India. It is also the national tree of Bangladesh. In India, harvest and sale of mangoes is during March–May and this is annually covered by news agencies.

The mango has a traditional context in the culture of South Asia. In his edicts, the Mauryan emperor Ashoka references the planting of fruit- and shade-bearing trees along imperial roads:

&quot;On the roads banyan-trees were caused to be planted by me, (in order that) they might afford shade to cattle and men, (and) mango-groves were caused to be planted.&quot;

In medieval India, the Indo-Persian poet Amir Khusrau termed the mango &quot;Naghza Tarin Mewa Hindustan&quot; – &quot;the fairest fruit of Hindustan&quot;. Mangoes were enjoyed at the court of the Delhi Sultan Alauddin Khijli. The Mughal Empire was especially fond of the fruits: Babur praises the mango in his &quot;Babarnameh&quot;. At the same time, Sher Shah Suri inaugurated the creation of the Chaunsa variety after his victory over the Mughal emperor Humayun. Mughal patronage of horticulture led to the grafting of thousands of mangoes varieties, including the famous Totapuri, which was the first variety to be exported to Iran and Central Asia. Akbar (15561605) is said to have planted a mango orchard of 100,000 trees near Darbhanga, Bihar, while Jahangir and Shah Jahan ordered the planting of mango orchards in Lahore and Delhi and the creation of mango-based desserts.

The Jain goddess Ambika is traditionally represented as sitting under a mango tree. Mango blossoms are also used in the worship of the goddess Saraswati. Mango leaves decorate archways and doors in Indian houses during weddings and celebrations such as Ganesh Chaturthi. Mango motifs and paisleys are widely used in different Indian embroidery styles, and are found in Kashmiri shawls, Kanchipuram and silk sarees. In Tamil Nadu, the mango is referred to as one of the three royal fruits, along with banana and jackfruit, for their sweetness and flavor. This triad of fruits is referred to as &quot;ma-pala-vazhai&quot;. The classical Sanskrit poet Kalidasa sang the praises of mangoes.

Mangoes were the subject of the mango cult in China during the Cultural Revolution as symbols of chairman Mao Zedong&#x27;s love for the people.
== See also ==

* Achaar, South Asian pickles, commonly containing mango and lime
* Amchoor, mango powder
* &quot;Mangifera caesia&quot;, a related species also widely cultivated for its fruit in Southeast Asia
* Mango mealybug
* Mango pickle – Mangai-oorkai (manga-achar), South Indian hot mango pickle
* Aam papad - an Indian fruit leather made out of mango pulp mixed with concentrated sugar solution and sun dried.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Litz, Richard E. (editor, 2009). &quot;The Mango: Botany, Production and Uses&quot;. 2nd edition. CABI. .
* Susser, Allen (2001). &quot;The Great Mango Book: A Guide with Recipes&quot;. Ten Speed Press. .

== External links ==
* Sorting &quot;Mangifera&quot; species
* Pine Island Nursery&#x27;s Mango Variety viewer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q169" start="2" end="7" title="Mango" label="mango"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712" start="21" end="32" title="drupe" label="stone fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919027" start="69" end="85" title="Mangifera indica" label="Mangifera indica"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="144" end="151" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="153" end="163" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="182" end="187" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="234" end="239" title="South Asia" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q161807" start="432" end="441" title="Mangifera" label="Mangifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469840" start="556" end="563" title="Malesia" label="Malesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834077" start="614" end="632" title="List of mango cultivars" label="cultivars of mango"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351254" start="799" end="813" title="national fruit" label="national fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="817" end="822" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="824" end="832" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="841" end="852" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235701" start="882" end="895" title="List of national trees" label="national tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="1054" end="1064" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="1081" end="1086" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="1113" end="1118" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="1194" end="1203" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q609336" start="1521" end="1528" title="taproot" label="taproot"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="1651" end="1657" title="leaves" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="1662" end="1671" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="1833" end="1839" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q148600" start="1866" end="1873" title="panicle" label="panicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q767728" start="1974" end="1983" title="Variety (botany)" label="varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263427" start="2346" end="2349" title="Pyrena" label="pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q161" start="2362" end="2369" title="fibre" label="fibrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="2481" end="2487" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="2810" end="2815" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="2889" end="2893" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052527" start="2914" end="2931" title="recalcitrant seed" label="recalcitrant seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q193838" start="3017" end="3028" title="germination" label="germination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418688" start="3234" end="3258" title="evolutionary anachronism" label="evolutionary anachronism"/>
<link wikidata="Q943313" start="3268" end="3282" title="seed dispersal" label="seed dispersal"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="3314" end="3321" title="Extinction" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916569" start="3335" end="3342" title="foraging" label="forager"/>
<link wikidata="Q730371" start="3354" end="3363" title="megafauna" label="megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901565" start="3575" end="3588" title="monoembryonic" label="monoembryonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q928363" start="3603" end="3616" title="polyembryonic" label="polyembryonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11395" start="3730" end="3743" title="domestication" label="domestication"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="4235" end="4262" title="interspecific hybridization" label="interspecific hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q161807" start="4280" end="4289" title="Mangifera" label="Mangifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469840" start="4318" end="4325" title="Malesia" label="Malesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236371" start="4683" end="4690" title="orchard" label="orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901565" start="4778" end="4791" title="Monoembryony" label="monoembryonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q222958" start="4818" end="4826" title="grafting" label="grafting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663618" start="4890" end="4910" title="Alphonso (mango)" label="&amp;#x27;Alphonso&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q193237" start="5146" end="5155" title="fungicide" label="fungicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q464067" start="5188" end="5202" title="fungal disease" label="fungal disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q811596" start="5203" end="5214" title="anthracnose" label="anthracnose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992883" start="5326" end="5350" title="Tommy Atkins (mango)" label="&amp;#x27;Tommy Atkins&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637734" start="5366" end="5383" title="Haden (mango)" label="&amp;#x27;Haden&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689021" start="5609" end="5619" title="shelf life" label="shelf life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5850062" start="5994" end="6002" title="Ethylene as a plant hormone" label="ethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="6197" end="6201" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="6206" end="6212" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="6290" end="6301" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Battuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449" start="6317" end="6326" title="Mogadishu" label="Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="6395" end="6407" title="Colonial Era" label="Colonial Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="6413" end="6430" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="6469" end="6472" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="6623" end="6632" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="6689" end="6703" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q683846" start="6784" end="6798" title="Manila galleon" label="Manila galleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="6936" end="6941" title="frost" label="frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="7049" end="7053" title="East Africa" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="7118" end="7127" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="7155" end="7164" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q95028" start="7183" end="7198" title="Province of Málaga" label="Málaga province"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="7344" end="7358" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331865" start="7493" end="7509" title="Coachella Valley" label="Coachella Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="7558" end="7566" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="7790" end="7800" title="agriculture" label="cultivated"/>
<link wikidata="Q201382" start="7902" end="7912" title="turpentine" label="turpentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="7981" end="7997" title="ornamental plant" label="ornamental plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627155" start="8033" end="8057" title="List of mango diseases" label="wide variety of diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q177836" start="8131" end="8148" title="potassium nitrate" label="potassium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q209355" start="8153" end="8159" title="ethrel" label="ethrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="8218" end="8226" title="Filipino people" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="8227" end="8241" title="horticulturist" label="horticulturist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198051" start="8242" end="8253" title="Ramon Barba" label="Ramon Barba"/>
<link wikidata="Q170662" start="8671" end="8681" title="mangosteen" label="mangosteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181909" start="8687" end="8692" title="guava" label="guava"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="8710" end="8715" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663618" start="8901" end="8909" title="Alphonso (mango)" label="Alphonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372598" start="8968" end="8972" title="plum" label="plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992883" start="8996" end="9008" title="Tommy Atkins (mango)" label="Tommy Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503967" start="9066" end="9073" title="Pickling" label="pickled"/>
<link wikidata="Q783903" start="9139" end="9157" title="contact dermatitis" label="contact dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q104280" start="9171" end="9178" title="gingiva" label="gingiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q275650" start="9282" end="9289" title="chutney" label="chutney"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891623" start="9298" end="9311" title="mango chutney" label="mango chutney"/>
<link wikidata="Q14558271" start="9314" end="9321" title="Mango pickle" label="pickles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139389" start="9323" end="9328" title="Dal" label="daals"/>
<link wikidata="Q192087" start="9354" end="9368" title="Indian cuisine" label="Indian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661428" start="9398" end="9407" title="aam panna" label="aam panna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139389" start="9493" end="9497" title="dhal" label="dhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q827654" start="9554" end="9565" title="Mango lassi" label="Mango lassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q106612" start="9652" end="9662" title="buttermilk" label="buttermilk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308410" start="9724" end="9730" title="Aamras" label="Aamras"/>
<link wikidata="Q752006" start="9816" end="9824" title="chapatis" label="chapatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146928" start="9840" end="9846" title="pooris" label="pooris"/>
<link wikidata="Q14558271" start="9948" end="9957" title="aavakaaya" label="aavakaaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q133205" start="10046" end="10055" title="fenugreek" label="fenugreek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937700" start="10063" end="10077" title="mustard powder" label="mustard powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q265878" start="10089" end="10102" title="groundnut oil" label="groundnut oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q787497" start="10218" end="10236" title="Indonesian cuisine" label="Indonesian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807004" start="10275" end="10281" title="asinan" label="asinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q720230" start="10295" end="10300" title="rojak" label="rujak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10317" end="10342" title="sambal#Indonesia" label="sambal pencit/mangga muda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10364" end="10375" title="Salt#Edible salt" label="edible salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644850" start="10409" end="10416" title="murabba" label="murabba"/>
<link wikidata="Q903071" start="10652" end="10661" title="desiccate" label="desiccate"/>
<link wikidata="Q52406" start="10737" end="10743" title="muesli" label="muesli"/>
<link wikidata="Q119203" start="10752" end="10759" title="granola" label="granola"/>
<link wikidata="Q8492" start="10784" end="10790" title="juices" label="juices"/>
<link wikidata="Q13290" start="10792" end="10800" title="smoothie" label="smoothie"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="10803" end="10812" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491078" start="10832" end="10839" title="raspado" label="raspado"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694505" start="10854" end="10867" title="aguas frescas" label="aguas frescas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360264" start="10875" end="10878" title="pie" label="pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098942" start="10891" end="10902" title="chili sauce" label="chili sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069848" start="10924" end="10930" title="Chamoy (Sauce)" label="chamoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="11044" end="11056" title="black pepper" label="black pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q37159" start="11197" end="11206" title="milkshake" label="milkshake"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="11247" end="11254" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q13013369" start="11289" end="11306" title="mango sticky rice" label="mango sticky rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849012" start="11382" end="11394" title="rice vinegar" label="rice vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q495618" start="11457" end="11469" title="dried shrimp" label="dried shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830455" start="11482" end="11496" title="condensed milk" label="condensed milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491078" start="11526" end="11536" title="shaved ice" label="shaved ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q545985" start="11657" end="11667" title="fish sauce" label="fish sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842073" start="11864" end="11871" title="bagoong" label="bagoong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842073" start="11885" end="11889" title="bagoong" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127705" start="11893" end="11905" title="shrimp paste" label="shrimp paste"/>
<link wikidata="Q229385" start="11914" end="11923" title="soy sauce" label="soy sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740781" start="11945" end="11956" title="Mango float" label="Mango float"/>
<link wikidata="Q64149277" start="11961" end="11971" title="mango cake" label="mango cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q105044482" start="12037" end="12049" title="Dried mango" label="Dried strips"/>
<link wikidata="Q80235" start="12105" end="12113" title="tamarind" label="tamarind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719623" start="12206" end="12212" title="nectar (drink)" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="12263" end="12272" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q17088676" start="12283" end="12291" title="sorbetes" label="sorbetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639139" start="12331" end="12344" title="phytochemical" label="phytochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q171187" start="12367" end="12371" title="peel (fruit)" label="peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915788" start="12394" end="12404" title="triterpene" label="triterpene"/>
<link wikidata="Q409366" start="12405" end="12411" title="lupeol" label="lupeol"/>
<link wikidata="Q191907" start="12453" end="12463" title="carotenoid" label="carotenoid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12478" end="12490" title="provitamin A" label="provitamin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q306135" start="12501" end="12514" title="beta-carotene" label="beta-carotene"/>
<link wikidata="Q422067" start="12516" end="12522" title="lutein" label="lutein"/>
<link wikidata="Q142871" start="12527" end="12541" title="alpha-carotene" label="alpha-carotene"/>
<link wikidata="Q290439" start="12547" end="12558" title="polyphenols" label="polyphenols"/>
<link wikidata="Q409478" start="12568" end="12577" title="quercetin" label="quercetin"/>
<link wikidata="Q393336" start="12579" end="12589" title="kaempferol" label="kaempferol"/>
<link wikidata="Q375837" start="12591" end="12602" title="gallic acid" label="gallic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q414116" start="12604" end="12616" title="caffeic acid" label="caffeic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q20898120" start="12618" end="12627" title="flavan-3-ol" label="catechins"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="12632" end="12638" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570560" start="12665" end="12675" title="xanthonoid" label="xanthonoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074417" start="12683" end="12693" title="mangiferin" label="mangiferin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="12760" end="12768" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="12915" end="12927" title="pigmentation" label="pigmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570560" start="13018" end="13028" title="xanthonoid" label="xanthonoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q124794" start="13079" end="13085" title="Flavor (taste)" label="flavor"/>
<link wikidata="Q212364" start="13173" end="13180" title="terpene" label="terpene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596886" start="13182" end="13190" title="furanone" label="furanone"/>
<link wikidata="Q59078" start="13192" end="13199" title="lactone" label="lactone"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="13205" end="13210" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834077" start="13243" end="13263" title="list of mango cultivars" label="cultivars of mangoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="13389" end="13398" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="13649" end="13658" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663618" start="13680" end="13700" title="Alphonso (mango)" label="&amp;#x27;Alphonso&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q151313" start="13940" end="13948" title="Ethylene" label="Ethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q229256" start="14486" end="14496" title="dermatitis" label="dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q168800" start="14501" end="14512" title="anaphylaxis" label="anaphylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19944476" start="14595" end="14603" title="urushiol" label="urushiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q102346183" start="14626" end="14636" title="poison ivy" label="poison ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55644327" start="14638" end="14648" title="poison oak" label="poison oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002291" start="14653" end="14665" title="poison sumac" label="poison sumac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074417" start="14808" end="14818" title="mangiferin" label="mangiferin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="15141" end="15147" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q255722" start="15213" end="15218" title="vapor" label="vapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q170885" start="15223" end="15236" title="essential oil" label="essential oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q76626" start="15341" end="15344" title="sap" label="sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="15473" end="15485" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="15491" end="15498" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q130964" start="15581" end="15588" title="calorie" label="calorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="15614" end="15623" title="vitamin C" label="vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366307" start="15636" end="15647" title="Daily Value" label="Daily Value"/>
<link wikidata="Q127060" start="15678" end="15684" title="folate" label="folate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754605" start="15698" end="15704" title="Copper in biology" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q531507" start="15727" end="15740" title="micronutrient" label="micronutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351254" start="15802" end="15816" title="List of national fruits" label="national fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235701" start="15842" end="15855" title="List of national trees" label="national tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q779933" start="16050" end="16056" title="Edicts of Ashoka" label="edicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="16078" end="16084" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5678886" start="16185" end="16191" title="banyan" label="banyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207817" start="16384" end="16396" title="Amir Khusrau" label="Amir Khusrau"/>
<link wikidata="Q335362" start="16554" end="16569" title="Alauddin Khalji" label="Alauddin Khijli"/>
<link wikidata="Q797848" start="16624" end="16629" title="Babur" label="Babur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906014" start="16661" end="16671" title="Baburnama" label="Babarnameh"/>
<link wikidata="Q83680" start="16697" end="16711" title="Sher Shah Suri" label="Sher Shah Suri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088330" start="16744" end="16751" title="Chaunsa" label="Chaunsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q486188" start="16802" end="16809" title="Humayun" label="Humayun"/>
<link wikidata="Q17093248" start="16920" end="16928" title="Totapuri" label="Totapuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q8597" start="16999" end="17004" title="Akbar" label="Akbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136189" start="17078" end="17087" title="Darbhanga" label="Darbhanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q83653" start="17102" end="17110" title="Jahangir" label="Jahangir"/>
<link wikidata="Q83672" start="17115" end="17125" title="Shah Jahan" label="Shah Jahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="17232" end="17236" title="Jain" label="Jain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741456" start="17245" end="17251" title="Ambika (Jainism)" label="Ambika"/>
<link wikidata="Q58838" start="17371" end="17380" title="Saraswati" label="Saraswati"/>
<link wikidata="Q929250" start="17481" end="17497" title="Ganesh Chaturthi" label="Ganesh Chaturthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917681" start="17505" end="17511" title="Motif (textile arts)" label="motifs"/>
<link wikidata="Q937704" start="17516" end="17524" title="Paisley (design)" label="paisleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q18281" start="17561" end="17571" title="embroidery" label="embroidery"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="17597" end="17604" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q212332" start="17614" end="17625" title="Kanchipuram" label="Kanchipuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q172827" start="17635" end="17640" title="saree" label="saree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="17646" end="17656" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q45757" start="17739" end="17748" title="jackfruit" label="jackfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011" start="17877" end="17885" title="Kalidasa" label="Kalidasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q115389540" start="17948" end="17958" title="mango cult" label="mango cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="17979" end="17998" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="18022" end="18032" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478245" start="18079" end="18085" title="Achaar" label="Achaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015681" start="18145" end="18152" title="Amchoor" label="Amchoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499976" start="18175" end="18191" title="Mangifera caesia" label="Mangifera caesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10476927" start="18274" end="18288" title="Mango mealybug" label="Mango mealybug"/>
<link wikidata="Q14558271" start="18291" end="18303" title="Mango pickle" label="Mango pickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661429" start="18367" end="18376" title="Aam papad" label="Aam papad"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56324" wikidata="Q207642" url="?curid=56324" title="Khat">
<text>Khat (Catha edulis), also known as Bushman&#x27;s tea, especially in South Africa, is a flowering plant native to eastern and southeastern Africa. It has a history of cultivation originating in the Harar area (present day eastern Ethiopia) and subsequently introduced at different times to countries nearby in East Africa and Southern Arabia, most notably Yemen. Cultivated by farmers, its leaves are sold on the market to be chewed as a recreational stimulant. The world&#x27;s largest consumers are Eastern Africans, particularly Somalis, and nearby Yemen, with the largest producers/exporters being Ethiopia and Kenya.

Khat contains the alkaloid &quot;cathinone&quot;, a stimulant which causes greater sociability, excitement, mild loss of appetite and mild euphoria. Among communities from the areas where the plant is native, khat-chewing has historical relevance (as a social custom, especially among men) dating back thousands of years, analogous—but slightly different—to the use of coca leaves in South America&#x27;s Andes Mountains or the betel nut preparations in South Asia.

Since 1980, the World Health Organization (WHO) classifies khat as a “drug of abuse” that can produce psychological dependence, although the WHO does not consider khat addiction to be a serious global problem.

The legality of khat varies by region and country; in many territories, khat might pass &quot;under-the-radar&quot; as a botanical species (thus not be a specifically controlled substance), but its recreational use may, nevertheless, be illegal under more general laws. It is strictly a controlled substance in many regions, often at the highest degree, including in Australia, Canada, the European Union, India, Jordan, New Zealand, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and the United Kingdom (UK). In the United States (US) and Turkey, the botanical specimen (plant) &quot;Catha edulis&quot; is not prohibited, but the consumption and distribution of harvested leaves or possession for recreational use is illegal. In the UAE, the punishment for possession, use, or distribution of khat can include life imprisonment. By contrast, its production, sale, and consumption are all fully legal—or not mentioned in a legal context at all—in the nations where its use is culturally significant, including Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, Sudan, Uganda and Yemen. In Israel, which hosts a population of Yemenite Jews, only the consumption of the plant&#x27;s leaves in its natural state is permitted; &quot;khat extracts&quot; are illegal, because they became a street drug and were popularly abused in the 2000s.
==Nomenclature==
The genus name &quot;Catha&quot; is a Latinization of the Arabic name قات, which is regularly romanized as &quot;qāt&quot;. Other romanizations include &quot;kat&quot;, &quot;quatt&quot;, &quot;qaad&quot;, &quot;qhat&quot;, &quot;ghat&quot;, and &quot;chat&quot;.

The khat plant is known by a variety of names, such as &quot;qat&quot; and &quot;gat&quot; in Yemeni Arabic, &quot;qaat&quot; and &quot;jaad&quot; in Somali, and &quot;chat&quot; in Harari and Amharic. It is also known as &quot;jimaa&quot; in the Oromo language, &quot;mayirungi&quot; in Luganda, and as &quot;miraa&quot; and &quot;muguka&quot; in Swahili. In the African Great Lakes region, where &quot;Catha edulis&quot; is (in some areas) cultivated, it is known as &quot;miraa&quot;, &quot;muhulo&quot;, &quot;muguka&quot; and &quot;muirungi&quot;.

It also goes by various descriptive names, such as &quot;Abyssinian tea&quot;, &quot;Arabian tea&quot;, &quot;kafta&quot;, &quot;jimaa&quot;, and &quot;Somalian tea&quot; in its endemic regions of the Horn of Africa and the Arabian peninsula. In South Africa, the plant is known as &quot;Bushman&#x27;s tea&quot;. The plant is also known as &quot;chat tree&quot; and &quot;flower of paradise&quot;.

== Description ==

Khat is a slow-growing shrub or tree that typically attains a height of . However, it can reach heights of up to in equatorial areas. The plant usually grows in arid environments, at a temperature range of . It has evergreen leaves, which are long and broad.
It takes seven to eight years for the khat plant to reach its full height. Other than access to sun and water, khat requires little maintenance. Ground water is often pumped from deep wells by diesel engines to irrigate the crops, or brought in by water trucks. The plants are watered heavily starting around a month before they are harvested to make the leaves and stems soft and moist. A good khat plant can be harvested four times a year, providing a year-long source of income for the farmer.

The shrub&#x27;s flowers are produced on short axillary cymes that are in length. Each flower is small, with five white petals.

The samara fruit is an oblong, three-valved capsule, which contains one to three seeds.

==Cultivation and uses==

Khat has been grown for use as a stimulant for centuries in the Horn of Africa and the Arabian peninsula. There, chewing khat predates the use of coffee and is used in a similar social context. Its fresh leaves and tops are chewed or, less frequently, dried and consumed as tea, to achieve a state of euphoria and stimulation. The leaves or the soft part of the stem can be chewed with either chewing gum or fried peanuts to make it easier to chew.

In Uganda, it is grown in the central region, especially in Kasenge (Wakiso), Butambala District, Mabira Forest, and in some parts of the western region of the country. In Kenya, it is grown in Meru County and Embu County.

Although the practice of khat-chewing is still primarily restricted to its original area of cultivation in the Red Sea area, the khat plant is native to the whole of the eastern side of Africa from Kenya southwards to Tanzania, Malawi, Zambia, Zimbabwe, where it grows on rocky outcrops and around the fringes of woodlands. In southern Africa the shrub&#x27;s range is scattered but still grows in the KwaZulu-Natal, Eastern Cape, Western Cape and Mpumalanga provinces of South Africa, in addition to Eswatini and Mozambique. In recent years, however, improved roads, off-road motor vehicles, and air transportation have increased the global distribution of this perishable commodity and, as a result, the plant has been found in places such as Australia, Netherlands, Canada, the United Kingdom, the Levant, Rome (Italy), New Zealand and the United States. In the US, freshly-packed khat leaves are sold in the African and Middle Eastern markets of Boston, Dallas, Los Angeles, and New York City, where the demand is highest.

Traditionally, khat is used as a socialising drug as in Yemen, where khat-chewing is predominantly a male habit combined with conversation, hookah smoking, and tea drinking. Khat is so popular in Yemen that its cultivation consumes much of the country&#x27;s agricultural resources. An estimated 40% of Yemen&#x27;s water supply goes towards irrigating it, with production increasing by about 10% to 15% every year. One &quot;daily bag&quot; of khat requires an estimated of water to produce. Water consumption is high and groundwater levels in the Sana&#x27;a basin are diminishing, so government officials have proposed relocating large portions of the population of the city to the Red Sea coastal areas.

One reason for the widespread cultivation of khat in Yemen is the high income that it provides for farmers. Some studies done in 2001 estimated that the income from cultivating khat was about 2.5 million Yemeni rials per hectare, while fruits brought only 0.57 million rials per hectare. Between 1970 and 2000, the area on which khat was cultivated was estimated to have grown from 8,000 to 103,000 hectares. In 2000, according to a World Bank estimate, khat accounted for 30% of Yemen&#x27;s economy.

In countries outside the core area of growth and consumption, khat is sometimes chewed at parties or social functions. It may also be used by farmers and labourers for reducing physical fatigue or hunger, and by drivers and students for improving attention.

More recently, in 2019, reports indicate that child soldiers in Yemen have been chewing khat in order to remain alert on the battlefield.

==Effects==
Khat consumption induces mild euphoria and excitement, similar to that conferred by strong coffee. Individuals become very talkative under the influence of the plant. Animal testing has shown that khat causes an increase in motoric activity. The effects of oral administration of cathinone occur more rapidly than the effects of amphetamine pills; roughly 15 minutes as compared to 30 minutes in amphetamine. Khat can induce manic behaviours and hyperactivity, similar in effects to those produced by amphetamine.

The use of khat results in constipation. Dilated pupils (mydriasis) are prominent during khat consumption, reflecting the sympathomimetic effects of the drug, which are also reflected in increased heart rate and blood pressure. Long-term use can precipitate permanent tooth darkening (of a greenish tinge), susceptibility to ulcers, and diminished sex drive. Khat is an effective anorectic, causing loss of appetite.

It is unclear if the consumption of khat directly affects the mental health of the user or not. Occasionally, a psychotic episode can result, resembling a hypomanic state in presentation. In humans, its prolonged consumption creates an uplifted mood and a sense of release from time and space.

Khat is mainly chewed by men, but there are cases of its use by women, and in particular it has been associated with increased likelihood of adverse outcomes during pregnancy.

===Effects by timeframe===
Immediate
*alertness
*arousal
*concentration
*confidence
*constipation
*dilated pupils
*euphoria
*friendliness
*increased blood pressure
*increased heart rate
*insomnia
*mania
*psychosis
*suppressed appetite
*talkativeness
*thought disorder
*verbosity

Long-term
*depression
*infrequent hallucinations
*impaired inhibition (similar to alcohol)
*increased risk of myocardial infarction (heart attack)
*oral cancer
*psychosis in extreme cases in the genetically predisposed
*weight loss

Indeterminate
*death
*stroke following acute coronary syndrome (clogging of the artery)

==Chemistry and pharmacology==

The stimulant effect of the plant was originally attributed to &quot;katin&quot;, cathine, a phenethylamine-type substance isolated from the plant. However, the attribution was disputed by reports showing the plant extracts from fresh leaves contained another substance more behaviourally active than cathine. In 1975, the related alkaloid cathinone was isolated, and its absolute configuration, (S)-2-Amino-1-phenylpropan-1-one, was established in 1978. Cathinone is not very stable and breaks down to produce cathine and norephedrine. These chemicals belong to the PPA (phenylpropanolamine) family, a subset of the phenethylamines related to amphetamines and the catecholamines epinephrine and norepinephrine. In fact, cathinone and cathine have a very similar molecular structure to amphetamine. Khat is sometimes confused with methcathinone (also known as &quot;cat&quot;), a Schedule I substance that possesses a similar chemical structure to the khat plant&#x27;s cathinone active component. However, both the side effects and the addictive properties of methcathinone are much stronger than those associated with khat use.

When khat leaves dry, the more potent chemical, cathinone, decomposes within 48 hours, leaving behind the milder chemical, cathine. Thus, harvesters transport khat by packaging the fresh leaves and stems in plastic bags or wrapping them in banana leaves to preserve their moisture and keep the cathinone potent. It is also common for them to sprinkle the plant with water frequently or use refrigeration during transportation.

When the khat leaves are chewed, cathine and cathinone are released and absorbed through the mucous membranes of the mouth as well as the lining of the stomach. The action of cathine and cathinone on the reuptake of epinephrine and norepinephrine has been demonstrated in lab animals, showing that one or both of these chemicals cause(s) the body to recycle these neurotransmitters more slowly, resulting in the wakefulness and insomnia associated with khat use.

Receptors for serotonin show a high affinity for cathinone, suggesting this chemical is responsible for feelings of euphoria associated with chewing khat. In mice, cathinone produces the same types of nervous pacing or repetitive scratching behaviours associated with amphetamines. The effects of cathinone peak after 15 to 30 minutes, with nearly 98% of the substance metabolised into norephedrine by the liver.

Cathine is somewhat less understood, being believed to act upon the adrenergic receptors causing the release of epinephrine and norepinephrine. It has a half-life of about three hours in humans. The medication bromocriptine can reduce cravings and withdrawal symptoms within 24 hours.

==Demographics==

An estimated 5 to 10 million people globally use khat on a daily basis. It is grown principally by communities in the Horn of Africa and the Arabian peninsula, where khat-chewing has a long history as a social custom dating back thousands of years.

The traditional form of khat chewing in Yemen involves only male users; khat chewing by females is less formal and less frequent. Researchers estimate about 70–80% of Yemenis between 16 and 50 years old chew khat, at least on occasion. Approximately 60–90% of male and 35% of female Yemenis chew khat daily. Before Yemeni unification in 1990, khat chewing was largely confined to the north-west mountains of the country, where khat grows. Yemenis spend an estimated 14.6 million man-hours per day chewing khat. Researchers have also estimated that families spend about 17% of their income on khat.

In Ethiopia, khat is chewed by 19.5% of the population and is more commonly chewed by men than women.

==History==
The inhabitants of Ifat Sultanate were the first to be recorded using khat in the 14th century by Arab historian Ibn Fadlallah al-Umari. The khat plant likely originated in the Horn of Africa specifically Ethiopia-Somali area, from there it spread to Kenya and the Arabian Peninsula. According to nineteenth century British explorer Richard Burton, khat originated in the Emirate of Harar.

Muslim Sufis in the surrounding areas also used it to intensify their mystical experience and to facilitate a sense of union with God.

The earliest known documented description of khat is found in the &quot;Kitab al-Saidala fi al-Tibb&quot; , an 11th-century work on pharmacy and materia medica written by Abū Rayhān al-Bīrūnī, a Persian scientist and biologist. Unaware of its origins, al-Bīrūnī wrote that khat is:

It is mentioned again in a 13th-century publication by the physician Naguib Ad-Din.

In 1854, Malay author Abdullah bin Abdul Kadir noted that the custom of chewing khat was prevalent in Al Hudaydah in Yemen:

In 1856, English writer Charles Dickens also described the custom of khat chewing in the Horn region and the adjacent Gulf territories, likening it to drinking strong green tea:


Nowadays khat consumption is limited to East Africa and South Western Arabia. These countries include Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia (includes Somaliland), Uganda, and Yemen. The author Yousif Al Zarouni writes in his book:

Following a ban on khat in the British-governed Aden Protectorate, the Qāt Commission of Inquiry in Aden concluded: &quot;Qāt does not create an addiction, like opium or hashish, in that those who are suddenly deprived of it, do not suffer physical consequences.&quot;

==Regulation==
In 1965, the World Health Organization (WHO) Expert Committee on Dependence-producing Drugs&#x27; &quot;Fourteenth Report&quot; noted, &quot;The Committee was pleased to note the resolution of the Economic and Social Council with respect to khat, confirming the view that the abuse of this substance is a regional problem and may best be controlled at that level.&quot; For this reason, khat was not scheduled under the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. In 1980, the WHO classified the plant as a drug of abuse that can produce mild to moderate psychological dependence (less than tobacco or alcohol), although the WHO does not consider khat to be seriously addictive. It is a controlled or illegal substance in some countries, but is legal for sale and production in others.

===Africa===

==== Morocco ====
Khat is illegal in Morocco.

====Ethiopia====

Khat is legal in Ethiopia.

====Somalia====
Khat is legal in Somalia.

====Djibouti====
Khat is legal in Djibouti.

====Kenya====
Khat is legal in Kenya. However, two of its active components, cathinone and cathine, are classed as Class C substances.

====South Africa====
In South Africa, &quot;Catha edulis&quot; is a protected tree.

The use of khat is illegal.

====Uganda====
Miraa is legal in Uganda but efforts are underway (as of October 2015) to ban it.Khat has now been banned in Uganda.

===Asia===
====Bangladesh====
Khat is illegal in Bangladesh.

====China====
Khat is illegal in China.

====Hong Kong====
Khat is regarded as a dangerous drug in Hong Kong. Traffickers can face a penalty up to HK$5 million as well as life imprisonment.

====Taiwan====
In Taiwan, khat is illegal. It is classified as a narcotic drug.

====Israel====
Khat, called &quot;Gat&quot; in Israel, is consumed mainly by Yemenite Jews and Beta Israel. The activity of chewing its leaves is called &quot;lekhazen&quot; (). The process of chewing the Gat can take up to several hours. Some chew the Gat in a gathering which is called &quot;takhazina&quot; (). The Gat is grown traditionally in private gardens, but it may be found in some markets.

Gat is legal in Israel as long as it is consumed in its natural form, but the distillation of its components is illegal. Some use the plant as a hedge since it is an evergreen.

In 2003, Hagigat, a pill based on extracted cathinone, began to be sold in kiosks in Israel. Following several cases of hospitalisation, the Israeli Ministry of Health classified cathinone as a dangerous drug, and &quot;Hagigat&quot; was outlawed. The plant itself is allowed to be chewed and sold in its natural state, as no harm was found in normal quantities.

As of June 2012, the Israeli anti-drug authority announced that beverages containing Khat are considered illegal as per the dangerous drug ordinance of the state of Israel.

====Indonesia====
Khat is illegal in Indonesia.

====Saudi Arabia====
Khat is illegal in Saudi Arabia.

==== Singapore ====
Khat is prohibited in Singapore by the Central Narcotics Bureau (CNB).

====United Arab Emirates====
Khat is illegal in the United Arab Emirates under federal law number 14 of 1995 on the Countermeasures against Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. Schedule No. 4, Part 2(5), provides for the prohibition of the cultivation and possession of khat. The possession and selling of khat may lead to life imprisonment.

==== Vietnam ====
Khat is classified as a narcotic drug in Vietnam. The illegal cultivation, possession and distribution of khat are criminally prosecuted. The use of khat may lead to mandatory rehabilitation. 

====Yemen====

Khat is legal in Yemen. However, cultivation of the crop and the selling of its leaves are governed by a series of regulations. In 2007, the Yemeni government passed a law that restricted the cultivation of khat in a number of agricultural flatlands and basins with high water stress. The Law Concerning the General Sales Tax in 2005 also set the tax rate on khat at 20% of its retail price.

The widespread cultivation of khat in Yemen has exacerbated a severe water shortage. Khat is much more water-intensive to grow than other crops. It has also played a major role in a famine in the country.

===Europe===
====Belgium====
Khat has been illegal in Belgium since 2006.

====Denmark====
Khat has been illegal in Denmark since 1993. In 2009, the Danish Health Authority investigated khat use among Somalis in Denmark. A questionnaire with 848 respondents was used. The responses indicated that 48% of Somali males and 16% of females used the narcotic on a monthly basis and that 29% of males and 6% of females used it two times or more a week. Half the respondents had never used khat. The responses indicated that Somalis constituted the great majority of users in Denmark.

The report also investigated attitudes towards khat use among Somalis in Denmark. In total, two out of three respondents stated that khat is a problem for social integration into Danish society, while one in three users stated the same. Responses indicated that two out of three considered khat to be part of Somali culture, although two in three also stated that they agree that khat should be banned in Denmark.

====Finland====
Khat is classified as an illegal drug in Finland, and possession, use and sale of the substance is prohibited and punishable. As with all illegal drugs, operating a motor vehicle with detectable levels of Khat or its metabolites in one&#x27;s system can also lead to a conviction for driving under the influence, even if the driver does not appear intoxicated.

====France====
Khat is prohibited in France as a stimulant since 1957.

====Germany====
In Germany, cathinone is listed as a &quot;non-trafficable substance&quot;, which makes the possession, sale and purchase of fresh khat illegal. The derivative cathine, with &quot;norpseudoephedrine&quot; listed as an alternate name, is only available on prescription.

In 2017, 5815 kg of khat was discovered by customs officials in Frankfurt. In June 2018, 324 kg of khat was discovered in packages from East Africa.

====Iceland====
In August 2010 the Icelandic police intercepted khat smuggling for the first time. 37 kg were confiscated. The drugs were most likely intended for sale in Canada. Again in May 2011 the police intercepted around 60 kg.

====Ireland====
Khat is a controlled drug for the purpose of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1977 and Schedule 1 of the Misuse of Drugs Regulations 1988. As such its possession and supply is prohibited.

====Italy====
Khat is inserted in the Table I of the Italian official list of psychoactive drugs under the name &quot;Catha edulis pianta&quot; (English: &quot;Catha edulis plant&quot;) and thus possession is forbidden.

====Netherlands====
In the Netherlands, the active ingredients of khat, cathine and cathinone, are qualified as hard drugs and forbidden. Use is mostly limited to the Somali community. In 2008 health minister Ab Klink decided against qualifying the unprocessed plant as drugs after consultation with experts. However, on 9 January 2012 the Dutch government announced a ban on khat.

====Norway====
In Norway, khat is classified as a narcotic drug and is illegal to use, sell and possess. Most users are Somali immigrants and khat is smuggled from the Netherlands and the United Kingdom.

Norwegian Customs seized 10 metric tons of khat in 2010, an increase from less than 4 in 2006.

In 2016, Oslo municipality estimated 50–70% of Somali immigrant males to be habitual users.

====Poland====
In Poland, khat is a classified narcotic drug, and is illegal to use, sell and possess.

====Slovenia====
Khat is classified as an illegal drug in Slovenia.

====Sweden====
The drug was prohibited in Sweden in 1989, without research. In 2007, it was estimated that 30% of Somali males in Sweden were using khat. Smuggling seizures by police amounted to about 9 tonnes annually.

====Switzerland====
In Switzerland, khat is illegal. It is classified as a narcotic drug.

====United Kingdom====
Khat was made illegal in the UK on 24 June 2014. Concerns had been expressed by commentators, health professionals and community members about the use of khat in the UK, particularly by immigrants from Somalia, Yemen and Ethiopia. Studies of the effects of khat use by immigrants on their mental health suggested that there was a need for better research on khat-chewing and its possible link with psychiatric disorders; it also suggested that public discourse on the issue displayed elements of a moral panic. Some Somali community organisations also campaigned for khat to be banned. As a result of these concerns, the Home Office commissioned successive research studies to look into the matter, and in 2005, presented the question of khat&#x27;s legal status before the Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs. The study concluded that most of the participants who were using khat were using it moderately in terms of both the quantity used and the frequency and duration of chewing sessions, and that khat use was typically a social activity. Only a small minority of the study participants&#x27; khat use was judged to be excessive. After a careful review of the evidence, the Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs recommended in January 2006 that the status of khat as a legal substance should remain for the time being.

In 2008, Conservative politician Sayeeda Warsi stated that a future Conservative government would ban khat. The website of the Conservative Party, which in 2010 became the larger party in a UK coalition government, previously stated that a Conservative government would &quot;Tackle unacceptable cultural practices by&quot;, amongst other measures, &quot;classifying Khat&quot;. In 2009, the Home Office commissioned two new studies in the effects of khat use and in June 2010, a Home Office spokesperson stated: &quot;The Government is committed to addressing any form of substance misuse and will keep the issue of khat use under close scrutiny&quot;.

During a parliamentary debate on the legality issue on 11 January 2012, Mark Lancaster, the Conservative Member of Parliament for Milton Keynes, stated that the importation of Khat into the UK stands at 10 tonnes every week.

On 23 January 2013, the Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs (ACMD) said there was &quot;insufficient evidence&quot; that khat caused health problems. The ACMD said there was &quot;no evidence&quot; khat was directly linked with serious or organised crime, and was chewed to obtain a &quot;mild stimulant effect much less potent than stimulant drugs, such as amphetamine&quot;.

On 3 July 2013, the British Home Secretary Theresa May announced that khat was to be banned in Britain, designating it a Class C substance under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971.

Alex Miller, a journalist from the Montreal, Canada-based magazine and television channel Vice, looked into the use of the substance and the potential impact of the ban for BBC nightly current affairs programme Newsnight and for a Vice documentary.

Kenyan MPs appealed to the UK not to &quot;condemn people&quot; by banning the herbal stimulant khat

In March 2014, the United Kingdom House of Commons&#x27; Home Affairs Select Committee announced that it would continue to lobby for the UK government not to go through with its intended ban on khat. The committee had shortly before also completed an inquiry and a report recommending that the British authorities refrain from banning the plant.

On 12 May 2014, the House of Lords passed a Motion to Approve the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (Designation)(Amendment) (No. 2)(England, Wales and Scotland) Order 2014, in order to control &quot;Catha edulis&quot; as a Class C drug. An amendment was proposed stating that, &quot;this House regrets that Her Majesty’s Government’s plans for the introduction of the Order do not include provisions for a 12-month review of the impact of the reclassification of khat in view of the highly unusual community focus of its use, for putting a detailed policing strategy in place before a ban takes effect, or for a health strategy to prevent a transfer of addiction to other substances; and do not commit the Department for International Development to do more work with the government of Kenya to alleviate the effect of the reclassification on the Kenyan economy.&quot; However, the amendment was defeated by vote. The prohibition came into effect on 24 June 2014.

In January 2015, the &quot;Bristol Post&quot; reported that most khat houses in the city had closed down, &quot;forcing users to take the drug in their homes instead&quot;. The local police had initially not sought to enforce the ban, giving users a grace period, but according to the &quot;Bristol Post&quot; had recently started to take action against khat use and had issued three warnings and a caution. Additionally, in September 2014 the police had seized 24 bags of dried khat from a property in Easton, but no arrests were made. Additionally, the Somali Resource Centre indicated that the ban seemed to have been effective, and that the prohibition had all but destroyed the import market since the plant has to be fresh in order to be consumed. A consultation with Somalis in Glasgow undertaken by the national voluntary organisation Fast Forward at the request of the Somali Association in Glasgow in October 2014 suggested that khat continues to be used in both fresh and dried forms by some Somalis in the city, and that the ban has also led some users to seek out other substances. The ban has reportedly served to increase the price of khat in the UK. Channel 4 News reported in September 2014 that before the ban, 20 tonnes of khat arrived at Heathrow Airport daily, and it would sell for £3 per bundle. After the ban, it was reportedly selling at £30 per bundle.

===North America===
====Canada====
In Canada, khat is a controlled substance under Schedule IV of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA), meaning it is illegal to seek or obtain unless approved by a medical practitioner. Possession of khat for personal use is not an arraignable offence in Canada. The maximum punishment for trafficking or possession with the intent of trafficking is ten years in prison.

In 2008, Canadian authorities reported that khat is the most common illegal drug being smuggled at airports.

However, in 2012 the Ontario Court of Appeal upheld a 2011 absolute discharge of a young woman who brought 34 kilograms of khat into Canada in 2009. According to the defence, the ruling recognises that there is no empirical evidence that khat is harmful. The courts in Quebec and Ontario continued to discharge the accused for bringing khat into Canada for the same reason (no evidence of harmfulness of khat) in 2014 and 2016.

====United States====

In the United States, cathinone is a Schedule I drug, according to the US Controlled Substance Act. The 1993 DEA rule placing cathinone in Schedule I noted that it was effectively also banning khat:

&quot;Catha edulis&quot; (khat) is a stimulant similar to that of amphetamine and its congeners, not a drug as categorised by US FDA (United States Food &amp; Drug Administration) and FDA import Alert #66-23 (published date 03/18/2011) states that &quot;Districts may detain, without physical examination, all entries of khat&quot;, based on section 801(a) (3) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act on the grounds that &quot;its labeling fails to bear adequate directions for use.&quot;

As federal and local khat raids have often targeted immigrants from countries where khat is legal, issues of cultural misunderstanding have sometimes been raised.

The plant itself is specifically banned in Missouri:
In California, both the plant itself as well as cathinone, its active component, are illegal.

===Oceania===
====Australia====
In Australia, the importation of khat is controlled under the Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations 1956. It is illegal to import khat into Australia for personal use. Khat can be imported only for medical or scientific use.

Importing khat without a permit is subject to fines or prosecution. In 2003, the total number of khat annual permits was 294 and the total number of individual khat permits was 202 however as of 1 December 2013, permits for the use of khat by individuals for recreational/cultural purposes are no longer issued. There are currently no plans by the Australian Government to amend the regulations to allow the importation of khat for personal use.

Khat is listed as a Schedule 2 dangerous drug in Queensland, in the same category as cannabis. Legality in New South Wales is not clear.

The importation of Khat (&quot;Catha edulis&quot;) material (includes material that is fresh, dried, powdered, capsules or tablets) is prohibited under the Customs (Prohibited Import) Regulations 1956 unless the person importing the material is the holder of both a license to import and a permit to import granted by the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA).
Biosecurity Act 2015 

====New Zealand====
In New Zealand, khat is listed as a Class C drug, in the same category as cannabis and codeine.

===South America===
In South America, there is no legislation regarding khat; the active ingredients in the plant can be found in several weight control compounds sold in the continent.

==Biofuel==
The possibility of Khat waste has been explored as a biofuel. It may be a possible future fuel, especially in developing countries. Some chemical groups that are essential for biofuel properties, such as alkene groups and O-H bonds have been found in Khat waste.

==Research programs==
In 2009, the University of Minnesota launched the Khat Research Program (KRP), a multidisciplinary research and training program focusing on the neurobehavioral and health effects of khat, led by Prof. Dr. Mustafa al&#x27;Absi. The program was funded by the National Institutes of Health and the National Institute for Drug Abuse of the United States. The inaugural event for the KRP was held in Sharm El-Sheik, Egypt, in December, 2009 in collaboration with the International Brain Research Organization (IBRO) and its local affiliates.

==See also==
* Betel leaves, a herb in Southeast Asia
* Coca, a herb used for elaboration of cocaine and traditional chewing
* List of Southern African indigenous trees
* Phenylpropanolamine
* Use of drugs in warfare

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*Gatter, Peer (2012). &quot;Politics of Qat: The Role of a Drug in Ruling Yemen&quot;. Wiesbaden: Ludwig Reichert Verlag. . Link to the table of contents and to selected chapters.
*
*

==External links==

* Khat drug profile The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207642" start="0" end="4" title="Khat" label="Khat"/>
<link wikidata="Q207642" start="35" end="53" title="Khat" label="Bushman&amp;#x27;s tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="69" end="81" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="88" end="103" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033855" start="198" end="203" title="Harari Region" label="Harar"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="310" end="321" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429935" start="326" end="341" title="Southern Arabia" label="Southern Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="356" end="361" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="438" end="460" title="Recreational drug use" label="recreational stimulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="641" end="649" title="alkaloid" label="alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q414242" start="656" end="665" title="cathinone" label="cathinone"/>
<link wikidata="Q211036" start="675" end="684" title="stimulant" label="stimulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q567709" start="736" end="752" title="Anorectic" label="loss of appetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q203994" start="762" end="770" title="euphoria" label="euphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q66793593" start="992" end="996" title="coca" label="coca"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="1007" end="1020" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="1028" end="1043" title="Andes Mountains" label="Andes Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816679" start="1051" end="1060" title="betel nut" label="betel nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="1077" end="1087" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="1106" end="1131" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="1160" end="1173" title="drug of abuse" label="drug of abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420150" start="1192" end="1216" title="psychological dependence" label="psychological dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="1422" end="1439" title="Plantae" label="botanical species"/>
<link wikidata="Q850692" start="1588" end="1608" title="controlled substance" label="controlled substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1668" end="1677" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1679" end="1685" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1691" end="1705" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1707" end="1712" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="1714" end="1720" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="1722" end="1733" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="1735" end="1747" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="1753" end="1773" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1788" end="1802" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1816" end="1829" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="1839" end="1845" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="2309" end="2317" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="2319" end="2327" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="2329" end="2334" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="2336" end="2343" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="2345" end="2350" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="2352" end="2358" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="2363" end="2368" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="2373" end="2379" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q657993" start="2409" end="2422" title="Yemenite Jews" label="Yemenite Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q281801" start="2641" end="2651" title="botanical name" label="genus name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349106" start="2731" end="2740" title="Romanization of Arabic" label="romanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="2996" end="3002" title="Yemeni" label="Yemeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="3052" end="3058" title="Somali language" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33626" start="3084" end="3090" title="Harari language" label="Harari"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="3095" end="3102" title="Amharic" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33864" start="3149" end="3163" title="Oromo language" label="Oromo language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33368" start="3190" end="3197" title="Luganda" label="Luganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="3250" end="3257" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q87982" start="3266" end="3292" title="African Great Lakes region" label="African Great Lakes region"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="3898" end="3903" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="4036" end="4040" title="Desert climate" label="arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="4090" end="4099" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="4100" end="4106" title="Leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4688" end="4693" title="Cyme (botany)#Determinate or Cymose" label="cymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q475697" start="4765" end="4771" title="Samara (fruit)" label="samara"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="4940" end="4954" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="4963" end="4980" title="Arabian peninsula" label="Arabian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="5022" end="5028" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="5329" end="5335" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5386" end="5393" title="Kasenge" label="Kasenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649358" start="5395" end="5401" title="Wakiso" label="Wakiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321622" start="5404" end="5422" title="Butambala District" label="Butambala District"/>
<link wikidata="Q662173" start="5424" end="5437" title="Mabira Forest" label="Mabira Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="5498" end="5503" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045704" start="5520" end="5531" title="Meru County" label="Meru County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335242" start="5536" end="5547" title="Embu County" label="Embu County"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="5661" end="5668" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="5768" end="5776" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="5778" end="5784" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="5786" end="5792" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="5794" end="5802" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81725" start="5952" end="5965" title="KwaZulu-Natal" label="KwaZulu-Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q130840" start="5967" end="5979" title="Eastern Cape" label="Eastern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q127167" start="5981" end="5993" title="Western Cape" label="Western Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q132410" start="5998" end="6008" title="Mpumalanga" label="Mpumalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="6022" end="6034" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="6051" end="6059" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="6064" end="6074" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="6306" end="6317" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="6331" end="6345" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="6351" end="6357" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="6359" end="6371" title="Rome (Italy)" label="Rome (Italy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="6500" end="6506" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="6508" end="6514" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="6516" end="6527" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="6533" end="6546" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944582" start="6881" end="6906" title="Water supply and sanitation in Yemen" label="Yemen&amp;#x27;s water supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="7101" end="7112" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471" start="7127" end="7138" title="Sana&amp;#x27;a" label="Sana&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q240512" start="7491" end="7502" title="Yemeni rial" label="Yemeni rial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="7720" end="7730" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q843926" start="8095" end="8118" title="child soldiers in Yemen" label="child soldiers in Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q203994" start="8230" end="8238" title="euphoria (emotion)" label="euphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="8625" end="8630" title="mania" label="manic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="8646" end="8659" title="hyperactivity" label="hyperactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="8742" end="8754" title="constipation" label="constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260673" start="8756" end="8769" title="Pupillary response" label="Dilated pupil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128283" start="8772" end="8781" title="mydriasis" label="mydriasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q598405" start="8837" end="8852" title="sympathomimetic" label="sympathomimetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q553" start="8983" end="8988" title="tooth" label="tooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q172941" start="9040" end="9045" title="peptic ulcer" label="ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q178066" start="9063" end="9072" title="Libido" label="sex drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q567709" start="9095" end="9104" title="anorectic" label="anorectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188611" start="9288" end="9297" title="hypomanic" label="hypomanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q203994" start="9720" end="9728" title="euphoria" label="euphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="9802" end="9807" title="mania" label="mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="9809" end="9818" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188698" start="9856" end="9872" title="thought disorder" label="thought disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="9896" end="9906" title="Depression (clinical)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="9967" end="9974" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="9995" end="10016" title="myocardial infarction" label="myocardial infarction"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="10046" end="10055" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q718113" start="10105" end="10116" title="weight loss" label="weight loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="10133" end="10138" title="death" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q266018" start="10157" end="10180" title="acute coronary syndrome" label="acute coronary syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q423797" start="10321" end="10328" title="cathine" label="cathine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407411" start="10332" end="10346" title="phenethylamine" label="phenethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q414242" start="10579" end="10588" title="cathinone" label="cathinone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052053" start="10611" end="10633" title="absolute configuration" label="absolute configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q59627745" start="10762" end="10774" title="norephedrine" label="norephedrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q59627745" start="10806" end="10831" title="phenylpropanolamine" label="PPA (phenylpropanolamine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q422693" start="10856" end="10871" title="Substituted phenethylamine" label="phenethylamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q179452" start="10883" end="10895" title="amfetamine" label="amphetamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q271663" start="10904" end="10917" title="catecholamine" label="catecholamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="10919" end="10930" title="epinephrine" label="epinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="10935" end="10949" title="norepinephrine" label="norepinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q420643" start="11070" end="11083" title="methcathinone" label="methcathinone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11119" end="11129" title="Convention on Psychotropic Substances#Schedules of Controlled Substances" label="Schedule I"/>
<link wikidata="Q22290476" start="12002" end="12010" title="reuptake" label="reuptake"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="12014" end="12025" title="epinephrine" label="epinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="12276" end="12285" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q410568" start="12744" end="12764" title="adrenergic receptors" label="adrenergic receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="12829" end="12838" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q413581" start="12886" end="12899" title="bromocriptine" label="bromocriptine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139876" start="13545" end="13563" title="Yemeni unification" label="Yemeni unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141362" start="13709" end="13717" title="man-hour" label="man-hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q157727" start="13963" end="13977" title="Ifat Sultanate" label="Ifat Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="14042" end="14046" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658869" start="14057" end="14079" title="Ibn Fadlallah al-Umari" label="Ibn Fadlallah al-Umari"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="14121" end="14135" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="14195" end="14200" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="14209" end="14226" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q125057" start="14277" end="14291" title="Richard Francis Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372551" start="14316" end="14332" title="Emirate of Harar" label="Emirate of Harar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="14335" end="14347" title="Sufism" label="Muslim Sufis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14405" end="14424" title="Mysticism#Union with the Divine or Absolute and mystical experience" label="mystical experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q614304" start="14603" end="14611" title="pharmacy" label="pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291275" start="14616" end="14630" title="materia medica" label="materia medica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="14642" end="14662" title="Abū Rayhān al-Bīrūnī" label="Abū Rayhān al-Bīrūnī"/>
<link wikidata="Q785426" start="14666" end="14683" title="Islamic science" label="Persian scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q624029" start="14688" end="14697" title="Islamic medicine" label="biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="14848" end="14853" title="Malaysia" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q317767" start="14861" end="14885" title="Abdullah bin Abdul Kadir" label="Abdullah bin Abdul Kadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q270041" start="14941" end="14952" title="Al Hudaydah" label="Al Hudaydah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="14988" end="15003" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q484083" start="15131" end="15140" title="green tea" label="green tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="15184" end="15195" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="15214" end="15220" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="15246" end="15254" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="15256" end="15264" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="15266" end="15271" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="15273" end="15280" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34754" start="15291" end="15301" title="Somaliland" label="Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="15304" end="15310" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="15316" end="15321" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865132" start="15421" end="15438" title="Aden Protectorate" label="Aden Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="15671" end="15696" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q170075" start="15855" end="15882" title="United Nations Economic and Social Council" label="Economic and Social Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273678" start="16078" end="16113" title="Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs" label="Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="16158" end="16171" title="drug of abuse" label="drug of abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378593" start="16206" end="16230" title="Substance dependence" label="psychological dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="17065" end="17075" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="17111" end="17116" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="17177" end="17186" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q657993" start="17427" end="17440" title="Yemenite Jews" label="Yemenite Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q202812" start="17445" end="17456" title="Beta Israel" label="Beta Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q414242" start="17975" end="17984" title="cathinone" label="cathinone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079801" start="18072" end="18098" title="Israeli Ministry of Health" label="Israeli Ministry of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="18615" end="18624" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061480" start="18632" end="18656" title="Central Narcotics Bureau" label="Central Narcotics Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="18717" end="18737" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144077" start="19620" end="19632" title="Suggested retail price" label="retail price"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19697" end="19718" title="Water supply and sanitation in Yemen#Water resources" label="severe water shortage"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220588" start="19815" end="19823" title="Famine in Yemen (2016-Present)" label="a famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="19957" end="19964" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583472" start="19990" end="20013" title="Danish Health Authority" label="Danish Health Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q12336393" start="20042" end="20060" title="Somalis in Denmark" label="Somalis in Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q370735" start="20575" end="20593" title="social integration" label="social integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q250062" start="21135" end="21162" title="driving under the influence" label="driving under the influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q423797" start="22445" end="22452" title="cathine" label="cathine"/>
<link wikidata="Q414242" start="22457" end="22466" title="cathinone" label="cathinone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056190" start="22566" end="22581" title="Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport (Netherlands)" label="health minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q303926" start="22582" end="22590" title="Ab Klink" label="Ab Klink"/>
<link wikidata="Q940" start="22806" end="22814" title="narcotic" label="narcotic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22920" end="22935" title="#Netherlands" label="the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q19389647" start="23104" end="23120" title="Somalis in Norway" label="Somali immigrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559197" start="23437" end="23459" title="Somalis in Sweden" label="Somali males in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="23860" end="23867" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="23869" end="23874" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="23879" end="23887" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914277" start="24156" end="24167" title="moral panic" label="moral panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="24279" end="24290" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="24998" end="25010" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q336455" start="25022" end="25035" title="Sayeeda Warsi" label="Sayeeda Warsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719801" start="25179" end="25202" title="Cameron–Clegg coalition" label="UK coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q750161" start="25716" end="25730" title="Mark Lancaster, Baron Lancaster of Kimbolton" label="Mark Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686856" start="25894" end="25933" title="Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs" label="Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="26272" end="26294" title="British Home Secretary" label="British Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="26295" end="26306" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964398" start="26401" end="26425" title="Misuse of Drugs Act 1971" label="Misuse of Drugs Act 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q249838" start="26518" end="26522" title="Vice (magazine)" label="Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757848" start="28111" end="28123" title="Bristol Post" label="Bristol Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209574" start="28483" end="28490" title="Police caution" label="caution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330820" start="28587" end="28593" title="Easton, Bristol" label="Easton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="28869" end="28876" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707372" start="29250" end="29264" title="Channel 4 News" label="Channel 4 News"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="29342" end="29358" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165903" start="29566" end="29601" title="Controlled Drugs and Substances Act" label="Controlled Drugs and Substances Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="29671" end="29691" title="medical practitioner" label="medical practitioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000987" start="30010" end="30033" title="Ontario Court of Appeal" label="Ontario Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q928770" start="30515" end="30539" title="Controlled Substance Act" label="Controlled Substance Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q622899" start="30550" end="30553" title="Drug Enforcement Administration" label="DEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q900891" start="30727" end="30736" title="Congener (chemistry)" label="congeners"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067874" start="31009" end="31045" title="Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act" label="Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="32262" end="32277" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q174723" start="32785" end="32792" title="codeine" label="codeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="33293" end="33316" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943347" start="33486" end="33506" title="Mustafa al&amp;#x27;Absi" label="Mustafa al&amp;#x27;Absi"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="33538" end="33567" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q644" start="33676" end="33690" title="Sharm El-Sheik" label="Sharm El-Sheik"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="33692" end="33697" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048819" start="33743" end="33784" title="International Brain Research Organization" label="International Brain Research Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q159532" start="33834" end="33846" title="Betel leaves" label="Betel leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q66793593" start="33875" end="33879" title="Coca" label="Coca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597624" start="33946" end="33987" title="List of Southern African indigenous trees" label="List of Southern African indigenous trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q59627745" start="33990" end="34009" title="Phenylpropanolamine" label="Phenylpropanolamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856987" start="34012" end="34035" title="Use of drugs in warfare" label="Use of drugs in warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377256" start="34308" end="34367" title="The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction" label="The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56325" wikidata="Q444374" url="?curid=56325" title="Qat">
<text>Qat may refer to:

* Qaumi Awami Tehreek (QAT) faction of Awami Tahreek, a political party in Pakistan
* Khat or qat, a flowering plant whose leaves are chewed as a stimulant
* Qat (deity), in the oral mythology of the Banks Islands, Vanuatu

==See also==
* Quat (disambiguation)
* &quot;The Qat Collection&quot;, a 1994 album by Sasha
* Qatar, a country</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q444374" start="0" end="3" title="Qat" label="Qat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829778" start="58" end="71" title="Awami Tahreek" label="Awami Tahreek"/>
<link wikidata="Q207642" start="105" end="109" title="Khat" label="Khat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267079" start="177" end="188" title="Qat (deity)" label="Qat (deity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269548" start="258" end="279" title="Quat (disambiguation)" label="Quat (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758865" start="288" end="306" title="The Qat Collection" label="The Qat Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q846" start="338" end="343" title="Qatar" label="Qatar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56329" wikidata="Q337935" url="?curid=56329" title="Necromancy">
<text>Necromancy () is the practice of magic involving communication with the dead by summoning their spirits as apparitions or visions for the purpose of divination; imparting the means to foretell future events and discover hidden knowledge. Sometimes categorized under &quot;death magic&quot;, the term is occasionally also used in a more general sense to refer to black magic or witchcraft as a whole.

== Etymology ==

The word &quot;necromancy&quot; is adapted from Late Latin : a loan word from the post-Classical Greek (, or &#x27;divination through a dead body&#x27;), a compound of Ancient Greek (, or &#x27;dead body&#x27;) and (, or &#x27;divination&#x27;).

The Koine Greek compound form was first documented in the writings of Origen of Alexandria in the 3rd century AD. The Classical Greek term was (), from the episode of the &quot;Odyssey&quot; in which Odysseus visits the realm of the dead souls, and in Hellenistic Greek; in Latin, and &quot;necromancy&quot; in 17th-century English.

== Antiquity ==

Early necromancy was related to – and most likely evolved from –forms of shamanism or prehistoric ritual magic that calls upon spirits such as the ghosts of deceased forebears. Classical necromancers addressed the dead in &quot;a mixture of high-pitch squeaking and low droning&quot;, comparable to the trance-state mutterings of shamans.
Necromancy was prevalent throughout antiquity with records of its practice in ancient Egypt, Babylonia, Greece, ancient Etruria, Rome, and China. In his &quot;Geographica&quot;, Strabo refers to (), or &quot;diviners by the dead&quot;, as the foremost practitioners of divination among the people of Persia, and it is believed to have also been widespread among the peoples of Chaldea (particularly the Hermeticists, or &quot;star-worshipers&quot;) and Babylonia. The Babylonian necromancers were called or , and the spirits they raised were called . 
Traditional Chinese folk religion involves necromancy in seeking blessing from dead ancestors through ritual displays of filial piety.

The oldest literary account of necromancy is found in Homer&#x27;s &quot;Odyssey&quot;. Under the direction of Circe, a powerful sorceress, Odysseus travels to the underworld () in order to gain insight about his impending voyage home by raising the spirits of the dead through the use of spells which Circe has taught him. He wishes to invoke and question the shade of Tiresias in particular; however, he is unable to summon the seer&#x27;s spirit without the assistance of others. The &quot;Odyssey&quot;″s passages contain many descriptive references to necromantic rituals: rites must be performed around a pit with fire during nocturnal hours, and Odysseus has to follow a specific recipe, which includes the blood of sacrificial animals, to concoct a libation for the ghosts to drink while he recites prayers to both the ghosts and gods of the underworld.

Practices such as these, varying from the mundane to the grotesque, were commonly associated with necromancy. Rituals could be quite elaborate, involving magic circles, wands, talismans, and incantations. The necromancer might also surround himself with morbid aspects of death, which often included wearing the deceased&#x27;s clothing and consuming foods that symbolized lifelessness and decay such as unleavened black bread and unfermented grape juice. Some necromancers even went so far as to take part in the mutilation and consumption of corpses. These ceremonies could carry on for hours, days, or even weeks, leading up to the eventual summoning of spirits. Frequently they were performed in places of interment or other melancholy venues that suited specific guidelines of the necromancer. Additionally, necromancers preferred to summon the recently departed based on the premise that their revelations were spoken more clearly. This timeframe was usually limited to the twelve months following the death of the physical body; once this period elapsed, necromancers would evoke the deceased&#x27;s ghostly spirit instead.

While some cultures considered the knowledge of the dead to be unlimited, ancient Greeks and Romans believed that individual shades knew only certain things. The apparent value of their counsel may have been based on things they knew in life or knowledge they acquired after death. Ovid writes in his &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; of a marketplace in the underworld where the dead convene to exchange news and gossip.

=== Prohibited among Israelites ===
There are also several references to necromancers – called &quot;bone-conjurers&quot; among Jews of the later Hellenistic period – in the Bible. The Book of Deuteronomy () explicitly warns the Israelites against engaging in the Canaanite practice of divination from the dead: Though Mosaic Law prescribed the death penalty to practitioners of necromancy (), this warning was not always heeded. One of the foremost examples is when King Saul had the Witch of Endor invoke the spirit of Samuel, a judge and prophet, from Sheol to divine the outcome of a coming battle (). However, the so-called witch was shocked at the presence of a familiar spirit in the image of Samuel for in I Sam 28:7 states &quot;Behold, there is a woman that hath a familiar spirit at Endor&quot; and in I Sam 28:12 says, &quot;when the woman saw Samuel, she cried out in a loud voice&quot;, and the familiar spirit questioned his reawakening, asking as if he were Samuel the Prophet, &quot;Why hast thou disquieted me?&quot; Saul died the next day in combat, with Chronicles 10:13 implying this was due to the prohibition against necromancy.

== Early and High Middle Age ==

Many medieval writers believed that actual resurrection required the assistance of God. They saw the practice of necromancy as conjuring demons who took the appearance of spirits. The practice became known explicitly as maleficium, and the Catholic Church condemned it. Though the practitioners of necromancy were linked by many common threads, there is no evidence that these necromancers ever organized as a group. One noted commonality among practitioners of necromancy was usually the utilization of certain toxic and hallucinogenic plants from the nightshade family such as black henbane, jimson weed, belladonna or mandrake, usually in magic salves or potions.

Medieval necromancy is believed to be a synthesis of astral magic derived from Arabic influences and exorcism derived from Christian and Jewish teachings. Arabic influences are evident in rituals that involve moon phases, sun placement, day and time. Fumigation and the act of burying images are also found in both astral magic and necromancy. Christian and Jewish influences appear in the symbols and in the conjuration formulas used in summoning rituals.

Practitioners were often members of the Christian clergy, though some nonclerical practitioners are recorded. In some instances, mere apprentices or those ordained to lower orders dabbled in the practice. They were connected by a belief in the manipulation of spiritual beings – especially demons – and magical practices. These practitioners were almost always literate and well educated. Most possessed basic knowledge of exorcism and had access to texts of astrology and of demonology. Clerical training was informal and university-based education rare. Most were trained under apprenticeships and were expected to have a basic knowledge of Latin, ritual and doctrine. This education was not always linked to spiritual guidance and seminaries were almost non-existent. This situation allowed some aspiring clerics to combine Christian rites with occult practices despite its condemnation in Christian doctrine.

Medieval practitioners believed they could accomplish three things with necromancy: will manipulation, illusions, and knowledge:
* Will manipulation affects the mind and will of another person, animal, or spirit. Demons are summoned to cause various afflictions on others, &quot;to drive them mad, to inflame them to love or hatred, to gain their favor, or to constrain them to do or not do some deed.&quot;
* Illusions involve reanimation of the dead or conjuring food, entertainment, or a mode of transportation.
* Knowledge is allegedly discovered when demons provide information about various things. This might involve identifying criminals, finding items, or revealing future events.

The act of performing medieval necromancy usually involved magic circles, conjurations, and sacrifices such as those shown in the &quot;Munich Manual of Demonic Magic&quot;:
* Circles were usually traced on the ground, though cloth and parchment were sometimes used. Various objects, shapes, symbols, and letters may be drawn or placed within that represent a mixture of Christian and occult ideas. Circles were usually believed to empower and protect what was contained within, including protecting the necromancer from the conjured demons. A text known as the Heptameron explain the function of the circle thusly: &quot;But because the greatest power is attributed to the Circles; (For they are certain fortresses to defend the operators safe from the evil Spirits;)...&quot;
* Conjuration is the method of communicating with the demons to have them enter the physical world. It usually employs the power of special words and stances to call out the demons and often incorporated the use of Christian prayers or biblical verses. These conjurations may be repeated in succession or repeated to different directions until the summoning is complete.
* Sacrifice was the payment for summoning; though it may involve the flesh of a human being or animal, it could sometimes be as simple as offering a certain object. Instructions for obtaining these items were usually specific. The time, location, and method of gathering items for sacrifice could also play an important role in the ritual.

The rare confessions of those accused of necromancy suggest that there was a range of spell casting and related magical experimentation. It is difficult to determine if these details were due to their practices, as opposed to the whims of their interrogators. John of Salisbury is one of the first examples related by Richard Kieckhefer, but as a Parisian ecclesiastical court record of 1323 shows, a &quot;group who were plotting to invoke the demon Berich from inside a circle made from strips of cat skin&quot; were obviously participating in what the Church would define as &quot;necromancy&quot;.

Herbert Stanley Redgrove claims necromancy as one of three chief branches of medieval ceremonial magic, alongside black magic and white magic. This does not correspond to contemporary classifications, which often conflate &quot;nigromancy&quot; (&quot;black-knowledge&quot;) with &quot;necromancy&quot; (&quot;death-knowledge&quot;).

== Late Middle Ages to Renaissance ==
In the wake of inconsistencies of judgment, necromancers and other practitioners of the magic arts were able to utilize spells featuring holy names with impunity, as any biblical references in such rituals could be construed as prayers rather than spells. As a consequence, the necromancy that appears in the &quot;Munich Manual&quot; is an evolution of these theoretical understandings. It has been suggested that the authors of the &quot;Manual&quot; knowingly designed the book to be in discord with ecclesiastical law. The main recipe employed throughout the &quot;Manual&quot; used the same religious language and names of power alongside demonic names. An understanding of the names of God derived from apocryphal texts and the Hebrew Torah required that the author of such rites have at least a casual familiarity with these sources.

Within the tales related in occult manuals are found connections with stories from other cultures&#x27; literary traditions. For instance, the ceremony for conjuring a horse closely relates to the Arabic &quot;One Thousand and One Nights&quot; and French romances; Chaucer&#x27;s &quot;The Squire&#x27;s Tale&quot; also bears marked similarities. This becomes a parallel evolution of spells to foreign gods or demons that were once acceptable, and frames them into a new Christian context, albeit demonic and forbidden. As the material for these manuals was apparently derived from scholarly magical and religious texts from a variety of sources in many languages, the scholars who studied these texts likely manufactured their own aggregate sourcebook and manual with which to work spells or magic.

In the notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci, it is stated that &quot;Of all human opinions that is to be reputed the most foolish which deals with the belief in Necromancy, the sister of Alchemy, which gives birth to simple and natural things.&quot;

== Modern era ==
In the present day, necromancy is more generally used as a term to describe manipulation of death and the dead, or the pretense thereof, often facilitated through the use of ritual magic or some other kind of occult ceremony. Contemporary séances, channeling and Spiritualism verge on necromancy when supposedly invoked spirits are asked to reveal future events or secret information. Necromancy may also be presented as sciomancy, a branch of theurgic magic.

As to the practice of necromancy having endured in one form or another throughout the millennia, &quot;An Encyclopædia of Occultism&quot; states: 

== Contemporary pop-culture ==
The archvillain in J.R.R. Tolkien&#x27;s Lord of the Rings fantasy, Sauron, first reappears in the environs of Middle Earth as &#x27;the Necromancer of Dol Guldur&#x27; in Tolkien&#x27;s standalone prologue to the trilogy &quot;The Hobbit&quot;. In fictional settings such as &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;, or fantasy video games, necromancy is associated with the reanimation of corpses often meant to be used as weapons. This tradition appears to combine associations of conjuring the dead from European and Mediterranean traditions with elements involving Zombies that seem to derive from Caribbean folklore and practice. 

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== References ==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q337935" start="0" end="10" title="Necromancy" label="Necromancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="33" end="38" title="Magic (paranormal)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="72" end="76" title="Death" label="dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q829697" start="80" end="89" title="Evocation" label="summoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q45529" start="107" end="117" title="Ghost" label="apparition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682108" start="122" end="129" title="Vision (spirituality)" label="visions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="149" end="159" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q690768" start="362" end="373" title="black magic" label="black magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="377" end="387" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503113" start="466" end="476" title="Late Latin" label="Late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="500" end="520" title="Koine Greek" label="post-Classical Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="586" end="599" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q170472" start="735" end="755" title="Origen" label="Origen of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="842" end="849" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="865" end="873" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q253854" start="939" end="944" title="Classical Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="1089" end="1098" title="shamanism" label="shamanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45529" start="1163" end="1168" title="ghost" label="ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q466475" start="1319" end="1331" title="Trance" label="trance-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1433" end="1446" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="1448" end="1457" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1459" end="1465" title="ancient Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q206730" start="1475" end="1482" title="Etruria" label="Etruria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1484" end="1488" title="ancient Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="1494" end="1499" title="History of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q690653" start="1514" end="1525" title="Geographica" label="Geographica"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="1533" end="1539" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="1655" end="1661" title="Parthian Empire" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200969" start="1732" end="1739" title="Chaldea" label="Chaldea"/>
<link wikidata="Q192933" start="1758" end="1770" title="Hermeticists" label="Hermeticists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="1919" end="1940" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Chinese folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q614263" start="2028" end="2040" title="filial piety" label="filial piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="2097" end="2102" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="2116" end="2123" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q187602" start="2154" end="2159" title="Circe" label="Circe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521549" start="2207" end="2217" title="Greek underworld" label="underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460262" start="2404" end="2409" title="Shade (mythology)" label="shade"/>
<link wikidata="Q656881" start="2413" end="2421" title="Tiresias" label="Tiresias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211147" start="3060" end="3072" title="magic circle" label="magic circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q148493" start="3075" end="3079" title="wand" label="wand"/>
<link wikidata="Q44506" start="3082" end="3090" title="talisman" label="talisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999796" start="3097" end="3108" title="incantation" label="incantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q331055" start="3616" end="3625" title="burial" label="interment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="4320" end="4324" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="4345" end="4358" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="4599" end="4617" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="4627" end="4632" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q42614" start="4638" end="4657" title="Book of Deuteronomy" label="Book of Deuteronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="4682" end="4692" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4717" end="4726" title="Canaan#Hebrew Bible" label="Canaanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q85779284" start="4798" end="4811" title="List of capital crimes in the Torah" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28730" start="4925" end="4929" title="Saul" label="Saul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391553" start="4938" end="4952" title="Witch of Endor" label="Witch of Endor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577515" start="4974" end="4980" title="Samuel (Bible)" label="Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q621421" start="4984" end="4989" title="Biblical judges" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q42857" start="4994" end="5001" title="prophet" label="prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q31780" start="5008" end="5013" title="Sheol" label="Sheol"/>
<link wikidata="Q188681" start="5682" end="5694" title="resurrection" label="resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540656" start="5859" end="5869" title="maleficium (sorcery)" label="maleficium"/>
<link wikidata="Q194270" start="6161" end="6175" title="hallucinogenic" label="hallucinogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134172" start="6192" end="6209" title="nightshade family" label="nightshade family"/>
<link wikidata="Q161058" start="6218" end="6231" title="black henbane" label="black henbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q30959" start="6233" end="6244" title="jimson weed" label="jimson weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q156091" start="6246" end="6256" title="Atropa belladonna" label="belladonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651366" start="6260" end="6268" title="mandrake" label="mandrake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486172" start="6360" end="6366" title="Astral plane" label="astral"/>
<link wikidata="Q172663" start="6408" end="6416" title="exorcism" label="exorcism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="7224" end="7233" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q323996" start="7241" end="7251" title="demonology" label="demonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="7613" end="7619" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q5965315" start="8506" end="8536" title="Munich Manual of Demonic Magic" label="Munich Manual of Demonic Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179723" start="9521" end="9530" title="Sacrifice" label="Sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q264028" start="10120" end="10137" title="John of Salisbury" label="John of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864435" start="10178" end="10196" title="Richard Kieckhefer" label="Richard Kieckhefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640717" start="10216" end="10236" title="ecclesiastical court" label="ecclesiastical court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155334" start="10549" end="10565" title="ceremonial magic" label="ceremonial magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q690768" start="10577" end="10588" title="black magic" label="black magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q794819" start="10593" end="10604" title="Left-hand path and right-hand path" label="white magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="11034" end="11040" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999796" start="11084" end="11090" title="Spell (paranormal)" label="spells"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="11339" end="11357" title="ecclesiastical law" label="ecclesiastical law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092752" start="11545" end="11561" title="Apocrypha" label="apocryphal texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="11570" end="11582" title="Torah" label="Hebrew Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8258" start="11888" end="11915" title="One Thousand and One Nights" label="One Thousand and One Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159457" start="11933" end="11941" title="Romance (heroic literature)" label="romances"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="11943" end="11957" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Chaucer&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795408" start="11964" end="11986" title="The Squire&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Squire&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="12499" end="12516" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="12660" end="12667" title="Alchemy" label="Alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093522" start="12980" end="12986" title="séance" label="séance"/>
<link wikidata="Q583271" start="12989" end="12999" title="Mediumship" label="channeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q829348" start="13004" end="13016" title="Spiritualism (movement)" label="Spiritualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140325" start="13185" end="13199" title="Theurgy" label="theurgic magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="13422" end="13439" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q46289" start="13533" end="13543" title="Dol Guldur" label="Dol Guldur"/>
<link wikidata="Q74287" start="13609" end="13619" title="The Hobbit" label="The Hobbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="13663" end="13685" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56333" wikidata="Q41500" url="?curid=56333" title="Root">
<text>In vascular plants, the roots are the organs of a plant that are modified to provide anchorage for the plant and take in water and nutrients into the plant body, which allows plants to grow taller and faster. They are most often below the surface of the soil, but roots can also be aerial or aerating, that is, growing up above the ground or especially above water. Roots can be very fine like a thread or massive like those of the Sitka Spruce which, in an individual named &quot;The Octopus Tree&quot; at Trees of Mystery in northern California, has exposed roots over four feet (1.2 meters) thick.

==Function==
The major functions of roots are absorption of water, plant nutrition and anchoring of the plant body to the ground.

==Anatomy==

Root morphology is divided into four zones: the root cap, the apical meristem, the elongation zone, and the hair. The root cap of new roots helps the root penetrate the soil. These root caps are sloughed off as the root goes deeper creating a slimy surface that provides lubrication. The apical meristem behind the root cap produces new root cells that elongate. Then, root hairs form that absorb water and mineral nutrients from the soil. The first root in seed producing plants is the radicle, which expands from the plant embryo after seed germination.

When dissected, the arrangement of the cells in a root is root hair, epidermis, epiblem, cortex, endodermis, pericycle and, lastly, the vascular tissue in the centre of a root to transport the water absorbed by the root to other places of the plant.
Perhaps the most striking characteristic of roots that distinguishes them from other plant organs such as stem-branches and leaves is that roots have an &quot;endogenous&quot; origin, &quot;i.e.&quot;, they originate and develop from an inner layer of the mother axis, such as pericycle. In contrast, stem-branches and leaves are &quot;exogenous&quot;, &quot;i.e.&quot;, they start to develop from the cortex, an outer layer.

In response to the concentration of nutrients, roots also synthesise cytokinin, which acts as a signal as to how fast the shoots can grow. Roots often function in storage of food and nutrients. The roots of most vascular plant species enter into symbiosis with certain fungi to form mycorrhizae, and a large range of other organisms including bacteria also closely associate with roots.

==Root system architecture (RSA)==
===Definition===
In its simplest form, the term root system architecture (RSA) refers to the spatial configuration of a plant&#x27;s root system. This system can be extremely complex and is dependent upon multiple factors such as the species of the plant itself, the composition of the soil and the availability of nutrients. Root architecture plays the important role of providing a secure supply of nutrients and water as well as anchorage and support.

The configuration of root systems serves to structurally support the plant, compete with other plants and for uptake of nutrients from the soil. Roots grow to specific conditions, which, if changed, can impede a plant&#x27;s growth. For example, a root system that has developed in dry soil may not be as efficient in flooded soil, yet plants are able to adapt to other changes in the environment, such as seasonal changes.

===Terms and components===
The main terms used to classify the architecture of a root system are:

All components of the root architecture are regulated through a complex interaction between genetic responses and responses due to environmental stimuli. These developmental stimuli are categorised as intrinsic, the genetic and nutritional influences, or extrinsic, the environmental influences and are interpreted by signal transduction pathways.

Extrinsic factors affecting root architecture include gravity, light exposure, water and oxygen, as well as the availability or lack of nitrogen, phosphorus, sulphur, aluminium and sodium chloride. The main hormones (intrinsic stimuli) and respective pathways responsible for root architecture development include:
==Growth==

Early root growth is one of the functions of the apical meristem located near the tip of the root. The meristem cells more or less continuously divide, producing more meristem, root cap cells (these are sacrificed to protect the meristem), and undifferentiated root cells. The latter become the primary tissues of the root, first undergoing elongation, a process that pushes the root tip forward in the growing medium. Gradually these cells differentiate and mature into specialized cells of the root tissues.

Growth from apical meristems is known as primary growth, which encompasses all elongation.
Secondary growth encompasses all growth in diameter, a major component of woody plant tissues and many nonwoody plants. For example, storage roots of sweet potato have secondary growth but are not woody. Secondary growth occurs at the lateral meristems, namely the vascular cambium and cork cambium. The former forms secondary xylem and secondary phloem, while the latter forms the periderm.

In plants with secondary growth, the vascular cambium, originating between the xylem and the phloem, forms a cylinder of tissue along the stem and root. The vascular cambium forms new cells on both the inside and outside of the cambium cylinder, with those on the inside forming secondary xylem cells, and those on the outside forming secondary phloem cells. As secondary xylem accumulates, the &quot;girth&quot; (lateral dimensions) of the stem and root increases. As a result, tissues beyond the secondary phloem including the epidermis and cortex, in many cases tend to be pushed outward and are eventually &quot;sloughed off&quot; (shed).

At this point, the cork cambium begins to form the periderm, consisting of protective cork cells. The walls of cork cells contains suberin thickenings, which is an extra cellular complex biopolymer. The suberin thickenings functions by providing a physical barrier, protection against pathogens and by preventing water loss from the surrounding tissues. In addition, it also aids the process of wound healing in plants. It is also postulated that suberin could be a component of the apoplastic barrier (present at the outer cell layers of roots) which prevents toxic compounds from entering the root and reduces radial oxygen loss (ROL) from the aerenchyma during waterlogging. In roots, the cork cambium originates in the pericycle, a component of the vascular cylinder.

The vascular cambium produces new layers of secondary xylem annually. The xylem vessels are dead at maturity (in some) but are responsible for most water transport through the vascular tissue in stems and roots.

Tree roots usually grow to three times the diameter of the branch spread, only half of which lie underneath the trunk and canopy. The roots from one side of a tree usually supply nutrients to the foliage on the same side. Some families however, such as Sapindaceae (the maple family), show no correlation between root location and where the root supplies nutrients on the plant.

===Regulation===
There is a correlation of roots using the process of plant perception to sense their physical environment to grow, including the sensing of light, and physical barriers. Plants also sense gravity and respond through auxin pathways, resulting in gravitropism. Over time, roots can crack foundations, snap water lines, and lift sidewalks. Research has shown that roots have ability to recognize &#x27;self&#x27; and &#x27;non-self&#x27; roots in same soil environment.

The correct environment of air, mineral nutrients and water directs plant roots to grow in any direction to meet the plant&#x27;s needs. Roots will shy or shrink away from dry or other poor soil conditions.

Gravitropism directs roots to grow downward at germination, the growth mechanism of plants that also causes the shoot to grow upward.
Different types of roots such as primary, seminal, lateral and crown are maintained at different gravitropic setpoint angles i.e. the direction in which they grow. Recent research show that root angle in cereal crops such as barley and wheat is regulated by a novel gene called Enhanced Gravitropism 1 (EGT1).

Research indicates that plant roots growing in search of productive nutrition can sense and avoid soil compaction through diffusion of the gas ethylene.
== Shade avoidance response ==

In order to avoid shade, plants utilize a shade avoidance response. When a plant is under dense vegetation, the presence of other vegetation nearby will cause the plant to avoid lateral growth and experience an increase in upward shoot, as well as downward root growth. In order to escape shade, plants adjust their root architecture, most notably by decreasing the length and amount of lateral roots emerging from the primary root. Experimentation of mutant variants of &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; found that plants sense the Red to Far Red light ratio that enters the plant through photoreceptors known as phytochromes. Nearby plant leaves will absorb red light and reflect far-red light, which will cause the ratio red to far red light to lower. The phytochrome PhyA that senses this Red to Far Red light ratio is localized in both the root system as well as the shoot system of plants, but through knockout mutant experimentation, it was found that root localized PhyA does not sense the light ratio, whether directly or axially, that leads to changes in the lateral root architecture. Research instead found that shoot localized PhyA is the phytochrome responsible for causing these architectural changes of the lateral root. Research has also found that phytochrome completes these architectural changes through the manipulation of auxin distribution in the root of the plant. When a low enough Red to Far Red ratio is sensed by PhyA, the phyA in the shoot will be mostly in its active form. In this form, PhyA stabilize the transcription factor HY5 causing it to no longer be degraded as it is when phyA is in its inactive form. This stabilized transcription factor is then able to be transported to the roots of the plant through the phloem, where it proceeds to induce its own transcription as a way to amplify its signal. In the roots of the plant HY5 functions to inhibit an auxin response factor known as ARF19, a response factor responsible for the translation of PIN3 and LAX3, two well known auxin transporting proteins. Thus, through manipulation of ARF19, the level and activity of auxin transporters PIN3 and LAX3 is inhibited. Once inhibited, auxin levels will be low in areas where lateral root emergence normally occurs, resulting in a failure for the plant to have the emergence of the lateral root primordium through the root pericycle. With this complex manipulation of Auxin transport in the roots, lateral root emergence will be inhibited in the roots and the root will instead elongate downwards, promoting vertical plant growth in an attempt to avoid shade.

Research of Arabidopsis has led to the discovery of how this auxin mediated root response works. In an attempt to discover the role that phytochrome plays in lateral root development, Salisbury et al. (2007) worked with &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; grown on agar plates. Salisbury et al. used wild type plants along with varying protein knockout and gene knockout Arabidopsis mutants to observe the results these mutations had on the root architecture, protein presence, and gene expression. To do this, Salisbury et al. used GFP fluorescence along with other forms of both macro and microscopic imagery to observe any changes various mutations caused. From these research, Salisbury et al. were able to theorize that shoot located phytochromes alter auxin levels in roots, controlling lateral root development and overall root architecture. In the experiments of van Gelderen et al. (2018), they wanted to see if and how it is that the shoot of &quot;A. thaliana&quot; alters and affects root development and root architecture. To do this, they took &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; plants, grew them in agar gel, and exposed the roots and shoots to separate sources of light. From here, they altered the different wavelengths of light the shoot and root of the plants were receiving and recorded the lateral root density, amount of lateral roots, and the general architecture of the lateral roots. To identify the function of specific photoreceptors, proteins, genes, and hormones, they utilized various &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; knockout mutants and observed the resulting changes in lateral roots architecture. Through their observations and various experiments, van Gelderen et al. were able to develop a mechanism for how root detection of Red to Far-red light ratios alter lateral root development.

==Types==

A true root system consists of a primary root and secondary roots (or lateral roots).
* the diffuse root system: the primary root is not dominant; the whole root system is fibrous and branches in all directions. Most common in monocots. The main function of the fibrous root is to anchor the plant.

===Specialized===



The roots, or parts of roots, of many plant species have become specialized to serve adaptive purposes besides the two primary functions, described in the introduction.
* Adventitious roots arise out-of-sequence from the more usual root formation of branches of a primary root, and instead originate from the stem, branches, leaves, or old woody roots. They commonly occur in monocots and pteridophytes, but also in many dicots, such as clover (&quot;Trifolium&quot;), ivy (&quot;Hedera&quot;), strawberry (&quot;Fragaria&quot;) and willow (&quot;Salix&quot;). Most aerial roots and stilt roots are adventitious. In some conifers adventitious roots can form the largest part of the root system. Adventitious root formation is enhanced in many plant species during (partial) submergence, to increase gas exchange and storage of gases like oxygen. Distinct types of adventitious roots can be classified and are dependent on morphology, growth dynamics and function.
* Aerating roots (or knee root or knee or pneumatophores): roots rising above the ground, especially above water such as in some mangrove genera (&quot;Avicennia, Sonneratia&quot;). In some plants like &quot;Avicennia&quot; the erect roots have a large number of breathing pores for exchange of gases.
* Aerial roots: roots entirely above the ground, such as in ivy (&quot;Hedera&quot;) or in epiphytic orchids. Many aerial roots are used to receive water and nutrient intake directly from the air – from fogs, dew or humidity in the air. Some rely on leaf systems to gather rain or humidity and even store it in scales or pockets. Other aerial roots, such as mangrove aerial roots, are used for aeration and not for water absorption. Other aerial roots are used mainly for structure, functioning as prop roots, as in maize or anchor roots or as the trunk in strangler fig. In some Epiphytes – plants living above the surface on other plants, aerial roots serve for reaching to water sources or reaching the surface, and then functioning as regular surface roots.
*Canopy roots/arboreal roots: roots that form when tree branches support mats of epiphytes and detritus, which hold water and nutrients in the canopy. They grow out into these mats, likely to utilize the available nutrients and moisture.
* Coarse roots: roots that have undergone secondary thickening and have a woody structure. These roots have some ability to absorb water and nutrients, but their main function is transport and to provide a structure to connect the smaller diameter, fine roots to the rest of the plant.
* Contractile roots: roots that pull bulbs or corms of monocots, such as hyacinth and lily, and some taproots, such as dandelion, deeper in the soil through expanding radially and contracting longitudinally. They have a wrinkled surface. 
* Coralloid roots: similar to root nodules, these provide nitrogen to the plant. They are often larger than nodules, branched, and located at or near the soil surface, and harbor nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria. They are only found in cycads.
* Dimorphic root systems: roots with two distinctive forms for two separate functions
* Fine roots: typically primary roots &lt;2 mm diameter that have the function of water and nutrient uptake. They are often heavily branched and support mycorrhizas. These roots may be short lived, but are replaced by the plant in an ongoing process of root &#x27;turnover&#x27;.
* Haustorial roots: roots of parasitic plants that can absorb water and nutrients from another plant, such as in mistletoe (&quot;Viscum album&quot;) and dodder.
* Propagative roots: roots that form adventitious buds that develop into aboveground shoots, termed suckers, which form new plants, as in common milkweed (&quot;Asclepias syriaca&quot;), Canada thistle (&quot;Cirsium arvense&quot;), and many others.
*Photosynthetic roots: roots that are green and photosynthesize, providing sugar to the plant. They are similar to phylloclades. Several orchids have these, such as &quot;Dendrophylax&quot; and &quot;Taeniophyllum&quot;.
* Proteoid roots or cluster roots: dense clusters of rootlets of limited growth that develop under low phosphate or low iron conditions in Proteaceae and some plants from the following families Betulaceae, Casuarinaceae, Elaeagnaceae, Moraceae, Fabaceae and &quot;Myricaceae&quot;.
* Root nodules: roots that harbor nitrogen-fixing soil bacteria. These are often very short and rounded. Root nodules are found in virtually all legumes.
* Stilt roots: adventitious support roots, common among mangroves. They grow down from lateral branches, branching in the soil.
* Storage roots: roots modified for storage of food or water, such as carrots and beets. They include some taproots and tuberous roots.
* Structural roots: large roots that have undergone considerable secondary thickening and provide mechanical support to woody plants and trees.
* Surface roots: roots that proliferate close below the soil surface, exploiting water and easily available nutrients. Where conditions are close to optimum in the surface layers of soil, the growth of surface roots is encouraged and they commonly become the dominant roots.
* Tuberous roots: fleshy and enlarged lateral roots for food or water storage, e.g. sweet potato. A type of storage root distinct from taproot.

==Depths==

The distribution of vascular plant roots within soil depends on plant form, the spatial and temporal availability of water and nutrients, and the physical properties of the soil. The deepest roots are generally found in deserts and temperate coniferous forests; the shallowest in tundra, boreal forest and temperate grasslands. The deepest observed living root, at least below the ground surface, was observed during the excavation of an open-pit mine in Arizona, US. Some roots can grow as deep as the tree is high. The majority of roots on most plants are however found relatively close to the surface where nutrient availability and aeration are more favourable for growth. Rooting depth may be physically restricted by rock or compacted soil close below the surface, or by anaerobic soil conditions.

===Records===

==Evolutionary history==

The fossil record of roots—or rather, infilled voids where roots rotted after death—spans back to the late Silurian, about 430 million years ago. Their identification is difficult, because casts and molds of roots are so similar in appearance to animal burrows. They can be discriminated using a range of features. The evolutionary development of roots likely happened from the modification of shallow rhizomes (modified horizontal stems) which anchored primitive vascular plants combined with the development of filamentous outgrowths (called rhizoids) which anchored the plants and conducted water to the plant from the soil.

==Environmental interactions==

Light has been shown to have some impact on roots, but it&#x27;s not been studied as much as the effect of light on other plant systems. Early research in the 1930s found that light decreased the effectiveness of Indole-3-acetic acid on adventitious root initiation. Studies of the pea in the 1950s shows that lateral root formation was inhibited by light, and in the early 1960s researchers found that light could induce positive gravitropic responses in some situations. The effects of light on root elongation has been studied for monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous plants, with the majority of studies finding that light inhibited root elongation, whether pulsed or continuous. Studies of &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; in the 1990s showed negative phototropism and inhibition of the elongation of root hairs in light sensed by phyB.

Certain plants, namely Fabaceae, form root nodules in order to associate and form a symbiotic relationship with nitrogen-fixing bacteria called rhizobia. Owing to the high energy required to fix nitrogen from the atmosphere, the bacteria take carbon compounds from the plant to fuel the process. In return, the plant takes nitrogen compounds produced from ammonia by the bacteria.

Soil temperature is a factor that effects root initiation and length. Root length is usually impacted more dramatically by temperature than overall mass, where cooler temperatures tend to cause more lateral growth because downward extension is limited by cooler temperatures at subsoil levels. Needs vary by plant species, but in temperate regions cool temperatures may limit root systems. Cool temperature species like oats, rapeseed, rye, wheat fare better in lower temperatures than summer annuals like maize and cotton. Researchers have found that plants like cotton develop wider and shorter taproots in cooler temperatures. The first root originating from the seed usually has a wider diameter than root branches, so smaller root diameters are expected if temperatures increase root initiation. Root diameter also decreases when the root elongates.

==Plant interactions==
Plants can interact with one another in their environment through their root systems. Studies have demonstrated that plant-plant interaction occurs among root systems via the soil as a medium. Researchers have tested whether plants growing in ambient conditions would change their behavior if a nearby plant was exposed to drought conditions.
Since nearby plants showed no changes in stomatal aperture researchers believe the drought signal spread through the roots and soil, not through the air as a volatile chemical signal.

==Soil interactions==
Soil microbiota can suppress both disease and beneficial root symbionts (mycorrhizal fungi are easier to establish in sterile soil). Inoculation with soil bacteria can increase internode extension, yield and quicken flowering. The migration of bacteria along the root varies with natural soil conditions. For example, research has found that the root systems of wheat seeds inoculated with &quot;Azotobacter&quot; showed higher populations in soils favorable to &quot;Azotobacter&quot; growth. Some studies have been unsuccessful in increasing the levels of certain microbes (such as &quot;P. fluorescens&quot;) in natural soil without prior sterilization.

Grass root systems are beneficial at reducing soil erosion by holding the soil together. Perennial grasses that grow wild in rangelands contribute organic matter to the soil when their old roots decay after attacks by beneficial fungi, protozoa, bacteria, insects and worms release nutrients.

Scientists have observed significant diversity of the microbial cover of roots at around 10 percent of three week old root segments covered. On younger roots there was even low coverage, but even on 3-month-old roots the coverage was only around 37%. Before the 1970s, scientists believed that the majority of the root surface was covered by microorganisms.

==Nutrient absorption==

Researchers studying maize seedlings found that calcium absorption was greatest in the apical root segment, and potassium at the base of the root. Along other root segments absorption was similar. Absorbed potassium is transported to the root tip, and to a lesser extent other parts of the root, then also to the shoot and grain. Calcium transport from the apical segment is slower, mostly transported upward and accumulated in stem and shoot.

Researchers found that partial deficiencies of K or P did not change the fatty acid composition of phosphatidyl choline in &quot;Brassica napus L.&quot; plants. Calcium deficiency did, on the other hand, lead to a marked decline of polyunsaturated compounds that would be expected to have negative impacts for integrity of the plant membrane, that could effect some properties like its permeability, and is needed for the ion uptake activity of the root membranes.

==Economic importance==
The term root crops refers to any edible underground plant structure, but many root crops are actually stems, such as potato tubers. Edible roots include cassava, sweet potato, beet, carrot, rutabaga, turnip, parsnip, radish, yam and horseradish. Spices obtained from roots include sassafras, angelica, sarsaparilla and licorice.

Sugar beet is an important source of sugar. Yam roots are a source of estrogen compounds used in birth control pills. The fish poison and insecticide rotenone is obtained from roots of &quot;Lonchocarpus&quot; spp. Important medicines from roots are ginseng, aconite, ipecac, gentian and reserpine. Several legumes that have nitrogen-fixing root nodules are used as green manure crops, which provide nitrogen fertilizer for other crops when plowed under. Specialized bald cypress roots, termed knees, are sold as souvenirs, lamp bases and carved into folk art. Native Americans used the flexible roots of white spruce for basketry.

Tree roots can heave and destroy concrete sidewalks and crush or clog buried pipes. The aerial roots of strangler fig have damaged ancient Mayan temples in Central America and the temple of Angkor Wat in Cambodia.

Trees stabilize soil on a slope prone to landslides. The root hairs work as an anchor on the soil.

Vegetative propagation of plants via cuttings depends on adventitious root formation. Hundreds of millions of plants are propagated via cuttings annually including chrysanthemum, poinsettia, carnation, ornamental shrubs and many houseplants.

Roots can also protect the environment by holding the soil to reduce soil erosion. This is especially important in areas such as sand dunes.
== See also ==
* Absorption of water
* Cypress knee
* Drought rhizogenesis
* Fibrous root system
* Mycorrhiza – root symbiosis in which individual hyphae extending from the mycelium of a fungus colonize the roots of a host plant.
* Mycorrhizal network
* Plant physiology
* Rhizosphere – region of soil around the root influenced by root secretions and microorganisms present
* Root cutting
* Rooting powder
* Stolon
* Tanada effect
* Taproot

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
* Botany – University of Arkansas at Little Rock</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27133" start="3" end="17" title="vascular plant" label="vascular plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q41500" start="24" end="29" title="Root" label="roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q712378" start="38" end="55" title="plant organ" label="organs of a plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="254" end="258" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065886" start="282" end="288" title="aerial root" label="aerial"/>
<link wikidata="Q147426" start="432" end="444" title="Sitka Spruce" label="Sitka Spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="536" end="546" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550696" start="648" end="667" title="absorption of water" label="absorption of water"/>
<link wikidata="Q8328350" start="669" end="684" title="plant nutrition" label="plant nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392652" start="794" end="802" title="root cap" label="root cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q207604" start="808" end="823" title="apical meristem" label="apical meristem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392652" start="864" end="872" title="root cap" label="root cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129307" start="1233" end="1240" title="radicle" label="radicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351263" start="1361" end="1370" title="root hair" label="root hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q796482" start="1372" end="1381" title="Epidermis (botany)" label="epidermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382419" start="1383" end="1390" title="epiblem" label="epiblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293511" start="1392" end="1398" title="Cortex (botany)" label="cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295298" start="1400" end="1410" title="endodermis" label="endodermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567471" start="1412" end="1421" title="pericycle" label="pericycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q968604" start="1439" end="1454" title="vascular tissue" label="vascular tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567471" start="1830" end="1839" title="pericycle" label="pericycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q422032" start="2049" end="2058" title="cytokinin" label="cytokinin"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="2249" end="2254" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q99974" start="2263" end="2273" title="mycorrhiza" label="mycorrhiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="2323" end="2331" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q828130" start="3701" end="3729" title="signal transduction pathways" label="signal transduction pathways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392652" start="4236" end="4244" title="root cap" label="root cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q757163" start="4735" end="4746" title="woody plant" label="woody plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="4811" end="4823" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q207604" start="4896" end="4912" title="lateral meristem" label="lateral meristem"/>
<link wikidata="Q369429" start="4926" end="4942" title="vascular cambium" label="vascular cambium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312910" start="4947" end="4959" title="cork cambium" label="cork cambium"/>
<link wikidata="Q122811" start="4978" end="4993" title="secondary xylem" label="secondary xylem"/>
<link wikidata="Q185138" start="4998" end="5014" title="secondary phloem" label="secondary phloem"/>
<link wikidata="Q184453" start="5043" end="5051" title="periderm" label="periderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="5163" end="5171" title="cylinder (geometry)" label="cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q134267" start="5192" end="5196" title="Plant stem" label="stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q49444" start="5784" end="5788" title="cork (material)" label="cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q421955" start="5829" end="5836" title="suberin" label="suberin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333565" start="6344" end="6354" title="aerenchyma" label="aerenchyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567471" start="6421" end="6430" title="pericycle" label="pericycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q27147" start="6937" end="6948" title="Sapindaceae" label="Sapindaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="6954" end="6959" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695566" start="7134" end="7150" title="plant perception (physiology)" label="plant perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q276985" start="7326" end="7338" title="gravitropism" label="gravitropism"/>
<link wikidata="Q381105" start="7576" end="7579" title="Aeration" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="7589" end="7598" title="nutrients" label="nutrients"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="7603" end="7608" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q276985" start="7757" end="7769" title="Gravitropism" label="Gravitropism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193838" start="7804" end="7815" title="germination" label="germination"/>
<link wikidata="Q151313" start="8345" end="8353" title="ethylene" label="ethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="8864" end="8884" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="Arabidopsis thaliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q24779306" start="9000" end="9011" title="phytochrome" label="phytochrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q407384" start="9923" end="9943" title="transcription factor" label="transcription factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q185138" start="10134" end="10140" title="phloem" label="phloem"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="10418" end="10425" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q190022" start="10491" end="10496" title="auxin" label="auxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567471" start="10741" end="10750" title="pericycle" label="pericycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24779306" start="11116" end="11127" title="phytochrome" label="phytochrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q177998" start="12079" end="12087" title="Agar" label="agar gel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825033" start="12860" end="12873" title="lateral roots" label="lateral roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q78961" start="13017" end="13025" title="monocots" label="monocots"/>
<link wikidata="Q78961" start="13487" end="13494" title="monocot" label="monocot"/>
<link wikidata="Q8316" start="13532" end="13537" title="dicot" label="dicot"/>
<link wikidata="Q101538" start="13548" end="13554" title="clover" label="clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q26771" start="13580" end="13583" title="ivy" label="ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13158" start="13606" end="13616" title="strawberry" label="strawberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="13644" end="13650" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="14204" end="14212" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q132645" start="14227" end="14236" title="Avicennia" label="Avicennia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236804" start="14238" end="14248" title="Sonneratia" label="Sonneratia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065886" start="14379" end="14391" title="Aerial roots" label="Aerial roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q188238" start="14468" end="14477" title="epiphyte" label="epiphytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="14478" end="14484" title="orchid" label="orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="14735" end="14743" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="14893" end="14898" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500609" start="14934" end="14947" title="strangler fig" label="strangler fig"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064479" start="15140" end="15151" title="Canopy root" label="Canopy root"/>
<link wikidata="Q78961" start="15718" end="15725" title="monocot" label="monocot"/>
<link wikidata="Q158758" start="15736" end="15744" title="hyacinth (plant)" label="hyacinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194627" start="15749" end="15753" title="lily" label="lily"/>
<link wikidata="Q609336" start="15764" end="15771" title="taproot" label="taproot"/>
<link wikidata="Q30024" start="15782" end="15791" title="dandelion" label="dandelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="16097" end="16110" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q157114" start="16135" end="16140" title="cycad" label="cycad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277744" start="16145" end="16166" title="Dimorphic root system" label="Dimorphic root system"/>
<link wikidata="Q30949134" start="16231" end="16240" title="Fine root" label="Fine root"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885646" start="16622" end="16631" title="mistletoe" label="mistletoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q190505" start="16663" end="16669" title="dodder" label="dodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q960522" start="16771" end="16778" title="Basal shoot" label="suckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q158295" start="16809" end="16856" title="Asclepias syriaca" label="common milkweed (&amp;quot;Asclepias syriaca&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q341600" start="16858" end="16902" title="Cirsium arvense" label="Canada thistle (&amp;quot;Cirsium arvense&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366573" start="17036" end="17047" title="phylloclade" label="phylloclade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301232" start="17092" end="17104" title="Dendrophylax" label="Dendrophylax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601232" start="17121" end="17134" title="Taeniophyllum" label="Taeniophyllum"/>
<link wikidata="Q748536" start="17144" end="17157" title="Proteoid root" label="Proteoid root"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="17245" end="17254" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="17262" end="17266" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q157228" start="17281" end="17291" title="Proteaceae" label="Proteaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156064" start="17336" end="17346" title="Betulaceae" label="Betulaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q474620" start="17348" end="17361" title="Casuarinaceae" label="Casuarinaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156326" start="17363" end="17375" title="Elaeagnaceae" label="Elaeagnaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156579" start="17377" end="17385" title="Moraceae" label="Moraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q44448" start="17387" end="17395" title="Fabaceae" label="Fabaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q843892" start="17406" end="17416" title="Myricaceae" label="Myricaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15098397" start="17426" end="17438" title="Root nodule" label="Root nodules"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="17569" end="17575" title="legume" label="legume"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="17634" end="17642" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q81" start="17776" end="17782" title="carrot" label="carrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q165437" start="17788" end="17792" title="beet" label="beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q609336" start="17813" end="17820" title="taproot" label="taproot"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="18345" end="18357" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q62412" start="19371" end="19379" title="Silurian" label="Silurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q184208" start="19666" end="19674" title="rhizomes" label="rhizomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q944420" start="19808" end="19815" title="rhizoid" label="rhizoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q411208" start="20138" end="20158" title="Indole-3-acetic acid" label="Indole-3-acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q276985" start="20356" end="20367" title="gravitropic" label="gravitropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q78961" start="20459" end="20475" title="monocotyledonous" label="monocotyledonous"/>
<link wikidata="Q8316" start="20480" end="20494" title="dicotyledonous" label="dicotyledonous"/>
<link wikidata="Q157892" start="20625" end="20636" title="Arabidopsis" label="Arabidopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q863119" start="20672" end="20684" title="phototropism" label="phototropism"/>
<link wikidata="Q24779306" start="20751" end="20755" title="phyB" label="phyB"/>
<link wikidata="Q44448" start="20781" end="20789" title="Fabaceae" label="Fabaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15098397" start="20796" end="20808" title="root nodules" label="root nodules"/>
<link wikidata="Q9164450" start="20902" end="20910" title="rhizobia" label="rhizobia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21182" end="21197" title="root initiation" label="root initiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="21560" end="21564" title="oats" label="oats"/>
<link wikidata="Q177932" start="21566" end="21574" title="rapeseed" label="rapeseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="21576" end="21579" title="rye" label="rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="21581" end="21586" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="21633" end="21640" title="Annual plant" label="annuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="21646" end="21651" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="21656" end="21662" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q609336" start="21737" end="21744" title="taproot" label="taproot"/>
<link wikidata="Q216635" start="22403" end="22408" title="stoma" label="stoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q132995" start="22965" end="22976" title="Azotobacter" label="Azotobacter"/>
<link wikidata="Q135292" start="23159" end="23173" title="P. fluorescens" label="P. fluorescens"/>
<link wikidata="Q889503" start="23273" end="23285" title="soil erosion" label="soil erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="23316" end="23325" title="Perennial" label="Perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="23456" end="23461" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="23463" end="23471" title="protozoa" label="protozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="23926" end="23931" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q207604" start="23992" end="23998" title="Apical meristem" label="apical"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="24423" end="24433" title="fatty acid" label="fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q650187" start="24449" end="24469" title="phosphatidyl choline" label="phosphatidyl choline"/>
<link wikidata="Q177932" start="24479" end="24496" title="Brassica napus L." label="Brassica napus L."/>
<link wikidata="Q3604509" start="24582" end="24597" title="polyunsaturated" label="polyunsaturated"/>
<link wikidata="Q176088" start="24683" end="24691" title="membrane" label="membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="24772" end="24775" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q20136" start="24849" end="24858" title="root crop" label="root crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="24958" end="24964" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="24994" end="25001" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="25003" end="25015" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q165437" start="25017" end="25021" title="beet" label="beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q81" start="25023" end="25029" title="carrot" label="carrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q158464" start="25031" end="25039" title="rutabaga" label="rutabaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916957" start="25041" end="25047" title="turnip" label="turnip"/>
<link wikidata="Q188614" start="25049" end="25056" title="parsnip" label="parsnip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224565" start="25058" end="25064" title="radish" label="radish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="25066" end="25069" title="Yam (vegetable)" label="yam"/>
<link wikidata="Q26545" start="25074" end="25085" title="horseradish" label="horseradish"/>
<link wikidata="Q131532" start="25122" end="25131" title="sassafras" label="sassafras"/>
<link wikidata="Q219666" start="25133" end="25141" title="angelica" label="angelica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117102" start="25143" end="25155" title="Smilax regelii" label="sarsaparilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q257106" start="25160" end="25168" title="licorice" label="licorice"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="25171" end="25181" title="Sugar beet" label="Sugar beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="25215" end="25218" title="Yam (vegetable)" label="Yam"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="25241" end="25249" title="estrogen" label="estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="25268" end="25286" title="birth control pill" label="birth control pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="25298" end="25304" title="poison" label="poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="25309" end="25320" title="insecticide" label="insecticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q412388" start="25321" end="25329" title="rotenone" label="rotenone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756340" start="25362" end="25374" title="Lonchocarpus" label="Lonchocarpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q20817212" start="25421" end="25428" title="ginseng" label="ginseng"/>
<link wikidata="Q155904" start="25430" end="25437" title="aconitum" label="aconite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755412" start="25439" end="25445" title="Syrup of ipecac" label="ipecac"/>
<link wikidata="Q144682" start="25447" end="25454" title="gentian" label="gentian"/>
<link wikidata="Q407841" start="25459" end="25468" title="reserpine" label="reserpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q148950" start="25638" end="25650" title="bald cypress" label="bald cypress"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="25732" end="25748" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q128116" start="25776" end="25788" title="Picea glauca" label="white spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="25804" end="25808" title="Tree" label="Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="25837" end="25845" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500609" start="25908" end="25921" title="strangler fig" label="strangler fig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005167" start="25943" end="25948" title="Maya architecture" label="Mayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44539" start="25949" end="25955" title="temple" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="25960" end="25975" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q43473" start="25994" end="26004" title="Angkor Wat" label="Angkor Wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="26008" end="26016" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167903" start="26060" end="26070" title="landslides" label="landslides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351263" start="26076" end="26085" title="root hair" label="root hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q464666" start="26119" end="26141" title="Vegetative propagation" label="Vegetative propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q176982" start="26255" end="26263" title="cuttings (plants)" label="cuttings"/>
<link wikidata="Q59882" start="26283" end="26296" title="chrysanthemum" label="chrysanthemum"/>
<link wikidata="Q208253" start="26298" end="26308" title="poinsettia" label="poinsettia"/>
<link wikidata="Q158984" start="26310" end="26319" title="carnation" label="carnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="26332" end="26337" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q203834" start="26348" end="26359" title="houseplants" label="houseplants"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="26491" end="26501" title="sand dunes" label="sand dunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550696" start="26520" end="26539" title="Absorption of water" label="Absorption of water"/>
<link wikidata="Q754285" start="26542" end="26554" title="Cypress knee" label="Cypress knee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308642" start="26557" end="26577" title="Drought rhizogenesis" label="Drought rhizogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426303" start="26580" end="26599" title="Fibrous root system" label="Fibrous root system"/>
<link wikidata="Q99974" start="26602" end="26612" title="Mycorrhiza" label="Mycorrhiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q16267464" start="26735" end="26754" title="Mycorrhizal network" label="Mycorrhizal network"/>
<link wikidata="Q185973" start="26757" end="26773" title="Plant physiology" label="Plant physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124578" start="26776" end="26787" title="Rhizosphere" label="Rhizosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q176982" start="26880" end="26892" title="Root cutting" label="Root cutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q190022" start="26895" end="26909" title="Auxin" label="Rooting powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q633912" start="26912" end="26918" title="Stolon" label="Stolon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682201" start="26921" end="26934" title="Tanada effect" label="Tanada effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q609336" start="26937" end="26944" title="Taproot" label="Taproot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56335" wikidata="Q6630399" url="?curid=56335" title="List of neurological conditions and disorders">
<text>This is a list of major and frequently observed neurological disorders (e.g., Alzheimer&#x27;s disease), symptoms (e.g., back pain), signs (e.g., aphasia) and syndromes (e.g., Aicardi syndrome). There is disagreement over the definitions and criteria used to delineate various disorders and whether some of these conditions should be classified as mental disorders or in other ways.

*22q13 deletion syndrome

== A ==
*Abulia
*Achromatopsia
*Acquired brain injury
*Agraphia
*Agnosia
*Aicardi syndrome
*AIDS – neurological manifestations
*Akinetopsia
*Alexander Disease
*Alien hand syndrome
*Allan–Herndon–Dudley syndrome
*Alternating hemiplegia of childhood
*Alzheimer&#x27;s disease
*Amaurosis fugax
*Amnesia
*Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
*Anencephaly 
*Aneurysm
*Angelman syndrome
*Anosognosia
*Aphasia
*Aphantasia
*Apraxia
*Arachnoiditis
*Arnold–Chiari malformation
*Asomatognosia
*Asperger syndrome
*Ataxia
*ATR-16 syndrome
*Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
*Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder predominately inattentive
*Auditory processing disorder
*Autism spectrum disorder

== B ==
*Back pain
*Behçet&#x27;s disease
*Bell&#x27;s palsy
*Bipolar disorder
*Blindsight
*Blindness
*Blurred vision
*Brain damage
*Brachial plexus injury
*Brain death
*Brain injury
*Brain infarction
*Brain tumor
*Brody myopathy

== C ==
*Canavan disease 
*Capgras delusion
*Carpal tunnel syndrome
*Causalgia
*Central pain syndrome
*Central pontine myelinolysis
*Centronuclear myopathy 
*Cephalic disorder
*Cerebral aneurysm
*Cerebral arteriosclerosis
*Cerebral atrophy
*Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy
*Cerebral dysgenesis–neuropathy–ichthyosis–keratoderma syndrome
*Cerebral gigantism
*Cerebral palsy
*Cerebral vasculitis
*Cerebrospinal fluid leak
*Cervical spinal stenosis
*Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease
*Chiari malformation
*Chorea
*Chronic fatigue syndrome
*Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy
*Charles bonnet syndrome
*Chronic pain
*Cluster headache
*Cockayne syndrome
*Coffin–Lowry syndrome
*Coma
*Complex post-traumatic stress disorder
*Complex regional pain syndrome
*Compression neuropathy
*Congenital distal spinal muscular atrophy
*Congenital facial diplegia
*Color blindness
*Cornelia de Lange syndrome
*Corticobasal degeneration
*Cotard delusion
*Cranial arteritis
*Craniosynostosis
*Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease
*Cumulative trauma disorders
*Cushing&#x27;s syndrome
*Cyclic vomiting syndrome
*Cyclothymic disorder
*Cytomegalic inclusion body disease
*Cytomegalovirus Infection

== D ==
*Dandy–Walker syndrome
*Dawson disease
*De Morsier&#x27;s syndrome
*Dejerine–Klumpke palsy
*Dejerine–Sottas disease
*Delayed sleep phase disorder or syndrome
*Dementia
*Dermatillomania
*Dermatomyositis
*Developmental coordination disorder
*Diabetic neuropathy
*Disc herniation
*Diffuse sclerosis
*Diplopia
*Disorders of consciousness
*Distal hereditary motor neuropathy type V
*Distal spinal muscular atrophy type 1
*Distal spinal muscular atrophy type 2
*Dizziness
*Down syndrome
*Dravet syndrome
*Duchenne muscular dystrophy
*Dysarthria
*Dysautonomia
*Dyscalculia
*Dysphagia
*Dysgraphia
*Dyskinesia
*Dyslexia
*Dystonia

== E ==
*Empty sella syndrome
*Encephalitis
*Encephalocele
*Encephalopathy
*Encephalotrigeminal angiomatosis
*Encopresis
*Enuresis
*Epilepsy
*Epilepsy-intellectual disability in females
*Erb&#x27;s palsy
*Erythromelalgia
*Essential tremor
*Exploding head syndrome

== F ==
*Fabry&#x27;s disease
*Fahr&#x27;s syndrome
*Fainting
*Familial spastic paralysis
*Fetal alcohol syndrome
*Febrile seizures
*Fisher syndrome
*Fibromyalgia
*Foville&#x27;s syndrome
*Fragile X syndrome
*Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome
*Friedreich&#x27;s ataxia
*Frontotemporal dementia
*Functional neurological symptom disorder

== G ==
*Gaucher&#x27;s disease
*Generalized anxiety disorder
*Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus
*Gerstmann&#x27;s syndrome
*Giant cell arteritis
*Giant cell inclusion disease
*Globoid cell leukodystrophy
*Gray matter heterotopia
*Guillain–Barré syndrome

== H ==
*Head injury
*Headache
*Hemicrania Continua
*Hemifacial spasm
*Hemispatial neglect 
*Hereditary motor neuropathies
*Hereditary spastic paraplegia
*Heredopathia atactica polyneuritiformis
*Herpes zoster
*Herpes zoster oticus
*Hirayama syndrome
*Hirschsprung&#x27;s disease
*Holmes–Adie syndrome
*Holoprosencephaly
*HTLV-1 associated myelopathy
*Huntington&#x27;s disease
*Hydrocephalia
*Hydranencephaly
*Hydrocephalus
*Hypercortisolism
*Hypoalgesia
*Hypoesthesia
*Hypoxia

== I ==
*Immune-mediated encephalomyelitis
*Inclusion body myositis
*Incontinentia pigmenti
*Infantile spasms
*Inflammatory myopathy
*Intellectual disability
*Intracranial cyst
*Intracranial hypertension
*Isodicentric 15

== J ==
*Joubert syndrome

== K ==
*Karak syndrome
*Kearns–Sayre syndrome
*Kinsbourne syndrome
*Kleine–Levin syndrome
*Klippel Feil syndrome
*Krabbe disease
*Korsakoff Syndrome
*Kufor–Rakeb syndrome
*Kugelberg–Welander disease – see Spinal muscular atrophy

== L ==
* Lafora disease
* Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome
* Landau–Kleffner syndrome
* Lateral medullary (Wallenberg) syndrome
* Learning disabilities
* Leigh&#x27;s disease
* Lennox–Gastaut syndrome
* Lesch–Nyhan syndrome
* Leukodystrophy
* Leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter
* Lewy body dementia
* Lissencephaly
* Locked-in syndrome
* Lou Gehrig&#x27;s disease – see Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
* Lumbar disc disease
* Lumbar hernia
* Lumbar spinal stenosis
* Lupus erythematosus – neurological sequelae
* Lyme disease

== M ==
*Machado–Joseph disease
*Macrencephaly
*Macrocephalia
*Macropsia
*Mal de debarquement
*Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts
*Megalencephaly
*Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome
*Menieres disease
*Meningitis
*Menkes disease
*Metachromatic leukodystrophy
*Microcephaly
*Micropsia
*Migraine
*Mild brain injury
*Miller Fisher syndrome
*Mini-stroke (transient ischemic attack)
*Misophonia
*Mitochondrial myopathy
*Mobius syndrome
*Monomelic amyotrophy
*Morvan syndrome
*Motor neurone disease – see Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
*Motor skills disorder
*Moyamoya disease
*Mucopolysaccharidoses
*Multifocal motor neuropathy
*Multi-infarct dementia
*Multiple sclerosis
*Multiple system atrophy
*Muscular dystrophy
*Myalgic encephalomyelitis
*Myasthenia gravis
*Myelinoclastic diffuse sclerosis
*Myoclonic Encephalopathy of infants
*Myoclonus
*Myopathy
*Myotonia congenita
*Myotubular myopathy

== N ==
*Narcolepsy
*Neuralgia
*Neuro-Behçet&#x27;s disease
*Neurofibromatosis
*Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
*Neuromyotonia
*Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
*Neuronal migration disorders
*Neuropathy
*Neurosis
*Niemann–Pick disease
*Non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder
*Nonverbal learning disorder

== O ==
*Occipital Neuralgia
*Occult spinal dysraphism sequence
*Ohtahara syndrome
*Olivopontocerebellar atrophy
*Opsoclonus myoclonus syndrome
*Optic neuritis 
*Orthostatic hypotension
*O&#x27;Sullivan–McLeod syndrome
*Otosclerosis
*Overuse syndrome

== P ==
*Palinopsia
*PANDAS
*Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration
*Paraplegia
*Paralysis
*Paramyotonia congenita
*Paresthesia
*Paresis 
*Parkinson(&#x27;s) disease
*Paraneoplastic diseases
*Paroxysmal attacks
*Parry–Romberg syndrome
*Pelizaeus–Merzbacher disease
*Periodic paralyses
*Peripheral neuropathy
*Pervasive developmental disorders
*Phantom limb / Phantom pain
*Photic sneeze reflex
*Phytanic acid storage disease
*Pick&#x27;s disease
*Pinched nerve
*Pituitary tumors
*Polyneuropathy
*PMG
*Polio
*Polymicrogyria
*Polymyositis
*Porencephaly
*Post-polio syndrome
*Postherpetic neuralgia
*Posttraumatic stress disorder
*Postural hypotension
*Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome
*Prader–Willi syndrome
*Primary lateral sclerosis
*Prion diseases
*Progressive hemifacial atrophy
*Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
*Progressive supranuclear palsy
*Prosopagnosia
*Pseudotumor cerebri

== Q ==
*Quadrantanopia
*Quadriplegia

== R ==
*Rabies
*Radiculopathy
*Ramsay Hunt syndrome type I
*Ramsay Hunt syndrome type II
*Ramsay Hunt syndrome type III – see Ramsay–Hunt syndrome
*Rasmussen encephalitis
*Reflex neurovascular dystrophy
*Refsum disease
*REM sleep behavior disorder
*Repetitive stress injury
*Restless legs syndrome
*Retrovirus-associated myelopathy
*Rett syndrome
*Reye&#x27;s syndrome
*Rhythmic movement disorder
*Romberg syndrome

== S ==
*Savant syndrome 
*Saint Vitus dance
*Sandhoff disease
*Sanfilippo syndrome
*Schilder&#x27;s disease (two distinct conditions)
*Schizencephaly
*Sclerosis
*Seizures
*Sensory processing disorder
*Septo-optic dysplasia
*Shaken baby syndrome
*Shingles
*Shy–Drager syndrome
*Sjögren&#x27;s syndrome
*Sleep apnea
*Sleeping sickness
*Slurred speech
*Snatiation
*Sotos syndrome
*Spasticity
*Spina bifida
*Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy
*Spinal cord injury
*Spinal cord tumors
*Spinal muscular atrophy
*Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1 – see Distal spinal muscular atrophy type 1
*Spinocerebellar ataxia 
*Split-brain
*Steele–Richardson–Olszewski syndrome – see Progressive supranuclear palsy
*Stiff-person syndrome
*Stroke
*Sturge–Weber syndrome
*Stuttering
*Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis
*Subcortical arteriosclerotic encephalopathy
*Superficial siderosis
*Sydenham&#x27;s chorea
*Syncope
*Synesthesia
*Syringomyelia
*Substance use disorder

== T ==
*Traumatic encephalopathy
*Tardive dyskinesia
*Tarlov cyst
*Tarsal tunnel syndrome
*Tay–Sachs disease
*Temporal arteritis
*Temporal lobe epilepsy
*Tetanus
*Tethered spinal cord syndrome
*Thalamocortical dysrhythmia
*Thomsen disease
*Thoracic outlet syndrome
*Tic Douloureux
*Tinnitus
*Todd&#x27;s paralysis
*Tourette syndrome
*Toxic encephalopathy
*Transient ischemic attack
*Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies
*Transverse myelitis
*Traumatic brain injury
*Tremor
*Trichotillomania
*Trigeminal neuralgia
*Tropical spastic paraparesis
*Trypanosomiasis
*Tuberous sclerosis

== U ==
*Unconsciousness
*Unverricht–Lundborg disease

== V ==
*Vestibular schwannoma
*Vertigo
*Viliuisk encephalomyelitis
*Visual Snow
*Von Hippel–Lindau disease
*Vulpian-Bernhardt Syndrome

== W ==
*Wallenberg&#x27;s syndrome
*Werdnig–Hoffmann disease – see Spinal muscular atrophy
*Wernicke&#x27;s encephalopathy
*Wernicke Korsakoff syndrome
*West syndrome
*Whiplash
*Williams syndrome
*Wilson&#x27;s disease
*Witzelsucht

== Y ==
*Y-Linked hearing impairment

== Z ==
*Zellweger syndrome

== See also ==
* List of mental disorders

== References ==
The source of this list is from the NIH public domain </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3339235" start="61" end="70" title="Neurological disorder" label="disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="78" end="102" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5781808" start="121" end="130" title="back pain" label="back pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836" start="146" end="153" title="aphasia" label="aphasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403463" start="176" end="192" title="Aicardi syndrome" label="Aicardi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="348" end="364" title="mental disorders" label="mental disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926345" start="385" end="408" title="22q13 deletion syndrome" label="22q13 deletion syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q335941" start="419" end="425" title="Abulia" label="Abulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q432396" start="427" end="440" title="Achromatopsia" label="Achromatopsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674782" start="442" end="463" title="Acquired brain injury" label="Acquired brain injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q395931" start="465" end="473" title="Agraphia" label="Agraphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220322" start="475" end="482" title="Agnosia" label="Agnosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403463" start="484" end="500" title="Aicardi syndrome" label="Aicardi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="502" end="536" title="AIDS" label="AIDS – neurological manifestations"/>
<link wikidata="Q784564" start="538" end="549" title="Akinetopsia" label="Akinetopsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q567820" start="551" end="568" title="Alexander Disease" label="Alexander Disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q143790" start="570" end="589" title="Alien hand syndrome" label="Alien hand syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731121" start="591" end="620" title="Allan–Herndon–Dudley syndrome" label="Allan–Herndon–Dudley syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632848" start="622" end="657" title="Alternating hemiplegia of childhood" label="Alternating hemiplegia of childhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="659" end="683" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146228" start="685" end="700" title="Amaurosis fugax" label="Amaurosis fugax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072" start="702" end="709" title="Amnesia" label="Amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="711" end="740" title="Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis" label="Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q529292" start="742" end="753" title="Anencephaly" label="Anencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198391" start="756" end="764" title="Intracranial aneurysm" label="Aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q535364" start="766" end="783" title="Angelman syndrome" label="Angelman syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q567869" start="785" end="796" title="Anosognosia" label="Anosognosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836" start="798" end="805" title="Aphasia" label="Aphasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707611" start="807" end="817" title="Aphantasia" label="Aphantasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q498916" start="819" end="826" title="Apraxia" label="Apraxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669284" start="828" end="841" title="Arachnoiditis" label="Arachnoiditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071707" start="843" end="869" title="Arnold–Chiari malformation" label="Arnold–Chiari malformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q734123" start="871" end="884" title="Asomatognosia" label="Asomatognosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161790" start="886" end="903" title="Asperger syndrome" label="Asperger syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q213373" start="905" end="911" title="Ataxia" label="Ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508561" start="913" end="928" title="ATR-16 syndrome" label="ATR-16 syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="930" end="970" title="Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993146" start="972" end="1038" title="Attention deficit disorder without hyperactivity" label="Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder predominately inattentive"/>
<link wikidata="Q130378384" start="1040" end="1068" title="Auditory processing disorder" label="Auditory processing disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="1070" end="1094" title="Autism spectrum disorder" label="Autism spectrum disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5781808" start="1105" end="1114" title="Back pain" label="Back pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q911427" start="1116" end="1137" title="Behçet&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Behçet&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135338" start="1139" end="1156" title="Bell&amp;#x27;s palsy" label="Bell&amp;#x27;s palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="1158" end="1174" title="Bipolar disorder" label="Bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q751507" start="1176" end="1186" title="Blindsight" label="Blindsight"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="1188" end="1197" title="Blindness" label="Blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930803" start="1199" end="1213" title="Blurred vision" label="Blurred vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q720026" start="1215" end="1227" title="Brain damage" label="Brain damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517861" start="1229" end="1251" title="Brachial plexus injury" label="Brachial plexus injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q223867" start="1253" end="1264" title="Brain death" label="Brain death"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920572" start="1266" end="1278" title="Head injury" label="Brain injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209150" start="1280" end="1296" title="Brain infarction" label="Brain infarction"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="1298" end="1309" title="Brain tumor" label="Brain tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973199" start="1311" end="1325" title="Brody myopathy" label="Brody myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349546" start="1336" end="1351" title="Canavan disease" label="Canavan disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q838018" start="1354" end="1370" title="Capgras delusion" label="Capgras delusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q332293" start="1372" end="1394" title="Carpal tunnel syndrome" label="Carpal tunnel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066311" start="1396" end="1405" title="Causalgia" label="Causalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190389" start="1407" end="1428" title="Central pain syndrome" label="Central pain syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q190370" start="1430" end="1458" title="Central pontine myelinolysis" label="Central pontine myelinolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q782958" start="1460" end="1482" title="Centronuclear myopathy" label="Centronuclear myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q584265" start="1485" end="1502" title="Cephalic disorder" label="Cephalic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198391" start="1504" end="1521" title="Cerebral aneurysm" label="Cerebral aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q184559" start="1523" end="1548" title="Cerebral arteriosclerosis" label="Cerebral arteriosclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620193" start="1550" end="1566" title="Cerebral atrophy" label="Cerebral atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022718" start="1568" end="1658" title="CADASIL syndrome" label="Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064098" start="1660" end="1722" title="Cerebral dysgenesis–neuropathy–ichthyosis–keratoderma syndrome" label="Cerebral dysgenesis–neuropathy–ichthyosis–keratoderma syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770836" start="1724" end="1742" title="Cerebral gigantism" label="Cerebral gigantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q210427" start="1744" end="1758" title="Cerebral palsy" label="Cerebral palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191557" start="1760" end="1779" title="Cerebral vasculitis" label="Cerebral vasculitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064113" start="1781" end="1805" title="Cerebrospinal fluid leak" label="Cerebrospinal fluid leak"/>
<link wikidata="Q19596346" start="1807" end="1831" title="Cervical spinal stenosis" label="Cervical spinal stenosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="1833" end="1860" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071707" start="1862" end="1881" title="Chiari malformation" label="Chiari malformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076421" start="1883" end="1889" title="Chorea" label="Chorea"/>
<link wikidata="Q209733" start="1891" end="1915" title="Chronic fatigue syndrome" label="Chronic fatigue syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088030" start="1917" end="1966" title="Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy" label="Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q921907" start="1968" end="1991" title="Charles bonnet syndrome" label="Charles bonnet syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088113" start="1993" end="2005" title="Chronic pain" label="Chronic pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q166907" start="2007" end="2023" title="Cluster headache" label="Cluster headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q914389" start="2025" end="2042" title="Cockayne syndrome" label="Cockayne syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106881" start="2044" end="2065" title="Coffin–Lowry syndrome" label="Coffin–Lowry syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q159557" start="2067" end="2071" title="Coma" label="Coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q477502" start="2073" end="2111" title="Complex post-traumatic stress disorder" label="Complex post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066311" start="2113" end="2143" title="Complex regional pain syndrome" label="Complex regional pain syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978084" start="2145" end="2167" title="Compression neuropathy" label="Compression neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160420" start="2169" end="2210" title="Congenital distal spinal muscular atrophy" label="Congenital distal spinal muscular atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418152" start="2212" end="2238" title="Congenital facial diplegia" label="Congenital facial diplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133696" start="2240" end="2255" title="Color blindness" label="Color blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133289" start="2257" end="2283" title="Cornelia de Lange syndrome" label="Cornelia de Lange syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755684" start="2285" end="2310" title="Corticobasal degeneration" label="Corticobasal degeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069110" start="2312" end="2327" title="Cotard delusion" label="Cotard delusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q707816" start="2329" end="2346" title="Cranial arteritis" label="Cranial arteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q378183" start="2348" end="2364" title="Craniosynostosis" label="Craniosynostosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49989" start="2366" end="2391" title="Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease" label="Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q877796" start="2393" end="2420" title="Cumulative trauma disorders" label="Cumulative trauma disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q219102" start="2422" end="2445" title="Cushing&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Cushing&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857905" start="2447" end="2471" title="Cyclic vomiting syndrome" label="Cyclic vomiting syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q245590" start="2473" end="2493" title="Cyclothymic disorder" label="Cyclothymic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201359" start="2495" end="2529" title="Cytomegalic inclusion body disease" label="Cytomegalic inclusion body disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946" start="2531" end="2556" title="Cytomegalovirus" label="Cytomegalovirus Infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q733493" start="2567" end="2588" title="Dandy–Walker syndrome" label="Dandy–Walker syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475919" start="2590" end="2604" title="Dawson disease" label="Dawson disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756703" start="2606" end="2632" title="De Morsier&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="De Morsier&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336817" start="2634" end="2656" title="Dejerine–Klumpke palsy" label="Dejerine–Klumpke palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q845618" start="2658" end="2681" title="Dejerine–Sottas disease" label="Dejerine–Sottas disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470530" start="2683" end="2711" title="Delayed sleep phase disorder" label="Delayed sleep phase disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="2725" end="2733" title="Dementia" label="Dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q904200" start="2735" end="2750" title="Dermatillomania" label="Dermatillomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q681160" start="2752" end="2767" title="Dermatomyositis" label="Dermatomyositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269351" start="2769" end="2804" title="Developmental coordination disorder" label="Developmental coordination disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046550" start="2806" end="2825" title="Diabetic neuropathy" label="Diabetic neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q697117" start="2827" end="2842" title="Disc herniation" label="Disc herniation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909420" start="2844" end="2861" title="Diffuse myelinoclastic sclerosis" label="Diffuse sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q775940" start="2863" end="2871" title="Diplopia" label="Diplopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4313500" start="2873" end="2899" title="Disorders of consciousness" label="Disorders of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134983" start="2901" end="2942" title="Distal hereditary motor neuropathy type V" label="Distal hereditary motor neuropathy type V"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282845" start="2944" end="2981" title="Distal spinal muscular atrophy type 1" label="Distal spinal muscular atrophy type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q16944450" start="2983" end="3020" title="Distal spinal muscular atrophy type 2" label="Distal spinal muscular atrophy type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q10916362" start="3022" end="3031" title="Dizziness" label="Dizziness"/>
<link wikidata="Q47715" start="3033" end="3046" title="Down syndrome" label="Down syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255956" start="3048" end="3063" title="Dravet syndrome" label="Dravet syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648484" start="3065" end="3092" title="Duchenne muscular dystrophy" label="Duchenne muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q225957" start="3094" end="3104" title="Dysarthria" label="Dysarthria"/>
<link wikidata="Q620639" start="3106" end="3118" title="Dysautonomia" label="Dysautonomia"/>
<link wikidata="Q742672" start="3120" end="3131" title="Dyscalculia" label="Dyscalculia"/>
<link wikidata="Q623289" start="3133" end="3142" title="Dysphagia" label="Dysphagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q584560" start="3144" end="3154" title="Dysgraphia" label="Dysgraphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q629444" start="3156" end="3166" title="Dyskinesia" label="Dyskinesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132971" start="3168" end="3176" title="Dyslexia" label="Dyslexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q906492" start="3178" end="3186" title="Dystonia" label="Dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339466" start="3197" end="3217" title="Empty sella syndrome" label="Empty sella syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q199615" start="3219" end="3231" title="Encephalitis" label="Encephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346023" start="3233" end="3246" title="Encephalocele" label="Encephalocele"/>
<link wikidata="Q576349" start="3248" end="3262" title="Encephalopathy" label="Encephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886238" start="3264" end="3296" title="Encephalotrigeminal Angiomatosis" label="Encephalotrigeminal angiomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q653027" start="3298" end="3308" title="Encopresis" label="Encopresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448862" start="3310" end="3318" title="Enuresis" label="Enuresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="3320" end="3328" title="Epilepsy" label="Epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813663" start="3330" end="3373" title="Epilepsy-intellectual disability in females" label="Epilepsy-intellectual disability in females"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736543" start="3375" end="3391" title="Erb&amp;#x27;s palsy" label="Erb&amp;#x27;s palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q524353" start="3393" end="3408" title="Erythromelalgia" label="Erythromelalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q693519" start="3410" end="3426" title="Essential tremor" label="Essential tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106901" start="3428" end="3451" title="Exploding head syndrome" label="Exploding head syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q615645" start="3462" end="3482" title="Fabry&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Fabry&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947307" start="3484" end="3504" title="Fahr&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Fahr&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q180007" start="3506" end="3514" title="Fainting" label="Fainting"/>
<link wikidata="Q657516" start="3516" end="3542" title="Familial spastic paralysis" label="Familial spastic paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002116" start="3544" end="3566" title="Fetal alcohol syndrome" label="Fetal alcohol syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="3568" end="3584" title="Fever" label="Febrile seizures"/>
<link wikidata="Q205214" start="3586" end="3601" title="Fisher syndrome" label="Fisher syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q540571" start="3603" end="3615" title="Fibromyalgia" label="Fibromyalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476358" start="3617" end="3640" title="Foville&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Foville&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q221472" start="3642" end="3660" title="Fragile X syndrome" label="Fragile X syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440436" start="3662" end="3705" title="Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome" label="Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q913856" start="3707" end="3731" title="Friedreich&amp;#x27;s ataxia" label="Friedreich&amp;#x27;s ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18592" start="3733" end="3756" title="Frontotemporal dementia" label="Frontotemporal dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146697" start="3758" end="3798" title="Functional neurological symptom disorder" label="Functional neurological symptom disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q861645" start="3809" end="3831" title="Gaucher&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Gaucher&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q845224" start="3833" end="3861" title="Generalized anxiety disorder" label="Generalized anxiety disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909671" start="3863" end="3910" title="Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus" label="Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515119" start="3912" end="3937" title="Gerstmann&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Gerstmann&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q707816" start="3939" end="3959" title="Giant cell arteritis" label="Giant cell arteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946" start="3961" end="3989" title="Giant cell inclusion disease" label="Giant cell inclusion disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q511372" start="3991" end="4018" title="Globoid cell leukodystrophy" label="Globoid cell leukodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598270" start="4020" end="4043" title="Gray matter heterotopia" label="Gray matter heterotopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q205214" start="4045" end="4068" title="Guillain–Barré syndrome" label="Guillain–Barré syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920572" start="4079" end="4090" title="Head injury" label="Head injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="4092" end="4100" title="Headache" label="Headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q973425" start="4102" end="4121" title="Hemicrania continua" label="Hemicrania Continua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568480" start="4123" end="4139" title="Hemifacial spasm" label="Hemifacial spasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q152289" start="4141" end="4160" title="Hemispatial neglect" label="Hemispatial neglect"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282840" start="4163" end="4192" title="Hereditary motor neuropathies" label="Hereditary motor neuropathies"/>
<link wikidata="Q657516" start="4194" end="4223" title="Hereditary spastic paraplegia" label="Hereditary spastic paraplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177809" start="4225" end="4264" title="Heredopathia atactica polyneuritiformis" label="Heredopathia atactica polyneuritiformis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182155" start="4266" end="4279" title="Herpes zoster" label="Herpes zoster"/>
<link wikidata="Q182155" start="4281" end="4301" title="Herpes zoster" label="Herpes zoster oticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901736" start="4303" end="4320" title="Hirayama syndrome" label="Hirayama syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343645" start="4322" end="4349" title="Hirschsprung&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Hirschsprung&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q357067" start="4351" end="4371" title="Holmes–Adie syndrome" label="Holmes–Adie syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459821" start="4373" end="4390" title="Holoprosencephaly" label="Holoprosencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476361" start="4392" end="4420" title="HTLV-1 associated myelopathy" label="HTLV-1 associated myelopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190564" start="4422" end="4447" title="Huntington&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Huntington&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q193003" start="4449" end="4462" title="Hydrocephalia" label="Hydrocephalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565270" start="4464" end="4479" title="Hydranencephaly" label="Hydranencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q193003" start="4481" end="4494" title="Hydrocephalus" label="Hydrocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q219102" start="4496" end="4512" title="Hypercortisolism" label="Hypercortisolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144243" start="4514" end="4525" title="Hypoalgesia" label="Hypoalgesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641556" start="4527" end="4539" title="Hypoesthesia" label="Hypoesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="4541" end="4548" title="Hypoxia (medical)" label="Hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q199615" start="4559" end="4592" title="Encephalitis" label="Immune-mediated encephalomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848471" start="4594" end="4617" title="Inclusion body myositis" label="Inclusion body myositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q884590" start="4619" end="4641" title="Incontinentia pigmenti" label="Incontinentia pigmenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041258" start="4643" end="4659" title="Infantile spasms" label="Infantile spasms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117658" start="4661" end="4682" title="Inflammatory myopathy" label="Inflammatory myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="4684" end="4707" title="Intellectual disability" label="Intellectual disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q624590" start="4709" end="4726" title="Intracranial cyst" label="Intracranial cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416096" start="4728" end="4753" title="Intracranial hypertension" label="Intracranial hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703116" start="4755" end="4770" title="Isodicentric 15" label="Isodicentric 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101694" start="4781" end="4797" title="Joubert syndrome" label="Joubert syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368059" start="4808" end="4822" title="Karak syndrome" label="Karak syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605012" start="4824" end="4845" title="Kearns–Sayre syndrome" label="Kearns–Sayre syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424706" start="4847" end="4866" title="Kinsbourne syndrome" label="Kinsbourne syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q613809" start="4868" end="4889" title="Kleine–Levin syndrome" label="Kleine–Levin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774751" start="4891" end="4912" title="Klippel Feil syndrome" label="Klippel Feil syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q511372" start="4914" end="4928" title="Krabbe disease" label="Krabbe disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q622901" start="4930" end="4948" title="Korsakoff Syndrome" label="Korsakoff Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441908" start="4950" end="4970" title="Kufor–Rakeb syndrome" label="Kufor–Rakeb syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q580290" start="5005" end="5028" title="Spinal muscular atrophy" label="Spinal muscular atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q163905" start="5040" end="5054" title="Lafora disease" label="Lafora disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756898" start="5057" end="5090" title="Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome" label="Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636310" start="5093" end="5117" title="Landau–Kleffner syndrome" label="Landau–Kleffner syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140130" start="5120" end="5159" title="Wallenberg&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Lateral medullary (Wallenberg) syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q860740" start="5162" end="5183" title="Learning disability" label="Learning disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815019" start="5186" end="5206" title="Leigh&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Leigh&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544884" start="5209" end="5232" title="Lennox–Gastaut syndrome" label="Lennox–Gastaut syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q727436" start="5235" end="5255" title="Lesch–Nyhan syndrome" label="Lesch–Nyhan syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821559" start="5258" end="5272" title="Leukodystrophy" label="Leukodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508563" start="5275" end="5322" title="Leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter" label="Leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331905" start="5325" end="5343" title="Lewy body dementia" label="Lewy body dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544416" start="5346" end="5359" title="Lissencephaly" label="Lissencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q794457" start="5362" end="5380" title="Locked-in syndrome" label="Locked-in syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="5415" end="5444" title="Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis" label="Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703059" start="5447" end="5466" title="Lumbar disc disease" label="Lumbar disc disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q133076" start="5469" end="5482" title="Lumbar hernia" label="Lumbar hernia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164695" start="5485" end="5507" title="Lumbar spinal stenosis" label="Lumbar spinal stenosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188297" start="5510" end="5553" title="Lupus erythematosus" label="Lupus erythematosus – neurological sequelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q201989" start="5556" end="5568" title="Lyme disease" label="Lyme disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026441" start="5579" end="5601" title="Machado–Joseph disease" label="Machado–Joseph disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748814" start="5603" end="5616" title="Macrencephaly" label="Macrencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748814" start="5618" end="5631" title="Macrocephalia" label="Macrocephalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q614763" start="5633" end="5642" title="Macropsia" label="Macropsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480741" start="5644" end="5663" title="Mal de debarquement" label="Mal de debarquement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237080" start="5665" end="5723" title="Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts" label="Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748814" start="5725" end="5739" title="Megalencephaly" label="Megalencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919487" start="5741" end="5770" title="Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome" label="Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q460167" start="5772" end="5788" title="Menieres disease" label="Menieres disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="5790" end="5800" title="Meningitis" label="Meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q639203" start="5802" end="5816" title="Menkes disease" label="Menkes disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120682" start="5818" end="5846" title="Metachromatic leukodystrophy" label="Metachromatic leukodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q431643" start="5848" end="5860" title="Microcephaly" label="Microcephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354624" start="5862" end="5871" title="Micropsia" label="Micropsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133823" start="5873" end="5881" title="Migraine" label="Migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="5883" end="5900" title="Mild brain injury" label="Mild brain injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q205214" start="5902" end="5924" title="Miller Fisher syndrome" label="Miller Fisher syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q593958" start="5926" end="5937" title="Mini-stroke" label="Mini-stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q593958" start="5939" end="5964" title="transient ischemic attack" label="transient ischemic attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054837" start="5967" end="5977" title="Misophonia" label="Misophonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881881" start="5979" end="6001" title="Mitochondrial myopathy" label="Mitochondrial myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418152" start="6003" end="6018" title="Mobius syndrome" label="Mobius syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901736" start="6020" end="6040" title="Monomelic amyotrophy" label="Monomelic amyotrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964544" start="6042" end="6057" title="Morvan syndrome" label="Morvan syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="6087" end="6116" title="Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis" label="Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269351" start="6118" end="6139" title="Motor skills disorder" label="Motor skills disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951267" start="6141" end="6157" title="Moyamoya disease" label="Moyamoya disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479681" start="6159" end="6180" title="Mucopolysaccharidoses" label="Mucopolysaccharidoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934690" start="6182" end="6209" title="Multifocal motor neuropathy" label="Multifocal motor neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q583908" start="6211" end="6233" title="Multi-infarct dementia" label="Multi-infarct dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="6235" end="6253" title="Multiple sclerosis" label="Multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541975" start="6255" end="6278" title="Multiple system atrophy" label="Multiple system atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137767" start="6280" end="6298" title="Muscular dystrophy" label="Muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209733" start="6300" end="6325" title="Myalgic encephalomyelitis" label="Myalgic encephalomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8285" start="6327" end="6344" title="Myasthenia gravis" label="Myasthenia gravis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909420" start="6346" end="6378" title="Diffuse myelinoclastic sclerosis" label="Myelinoclastic diffuse sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424706" start="6380" end="6415" title="Myoclonic Encephalopathy of infants" label="Myoclonic Encephalopathy of infants"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275" start="6417" end="6426" title="Myoclonus" label="Myoclonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q692536" start="6428" end="6436" title="Myopathy" label="Myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q587420" start="6438" end="6456" title="Myotonia congenita" label="Myotonia congenita"/>
<link wikidata="Q782958" start="6458" end="6477" title="Centronuclear myopathy" label="Myotubular myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189561" start="6488" end="6498" title="Narcolepsy" label="Narcolepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136940" start="6500" end="6509" title="Neuralgia" label="Neuralgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002102" start="6511" end="6538" title="Neuro-Behçet&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Neuro-Behçet&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q847605" start="6540" end="6557" title="Neurofibromatosis" label="Neurofibromatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424956" start="6559" end="6589" title="Neuroleptic malignant syndrome" label="Neuroleptic malignant syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q520797" start="6591" end="6604" title="Neuromyotonia" label="Neuromyotonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358039" start="6606" end="6636" title="Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis" label="Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146964" start="6638" end="6666" title="Neuronal migration disorders" label="Neuronal migration disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="6668" end="6678" title="Neuropathy" label="Neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181032" start="6680" end="6688" title="Neurosis" label="Neurosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419931" start="6690" end="6710" title="Niemann–Pick disease" label="Niemann–Pick disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773215" start="6712" end="6743" title="Non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder" label="Non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417880" start="6745" end="6772" title="Nonverbal learning disorder" label="Nonverbal learning disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347239" start="6783" end="6802" title="Occipital Neuralgia" label="Occipital Neuralgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q386346" start="6804" end="6837" title="Occult spinal dysraphism sequence" label="Occult spinal dysraphism sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q649602" start="6839" end="6856" title="Ohtahara syndrome" label="Ohtahara syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541975" start="6858" end="6886" title="Olivopontocerebellar atrophy" label="Olivopontocerebellar atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424706" start="6888" end="6917" title="Opsoclonus myoclonus syndrome" label="Opsoclonus myoclonus syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q972514" start="6919" end="6933" title="Optic neuritis" label="Optic neuritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104966" start="6936" end="6959" title="Orthostatic hypotension" label="Orthostatic hypotension"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901736" start="6961" end="6992" title="O&amp;#x27;Sullivan–McLeod syndrome" label="O&amp;#x27;Sullivan–McLeod syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q756610" start="6994" end="7006" title="Otosclerosis" label="Otosclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q877796" start="7008" end="7024" title="Overuse syndrome" label="Overuse syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568737" start="7035" end="7045" title="Palinopsia" label="Palinopsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043695" start="7047" end="7053" title="PANDAS" label="PANDAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436162" start="7055" end="7103" title="Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration" label="Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049655" start="7105" end="7115" title="Paraplegia" label="Paraplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="7117" end="7126" title="Paralysis" label="Paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q493103" start="7128" end="7150" title="Paramyotonia congenita" label="Paramyotonia congenita"/>
<link wikidata="Q769220" start="7152" end="7163" title="Paresthesia" label="Paresthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126769" start="7165" end="7172" title="Paresis" label="Paresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="7175" end="7201" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson(&amp;#x27;s) disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q936417" start="7203" end="7225" title="Paraneoplastic disease" label="Paraneoplastic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053948" start="7228" end="7246" title="Paroxysmal attacks" label="Paroxysmal attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q250365" start="7248" end="7270" title="Parry–Romberg syndrome" label="Parry–Romberg syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876206" start="7272" end="7300" title="Pelizaeus–Merzbacher disease" label="Pelizaeus–Merzbacher disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788314" start="7302" end="7320" title="Periodic paralyses" label="Periodic paralyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="7322" end="7343" title="Peripheral neuropathy" label="Peripheral neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691991" start="7345" end="7377" title="Pervasive developmental disorder" label="Pervasive developmental disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191062" start="7380" end="7392" title="Phantom limb" label="Phantom limb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202906" start="7395" end="7407" title="Phantom pain" label="Phantom pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q671758" start="7409" end="7429" title="Photic sneeze reflex" label="Photic sneeze reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q177809" start="7431" end="7460" title="Phytanic acid storage disease" label="Phytanic acid storage disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q18592" start="7462" end="7481" title="Pick&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Pick&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q175180" start="7483" end="7496" title="Pinched nerve" label="Pinched nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q864296" start="7498" end="7514" title="Pituitary tumors" label="Pituitary tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502312" start="7516" end="7530" title="Polyneuropathy" label="Polyneuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991265" start="7532" end="7535" title="Polymicrogyria" label="PMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="7537" end="7542" title="Polio" label="Polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991265" start="7544" end="7558" title="Polymicrogyria" label="Polymicrogyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q980926" start="7560" end="7572" title="Polymyositis" label="Polymyositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q492129" start="7574" end="7586" title="Porencephaly" label="Porencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="7588" end="7607" title="Polio" label="Post-polio syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714245" start="7609" end="7631" title="Postherpetic neuralgia" label="Postherpetic neuralgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="7633" end="7662" title="Posttraumatic stress disorder" label="Posttraumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104966" start="7664" end="7684" title="Postural hypotension" label="Postural hypotension"/>
<link wikidata="Q620760" start="7686" end="7727" title="Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome" label="Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q594013" start="7729" end="7750" title="Prader–Willi syndrome" label="Prader–Willi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881413" start="7752" end="7777" title="Primary lateral sclerosis" label="Primary lateral sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47051" start="7779" end="7793" title="Prion" label="Prion diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q250365" start="7795" end="7825" title="Progressive hemifacial atrophy" label="Progressive hemifacial atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q704930" start="7827" end="7869" title="Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy" label="Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q945930" start="7871" end="7901" title="Progressive supranuclear palsy" label="Progressive supranuclear palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q244438" start="7903" end="7916" title="Prosopagnosia" label="Prosopagnosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q741208" start="7918" end="7937" title="Pseudotumor cerebri" label="Pseudotumor cerebri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121869" start="7948" end="7962" title="Quadrantanopia" label="Quadrantanopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q944758" start="7964" end="7976" title="Quadriplegia" label="Quadriplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39222" start="7987" end="7993" title="Rabies" label="Rabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q175180" start="7995" end="8008" title="Radiculopathy" label="Radiculopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961686" start="8010" end="8037" title="Ramsay Hunt syndrome type I" label="Ramsay Hunt syndrome type I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648128" start="8039" end="8067" title="Ramsay Hunt syndrome type II" label="Ramsay Hunt syndrome type II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697371" start="8105" end="8125" title="Ramsay–Hunt syndrome" label="Ramsay–Hunt syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637701" start="8127" end="8149" title="Rasmussen encephalitis" label="Rasmussen encephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066311" start="8151" end="8181" title="Reflex neurovascular dystrophy" label="Reflex neurovascular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q177809" start="8183" end="8197" title="Refsum disease" label="Refsum disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103933" start="8199" end="8226" title="REM sleep behavior disorder" label="REM sleep behavior disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q877796" start="8228" end="8252" title="Repetitive stress injury" label="Repetitive stress injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q916280" start="8254" end="8276" title="Restless legs syndrome" label="Restless legs syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476361" start="8278" end="8310" title="Retrovirus-associated myelopathy" label="Retrovirus-associated myelopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q917357" start="8312" end="8325" title="Rett syndrome" label="Rett syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q826103" start="8327" end="8347" title="Reye&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Reye&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q559543" start="8349" end="8375" title="Rhythmic movement disorder" label="Rhythmic movement disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q250365" start="8377" end="8393" title="Romberg syndrome" label="Romberg syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q467265" start="8404" end="8419" title="Savant syndrome" label="Savant syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076421" start="8422" end="8439" title="Chorea (disease)" label="Saint Vitus dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q917227" start="8441" end="8457" title="Sandhoff disease" label="Sandhoff disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200359" start="8459" end="8478" title="Sanfilippo syndrome" label="Sanfilippo syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431299" start="8480" end="8503" title="Schilder&amp;#x27;s disease (disambiguation)" label="Schilder&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457267" start="8531" end="8545" title="Schizencephaly" label="Schizencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q140067" start="8547" end="8556" title="Sclerosis (medicine)" label="Sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="8558" end="8566" title="Seizures" label="Seizures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540887" start="8568" end="8595" title="Sensory processing disorder" label="Sensory processing disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756703" start="8597" end="8618" title="Septo-optic dysplasia" label="Septo-optic dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304399" start="8620" end="8640" title="Shaken baby syndrome" label="Shaken baby syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q182155" start="8642" end="8650" title="Herpes zoster" label="Shingles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541975" start="8652" end="8671" title="Shy–Drager syndrome" label="Shy–Drager syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q335555" start="8673" end="8696" title="Sjögren&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Sjögren&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q213600" start="8698" end="8709" title="Sleep apnea" label="Sleep apnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q203133" start="8711" end="8728" title="African trypanosomiasis" label="Sleeping sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q225957" start="8730" end="8744" title="Slurred speech" label="Slurred speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547427" start="8746" end="8756" title="Snatiation" label="Snatiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770836" start="8758" end="8772" title="Sotos syndrome" label="Sotos syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q117060" start="8774" end="8784" title="Spasticity" label="Spasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q844717" start="8786" end="8798" title="Spina bifida" label="Spina bifida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995327" start="8800" end="8834" title="Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy" label="Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415275" start="8836" end="8854" title="Spinal cord injury" label="Spinal cord injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="8856" end="8874" title="Spinal cord" label="Spinal cord tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q580290" start="8876" end="8899" title="Spinal muscular atrophy" label="Spinal muscular atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282845" start="8964" end="9001" title="Distal spinal muscular atrophy type 1" label="Distal spinal muscular atrophy type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q899726" start="9003" end="9025" title="Spinocerebellar ataxia" label="Spinocerebellar ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q551840" start="9028" end="9039" title="Split-brain" label="Split-brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q945930" start="9084" end="9114" title="Progressive supranuclear palsy" label="Progressive supranuclear palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235785" start="9116" end="9137" title="Stiff-person syndrome" label="Stiff-person syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="9139" end="9145" title="Stroke" label="Stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886238" start="9147" end="9168" title="Sturge–Weber syndrome" label="Sturge–Weber syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q186676" start="9170" end="9180" title="Stuttering" label="Stuttering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475919" start="9182" end="9217" title="Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis" label="Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399293" start="9219" end="9262" title="Subcortical arteriosclerotic encephalopathy" label="Subcortical arteriosclerotic encephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643329" start="9264" end="9285" title="Superficial siderosis" label="Superficial siderosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q522163" start="9287" end="9309" title="Sydenham&amp;#x27;s chorea" label="Sydenham&amp;#x27;s chorea"/>
<link wikidata="Q180007" start="9311" end="9318" title="Syncope (medicine)" label="Syncope"/>
<link wikidata="Q13258" start="9320" end="9331" title="Synesthesia" label="Synesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112977" start="9333" end="9346" title="Syringomyelia" label="Syringomyelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="9348" end="9370" title="Substance use disorder" label="Substance use disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114004" start="9381" end="9405" title="Traumatic encephalopathy" label="Traumatic encephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546328" start="9407" end="9425" title="Tardive dyskinesia" label="Tardive dyskinesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648960" start="9427" end="9438" title="Tarlov cyst" label="Tarlov cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410673" start="9440" end="9462" title="Tarsal tunnel syndrome" label="Tarsal tunnel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q560337" start="9464" end="9481" title="Tay–Sachs disease" label="Tay–Sachs disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q707816" start="9483" end="9501" title="Temporal arteritis" label="Temporal arteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q616667" start="9503" end="9525" title="Temporal lobe epilepsy" label="Temporal lobe epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47790" start="9527" end="9534" title="Tetanus" label="Tetanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q386346" start="9536" end="9565" title="Tethered spinal cord syndrome" label="Tethered spinal cord syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709511" start="9567" end="9594" title="Thalamocortical dysrhythmia" label="Thalamocortical dysrhythmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q587420" start="9596" end="9611" title="Thomsen disease" label="Thomsen disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q665207" start="9613" end="9637" title="Thoracic outlet syndrome" label="Thoracic outlet syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132120" start="9639" end="9653" title="Tic Douloureux" label="Tic Douloureux"/>
<link wikidata="Q192309" start="9655" end="9663" title="Tinnitus" label="Tinnitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q495068" start="9665" end="9686" title="Todd&amp;#x27;s paralysis" label="Todd&amp;#x27;s paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191779" start="9688" end="9705" title="Tourette syndrome" label="Tourette syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830379" start="9707" end="9727" title="Toxic encephalopathy" label="Toxic encephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q593958" start="9729" end="9754" title="Transient ischemic attack" label="Transient ischemic attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q154666" start="9756" end="9797" title="Bovine spongiform encephalopathy" label="Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies"/>
<link wikidata="Q202217" start="9799" end="9818" title="Transverse myelitis" label="Transverse myelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995526" start="9820" end="9842" title="Traumatic brain injury" label="Traumatic brain injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="9844" end="9850" title="Tremor" label="Tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q608259" start="9852" end="9868" title="Trichotillomania" label="Trichotillomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132120" start="9870" end="9890" title="Trigeminal neuralgia" label="Trigeminal neuralgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476361" start="9892" end="9920" title="Tropical spastic paraparesis" label="Tropical spastic paraparesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443552" start="9922" end="9937" title="Trypanosomiasis" label="Trypanosomiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362721" start="9939" end="9957" title="Tuberous sclerosis" label="Tuberous sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829165" start="9968" end="9983" title="Unconsciousness" label="Unconsciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356131" start="9985" end="10012" title="Unverricht–Lundborg disease" label="Unverricht–Lundborg disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q423965" start="10023" end="10044" title="Vestibular schwannoma" label="Vestibular schwannoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686316" start="10046" end="10053" title="Vertigo" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930230" start="10055" end="10081" title="Viliuisk encephalomyelitis" label="Viliuisk encephalomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q760367" start="10083" end="10094" title="Visual snow" label="Visual Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q741315" start="10096" end="10121" title="Von Hippel–Lindau disease" label="Von Hippel–Lindau disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q54667120" start="10123" end="10149" title="Vulpian-Bernhardt Syndrome" label="Vulpian-Bernhardt Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140130" start="10160" end="10186" title="Wallenberg&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Wallenberg&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q580290" start="10219" end="10242" title="Spinal muscular atrophy" label="Spinal muscular atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573307" start="10244" end="10274" title="Wernicke encephalopathy" label="Wernicke&amp;#x27;s encephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563352" start="10276" end="10303" title="Wernicke Korsakoff syndrome" label="Wernicke Korsakoff syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041258" start="10305" end="10318" title="West syndrome" label="West syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147223" start="10320" end="10328" title="Whiplash (medicine)" label="Whiplash"/>
<link wikidata="Q558077" start="10330" end="10347" title="Williams syndrome" label="Williams syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q117121" start="10349" end="10370" title="Wilson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Wilson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q127770" start="10372" end="10383" title="Witzelsucht" label="Witzelsucht"/>
<link wikidata="Q18061160" start="10394" end="10421" title="DFNY1" label="Y-Linked hearing impairment"/>
<link wikidata="Q189167" start="10432" end="10450" title="Zellweger syndrome" label="Zellweger syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182963" start="10469" end="10493" title="List of mental disorders" label="List of mental disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="10548" end="10551" title="NIH" label="NIH"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="10552" end="10565" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56345" wikidata="Q4423793" url="?curid=56345" title="Glossary of diabetes">
<text>The following is a glossary of diabetes which explains terms connected with diabetes.


== A ==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

== B ==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

== C ==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

== D ==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

== E ==
 
 
 
 
 
 

== F ==
 
 
 
 
 

== G ==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

== H ==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

== I ==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

== J ==
 

== K ==
 
 
 
 

== L ==
 
 
 
 
 
 

== M ==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

== N ==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

== O ==
 
 
 
 

== P ==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

== R ==
 
 
 
 

== S ==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

== T ==
 
 
 
 
 
 

== U ==
 
 
 
 

== V ==
 
 
 

== X ==

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4423793" start="19" end="39" title="Glossary of diabetes" label="glossary of diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="76" end="84" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56350" wikidata="Q4713968" url="?curid=56350" title="Aldose reductase inhibitor">
<text>Aldose reductase inhibitors are a class of drugs being studied as a way to prevent eye and nerve damage in people with diabetes.

==Mechanism==
Their target, aldose reductase, is an enzyme that is normally present in many other parts of the body, and catalyzes one of the steps in the sorbitol (polyol) pathway that is responsible for fructose formation from glucose. Aldose reductase activity increases as the glucose concentration rises in diabetes in those tissues that are not insulin sensitive, which include the lenses, peripheral nerves, and glomerulus. Sorbitol does not diffuse through cell membranes easily and therefore accumulates, causing osmotic damage which leads to retinopathy and neuropathy.

==Examples==
Natural sources reported to inhibit aldose reductase include indian gooseberry, spinach, cumin seeds, fennel seeds, basil leaves, lemon, black pepper, orange, curry leaves, cannabis, cinnamon and lichen. Luteolin, a type of flavonoid found mostly in leaves, and their synthetic derivatives are potential inhibitors of aldose reductase. 
Other ARIs: 
*Risarestat
*Exisulind
*Govorestat: CNS-penetrant ARI
*Caficrestat: AT001
*AT003

==Diabetic cataract==
Diabetic cataract formation follows an increase in sugars in the lens. The excess sugar within the lens is reduced by aldose reductase to its alcohol, but the lens capsule is relatively impermeable to sugar alcohols. Because of the excess sugar alcohol (polyol), the lens imbibes water, causing osmotic imbalance. Eventually, increased sodium and decreased potassium levels and decreased glutathione levels lead to cataract formation. Topical administration of aldose reductase inhibitors have been shown to prevent the cataract in rats.

==Asthma and COPD==
This class of drugs is also under investigation as a possible root pathology modulating treatment for asthma and COPD since it has been shown that they inhibit goblet cell metaplasia in the respiratory epithelium, thereby reducing the copious mucous secretion associated with these.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4713968" start="0" end="27" title="Aldose reductase inhibitor" label="Aldose reductase inhibitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="43" end="48" title="medication" label="drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q430024" start="83" end="86" title="Human eye" label="eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q9620" start="91" end="96" title="nerve" label="nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="119" end="127" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q414213" start="158" end="174" title="aldose reductase" label="aldose reductase"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="182" end="188" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226667" start="285" end="293" title="polyol pathway" label="sorbitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q415812" start="295" end="301" title="polyol" label="polyol"/>
<link wikidata="Q122043" start="335" end="343" title="fructose" label="fructose"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="359" end="366" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="442" end="450" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="481" end="488" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q146701" start="518" end="524" title="lens (anatomy)" label="lenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q26261754" start="549" end="559" title="glomerulus" label="glomerulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q550455" start="682" end="693" title="retinopathy" label="retinopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="698" end="708" title="neuropathy" label="neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q310050" start="785" end="802" title="indian gooseberry" label="indian gooseberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q81464" start="804" end="811" title="spinach" label="spinach"/>
<link wikidata="Q132624" start="813" end="818" title="cumin" label="cumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43511" start="826" end="832" title="fennel" label="fennel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38859" start="840" end="845" title="basil" label="basil"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="854" end="859" title="lemon" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="861" end="873" title="black pepper" label="black pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="875" end="881" title="Orange (fruit)" label="orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q244731" start="883" end="888" title="Curry tree" label="curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q79817" start="897" end="905" title="cannabis" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28165" start="907" end="915" title="cinnamon" label="cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="920" end="926" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q415011" start="928" end="936" title="Luteolin" label="Luteolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561192" start="948" end="957" title="flavonoid" label="flavonoid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1075" end="1085" title="Risarestat" label="Risarestat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420370" start="1087" end="1096" title="Exisulind" label="Exisulind"/>
<link wikidata="Q123481136" start="1098" end="1108" title="Govorestat" label="Govorestat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1129" end="1140" title="Caficrestat" label="Caficrestat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1142" end="1147" title="AT001" label="AT001"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1149" end="1154" title="AT003" label="AT003"/>
<link wikidata="Q127724" start="1187" end="1195" title="cataract" label="cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q146701" start="1243" end="1247" title="lens (anatomy)" label="lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q414213" start="1296" end="1312" title="aldose reductase" label="aldose reductase"/>
<link wikidata="Q156" start="1320" end="1327" title="Alcohol (chemistry)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="1514" end="1520" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="1535" end="1544" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q116907" start="1566" end="1577" title="glutathione" label="glutathione"/>
<link wikidata="Q127724" start="1593" end="1601" title="cataract" label="cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q127724" start="1698" end="1706" title="cataract" label="cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="1839" end="1845" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q199804" start="1850" end="1854" title="COPD" label="COPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q813622" start="1897" end="1908" title="goblet cell" label="goblet cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q660713" start="1909" end="1919" title="metaplasia" label="metaplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428754" start="1927" end="1949" title="respiratory epithelium" label="respiratory epithelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649349" start="1980" end="1986" title="mucus" label="mucous"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56353" wikidata="Q209812" url="?curid=56353" title="Linear span">
<text>In mathematics, the linear span (also called the linear hull or just span) of a set formula_1 of elements of a vector space formula_2 is the smallest linear subspace of formula_2 that contains formula_4 It is the set of all finite linear combinations of the elements of , and the intersection of all linear subspaces that contain formula_4 It often denoted or formula_6 

For example, in geometry, two linearly independent vectors span a plane.

To express that a vector space is a linear span of a subset , one commonly uses one of the following phrases: spans ; is a spanning set of ; is spanned or generated by ; is a generator set or a generating set of .

Spans can be generalized to many mathematical structures, in which case, the smallest substructure containing formula_1 is generally called the substructure &quot;generated&quot; by formula_4

== Definition ==
Given a vector space over a field , the span of a set of vectors (not necessarily finite) is defined to be the intersection of all subspaces of that contain . It is thus the smallest (for set inclusion) subspace containing . It is referred to as the subspace &quot;spanned by&quot; , or by the vectors in . Conversely, is called a &quot;spanning set&quot; of , and we say that &quot;spans&quot; .

It follows from this definition that the span of is the set of all finite linear combinations of elements (vectors) of , and can be defined as such. That is, formula_9 

When is empty, the only possibility is , and the previous expression for formula_10 reduces to the empty sum. The standard convention for the empty sum implies thus formula_11 a property that is immediate with the other definitions. However, many introductory textbooks simply include this fact as part of the definition.

When formula_12 is finite, one has
formula_13

== Examples ==
The real vector space formula_14 has {(−1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), (0, 0, 1)} as a spanning set. This particular spanning set is also a basis. If (−1, 0, 0) were replaced by (1, 0, 0), it would also form the canonical basis of formula_14.

Another spanning set for the same space is given by {(1, 2, 3), (0, 1, 2), (−1, , 3), (1, 1, 1)}, but this set is not a basis, because it is linearly dependent.

The set } is not a spanning set of formula_14, since its span is the space of all vectors in formula_14 whose last component is zero. That space is also spanned by the set {(1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0)}, as (1, 1, 0) is a linear combination of (1, 0, 0) and (0, 1, 0). Thus, the spanned space is not formula_18 It can be identified with formula_19 by removing the third components equal to zero.

The empty set is a spanning set of {(0, 0, 0)}, since the empty set is a subset of all possible vector spaces in formula_14, and {(0, 0, 0)} is the intersection of all of these vector spaces.

The set of monomials , where is a non-negative integer, spans the space of polynomials.

== Theorems ==
=== Equivalence of definitions ===
The set of all linear combinations of a subset of , a vector space over , is the smallest linear subspace of containing .

:&quot;Proof.&quot; We first prove that is a subspace of . Since is a subset of , we only need to prove the existence of a zero vector in , that is closed under addition, and that is closed under scalar multiplication. Letting formula_21, it is trivial that the zero vector of exists in , since formula_22. Adding together two linear combinations of also produces a linear combination of : formula_23, where all formula_24, and multiplying a linear combination of by a scalar formula_25 will produce another linear combination of : formula_26. Thus is a subspace of .

:It follows that formula_27, since every is a linear combination of (trivially). Suppose that is a linear subspace of containing . Since is closed under addition and scalar multiplication, then every linear combination formula_28 must be contained in . Thus, is contained in every subspace of containing , and the intersection of all such subspaces, or the smallest such subspace, is equal to the set of all linear combinations of .

=== Size of spanning set is at least size of linearly independent set ===
Every spanning set of a vector space must contain at least as many elements as any linearly independent set of vectors from .

:&quot;Proof.&quot; Let formula_29 be a spanning set and formula_30 be a linearly independent set of vectors from . We want to show that formula_31.

:Since spans , then formula_32 must also span , and formula_33 must be a linear combination of . Thus formula_32 is linearly dependent, and we can remove one vector from that is a linear combination of the other elements. This vector cannot be any of the , since is linearly independent. The resulting set is formula_35, which is a spanning set of . We repeat this step times, where the resulting set after the th step is the union of formula_36 and vectors of .

:It is ensured until the th step that there will always be some to remove out of for every adjoint of , and thus there are at least as many &#x27;s as there are &#x27;s—i.e. formula_31. To verify this, we assume by way of contradiction that formula_38. Then, at the th step, we have the set formula_39 and we can adjoin another vector formula_40. But, since formula_39 is a spanning set of , formula_40 is a linear combination of formula_39. This is a contradiction, since is linearly independent.

=== Spanning set can be reduced to a basis ===
Let be a finite-dimensional vector space. Any set of vectors that spans can be reduced to a basis for , by discarding vectors if necessary (i.e. if there are linearly dependent vectors in the set). If the axiom of choice holds, this is true without the assumption that has finite dimension. This also indicates that a basis is a minimal spanning set when is finite-dimensional.

== Generalizations ==
Generalizing the definition of the span of points in space, a subset of the ground set of a matroid is called a spanning set if the rank of equals the rank of the entire ground set

The vector space definition can also be generalized to modules. Given an -module and a collection of elements , ..., of , the submodule of spanned by , ..., is the sum of cyclic modules
formula_44
consisting of all &quot;R&quot;-linear combinations of the elements . As with the case of vector spaces, the submodule of &quot;A&quot; spanned by any subset of &quot;A&quot; is the intersection of all submodules containing that subset.

== Closed linear span (functional analysis) ==
In functional analysis, a closed linear span of a set of vectors is the minimal closed set which contains the linear span of that set.

Suppose that is a normed vector space and let be any non-empty subset of . The closed linear span of , denoted by formula_45 or formula_46, is the intersection of all the closed linear subspaces of which contain .

One mathematical formulation of this is

:formula_47

The closed linear span of the set of functions &quot;xn&quot; on the interval [0, 1], where &quot;n&quot; is a non-negative integer, depends on the norm used. If the &quot;L&quot;2 norm is used, then the closed linear span is the Hilbert space of square-integrable functions on the interval. But if the maximum norm is used, the closed linear span will be the space of continuous functions on the interval. In either case, the closed linear span contains functions that are not polynomials, and so are not in the linear span itself. However, the cardinality of the set of functions in the closed linear span is the cardinality of the continuum, which is the same cardinality as for the set of polynomials.

=== Notes ===
The linear span of a set is dense in the closed linear span. Moreover, as stated in the lemma below, the closed linear span is indeed the closure of the linear span.

Closed linear spans are important when dealing with closed linear subspaces (which are themselves highly important, see Riesz&#x27;s lemma).

=== A useful lemma ===
Let be a normed space and let be any non-empty subset of . Then
(E)&lt;/math&gt; is a closed linear subspace of &quot;X&quot; which contains &quot;E&quot;,
 | formula_48, viz. formula_45 is the closure of formula_50,
 | formula_51
 | formula_52

(So the usual way to find the closed linear span is to find the linear span first, and then the closure of that linear span.)

== See also ==
* Affine hull
* Conical combination
* Convex hull

== Footnotes ==
== Citations ==
== Sources ==
=== Textbooks ===
* 
* 
* 
* Lay, David C. (2021) &quot;Linear Algebra and Its Applications (6th Edition)&quot;. Pearson.

=== Web ===
* 

== External links ==
* Linear Combinations and Span: Understanding linear combinations and spans of vectors, khanacademy.org.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q209812" start="20" end="31" title="Linear span" label="linear span"/>
<link wikidata="Q209812" start="49" end="60" title="Linear span" label="linear hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q209812" start="69" end="73" title="Linear span" label="span"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="80" end="83" title="Set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="111" end="123" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q728435" start="150" end="165" title="linear subspace" label="linear subspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628" start="231" end="249" title="linear combination" label="linear combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="388" end="396" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q27670" start="402" end="422" title="linearly independent" label="linearly independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="423" end="430" title="vector (geometry)" label="vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="438" end="443" title="plane (geometry)" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q209812" start="569" end="581" title="Linear span" label="spanning set"/>
<link wikidata="Q643669" start="601" end="610" title="generator (mathematics)" label="generated"/>
<link wikidata="Q748349" start="694" end="716" title="mathematical structure" label="mathematical structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="879" end="891" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="899" end="904" title="field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="921" end="924" title="Set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q728435" start="1002" end="1011" title="linear subspace" label="subspaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="1059" end="1072" title="set inclusion" label="set inclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628" start="1343" end="1362" title="linear combinations" label="linear combinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q226183" start="1447" end="1452" title="empty set" label="empty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812158" start="1538" end="1547" title="empty sum" label="empty sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="1781" end="1787" title="finite set" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="1828" end="1832" title="real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q189569" start="1954" end="1959" title="Basis (linear algebra)" label="basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000912" start="2026" end="2041" title="standard basis" label="canonical basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27670" start="2199" end="2217" title="Linear dependency" label="linearly dependent"/>
<link wikidata="Q243723" start="2813" end="2821" title="monomial" label="monomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="2877" end="2887" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q27670" start="4224" end="4244" title="Linear independence" label="linearly independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q189569" start="5520" end="5525" title="Basis (linear algebra)" label="basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="5633" end="5648" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q898572" start="5921" end="5928" title="matroid" label="matroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18848" start="6137" end="6146" title="submodule" label="submodule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317997" start="6182" end="6195" title="cyclic module" label="cyclic module"/>
<link wikidata="Q190549" start="6496" end="6515" title="functional analysis" label="functional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="6543" end="6546" title="Set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="6550" end="6557" title="vector space" label="vectors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7064" end="7083" title="Lp space#Lp spaces and Lebesgue integrals" label="&amp;quot;L&amp;quot;2 norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="7128" end="7141" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530791" start="7145" end="7171" title="square-integrable function" label="square-integrable function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202673" start="7201" end="7213" title="maximum norm" label="maximum norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="7444" end="7455" title="cardinality" label="cardinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q22952648" start="7513" end="7541" title="cardinality of the continuum" label="cardinality of the continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720939" start="7757" end="7764" title="closure (mathematics)" label="closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189968" start="7906" end="7924" title="Riesz&amp;#x27;s lemma" label="Riesz&amp;#x27;s lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q382504" start="8341" end="8352" title="Affine hull" label="Affine hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161031" start="8355" end="8374" title="Conical combination" label="Conical combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138624" start="8377" end="8388" title="Convex hull" label="Convex hull"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="56354" wikidata="Q357824" url="?curid=56354" title="Gerald of Wales">
<text>Gerald of Wales (; ; ; ) was a Cambro-Norman priest and historian. As a royal clerk to the king and two archbishops, he travelled widely and wrote extensively. He studied and taught in France and visited Rome several times, meeting the Pope. He was nominated for several bishoprics but turned them down in the hope of becoming Bishop of St Davids, but was unsuccessful despite considerable support. His final post was as Archdeacon of Brecon, from which he retired to academic study for the remainder of his life. Much of his writing survives.
==Life==
===Early life===

Born at Manorbier Castle in Pembrokeshire, Wales, Gerald was of mixed Norman and Welsh descent. Gerald was the youngest son of William Fitz Odo de Barry (or Barri), the common ancestor of the De Barry family of Barry, Glamorganshire, who subsequently invaded Ireland, a retainer of Arnulf de Montgomery and Gerald de Windsor, and one of the most powerful Anglo-Norman barons in Wales. His mother was Angharad FitzGerald, a daughter of Gerald FitzWalter of Windsor, Constable of Pembroke Castle, and his wife Nest ferch Rhys, daughter of Rhys ap Tewdwr, the last King of South Wales. Through his mother Angharad, Gerald was a nephew of David FitzGerald, Bishop of St Davids, as well as a great-nephew of Gruffydd ap Rhys, the son and heir of Rhys ap Tewdwr, and a cousin of Rhys ap Gruffydd, the famous Arglwydd (Lord) Rhys and his family.

Gerald received his initial education at the Benedictine house of Gloucester, followed by a period of study in Paris from –74, where he studied the trivium. He was employed by Richard of Dover, the Archbishop of Canterbury, on various ecclesiastical missions in Wales, and distinguished himself by his efforts to remove supposed abuses of consanguinity and tax laws flourishing in the Welsh church at the time. He was appointed in 1174 as Archdeacon of Brecon, to which was attached a residence at Llanddew. He obtained this position by reporting the existence of the previous archdeacon&#x27;s mistress; the man was promptly dismissed. While administering this post, Gerald collected tithes of wool and cheese from the populace; the income from the archdeaconry supported him for many years.

Upon the death of his uncle, the Bishop of St Davids, in 1176, the chapter nominated Gerald as his successor. St Davids had the long-term aim of becoming independent of Canterbury, and the chapter may have thought that Gerald was the man to take up its cause. King Henry II of England, fresh from his struggle with Archbishop Thomas Becket, promptly rejected Gerald in favour of Peter de Leia, one of his Norman retainers, possibly because Gerald&#x27;s Welsh blood and ties to the ruling family of Deheubarth made him seem like a troublesome prospect. According to Gerald, the king said at the time: &quot;It is neither necessary nor expedient for king or archbishop that a man of great honesty or vigour should become Bishop of St Davids, for fear that the Crown and Canterbury should suffer thereby. Such an appointment would only give strength to the Welsh and increase their pride.&quot; The chapter acquiesced in the decision; and Gerald, disappointed with the result, withdrew to the University of Paris. From -8, he studied and taught canon law and theology. He returned to England and spent an additional five years studying theology. In 1180, he received a minor appointment from the Bishop of St Davids, which he soon resigned.

===Travels===
Gerald became a royal clerk and chaplain to King Henry II of England in 1184, first acting as mediator between the crown and Prince Rhys ap Gruffydd. He was chosen to accompany one of the king&#x27;s sons, John, in 1185 on John&#x27;s first expedition to Ireland. This was the catalyst for his literary career; his work &quot;Topographia Hibernica&quot; (first circulated in manuscript in 1188, and revised at least four times) is an account of his journey to Ireland; Gerald always referred to it as his &quot;Topography&quot;, though &quot;history&quot; is the more accurate term.

He followed it up, shortly afterwards, with an account of Henry&#x27;s conquest of Ireland, the &quot;Expugnatio Hibernica&quot;. Both works were revised and added to several times before his death, and display a notable degree of Latin learning, as well as a great deal of prejudice against foreign people. Gerald was proud to be related to some of the Norman invaders of Ireland, such as his maternal uncle Robert FitzStephen and Raymond FitzGerald, and his influential account, which portrays the Irish as barbaric savages, gives important insight into Cambro-Norman views of Ireland and the history of the invasion.

Having thus demonstrated his usefulness, Gerald was selected to accompany the Archbishop of Canterbury, Baldwin of Forde, on a tour of Wales in 1188, the object being a recruitment campaign for the Third Crusade. His account of that journey, the &quot;Itinerarium Cambriae&quot; (1191) was followed by the &quot;Descriptio Cambriae&quot; in 1194.

His two works on Wales remain very valuable historical documents, useful for their descriptions (however untrustworthy and inflected by ideology, whimsy, and his unique style) of Welsh and Norman culture. It is uncertain whether Gerald was a Welsh speaker; although he quotes Welsh proverbs and appears familiar with the language, he seems not to have been employed as an interpreter for the expedition.

As a royal clerk, Gerald observed significant political events first-hand and was offered appointments as bishoprics of Wexford and Leighlin, and apparently, slightly later, the bishopric of Ossory and the archbishopric of Cashel, and later the bishopric of Bangor in Wales; and, in 1191, that of Llandaff. He turned them all down, possibly in the hope of landing a more prominent bishopric in the future. He was acquainted with Walter Map, whose career shares some similarities with Gerald&#x27;s. Retiring from royal service, he lived in Lincoln from to 1198, when his friend, William de Montibus, was chancellor of the cathedral. In this period &quot;De principis instructione&quot; was probably first written, a useful historical source on contemporary events. It was an influential work at the time, spreading, for example, the legend of MacAlpin&#x27;s treason. Here Gerald is frequently critical of the rule of the Angevin kings, a shift from his earlier praise of Henry II in the &quot;Topographia&quot;. He also wrote a life of St Hugh of Lincoln.

===Attempts to become bishop of St Davids===

On the death of Peter de Leia in 1198, the chapter of St Davids again nominated Gerald for the bishopric; but Hubert Walter, Archbishop of Canterbury, refused confirmation. Representatives of the canons followed Richard I to France, but before they could interview him he died; his successor, King John, received them kindly and granted them permission to hold an election. They were unanimous in their selection of Gerald, and Gerald acted as bishop-elect for much of the next four years; and, as Hubert still refused to confirm the election, Gerald started for Rome to have his election confirmed. There he had an interview with Pope Innocent III. He visited Rome on three occasions (1199–1200; 1201; 1202–3) in support of his claims. But in 1198 the archbishop had forestalled him, and his agents in Rome undermined Gerald&#x27;s case; and as the pope was not convinced that St Davids was independent of Canterbury, Gerald&#x27;s mission failed. Gerald had pleaded not only his own cause, but that of St Davids as a Metropolitan archbishopric (and thus of the same status as Canterbury) reviving the earlier claims of Rhygyfarch and Bishop Bernard of St Davids. It was in connexion with this cause that he wrote his books &quot;De jure Menevensis Ecclesiâ&quot; and &quot;De Rebus a Se Gestis&quot;. Gerald returned, and his cause was now supported by the Princes of Wales, most notably Llywelyn the Great, and Gruffydd ap Rhys II, while King John, frequently in conflict with the Welsh, warmly espoused the cause of the Archbishop of Canterbury. In 1202, Gerald was accused of stirring up the Welsh to rebellion and was put on trial, but the trial came to nothing as the principal judges were absent. After this long struggle, the chapter of St Davids deserted Gerald, and having been obliged to leave Wales, he fled to Rome. The ports had been closed against him, so he travelled in secret. In April 1203 Pope Innocent III annulled both elections, and Geoffrey of Henlaw was appointed to the See of St Davids, despite the strenuous exertions of Gerald. Travelling back to France, he was briefly imprisoned there for these actions. He was afterwards reconciled with the king and was forced to vow never again to support the primacy of St Davids over Canterbury. The expenses of his unsuccessful election were paid by the crown. Gerald maintained his appointment had been prevented by fear of its possible effect on national politics in Wales. He famously complained in a letter to Innocent III, &quot;Because I am a Welshman am I to be debarred from all preferments in Wales? On the same reasoning so would an Englishman in England, a Frenchman in France, and Italian in Italy. But I am sprung from the Princes of Wales and the Barons of the Marches, and when I see injustice in either race I hate it.&quot; At this point he resigned his position as archdeacon of Brecon.

===Later life===
Gerald spent the remainder of his life in academic study, most probably in Lincoln, producing works of devotional instruction and politics, and revising the works on Ireland and Wales he had written earlier in his life. He spent two years (1204–6) in Ireland with his relatives and made a fourth visit to Rome, purely as a pilgrimage, in 1206. The controversy over St Davids soured his relationship with the crown. In 1216 a baronial plan to put Louis VIII of France on the throne of England in the First Barons&#x27; War was warmly welcomed by him. He died in about 1223 in his 77th year, probably in Hereford and he is, according to some accounts, buried at St Davids Cathedral.

There is a statue, by Henry Poole of Gerald in City Hall, Cardiff, and he was included in the vote on 100 Welsh Heroes for his &quot;Descriptio Cambriae&quot; and &quot;Itinerarium Cambriae&quot;. His reputation in Ireland, due to his negative portrayal of the Irish, is much less friendly.

==Works==
Gerald&#x27;s writings in good-quality Latin, based on a thorough knowledge of Classical authors, reflect experiences gained on his travels as well as his great knowledge of the standard authorities. He was respected as a scholar in his time and afterwards. The noted scholar Edward Augustus Freeman, in his &quot;Norman Conquest&quot;, said he was &quot;the father of comparative philology,&quot; and in the preface to the last volume of Gerald&#x27;s works in the Rolls Series, he calls him &quot;one of the most learned men of a learned age,&quot; &quot;the universal scholar.&quot; His writings were prolific, running to about ten volumes in modern printed editions. Gerald was a man of strong opinions whose works are frequently polemical, including bitter attacks on his enemies, but he also had an intense curiosity, recording much valuable detail of everyday life in his ethnographic works.

It is generally agreed today that his most distinguished works are those dealing with Wales and Ireland, with his two books on his beloved Wales the most important: &quot;Itinerarium Cambriae&quot; and &quot;Descriptio Cambriae&quot; which tell us much about Welsh history and geography and reflect on the cultural relationship between the Welsh and the English. Gerald, despite his desire for an independent Welsh Church and admiration for parts of Welsh life, was very loyal to Norman Marcher rule, regarding the Normans as more civilised than the Welsh, a feeling reflected in his writings. Professor Davies tells us that Gerald, whom he calls &quot;an admirable story-teller&quot;, is the only source for some of the most famous of the Welsh folk tales including the declaration of the old man of Pencader to Henry II which concludes &quot;Descriptio Cambriae&quot;: 

It was Gerald who also wrote (of the Welsh) that &quot;If they would be inseparable, they would be insuperable&quot;, and that, unlike the English hirelings, who fight for power or to procure gain or wealth, the Welsh patriots fight for their country. He had pleasant things to say about the poetic talents of his people, too:
Gerald could not have predicted the later perfection of &quot;cynghanedd&quot;, the complex system of sound correspondence that has characterised the strict-metre poetry of the Welsh for so many centuries and that is still practised today, especially in competitions for the &quot;eisteddfod&quot; chair. &quot;Cynghanedd&quot; did not become a formal system with strict rules until the fourteenth century, but its uniquely Welsh forms had been honed for centuries before that.

Finally, in &quot;Descriptio Cambriae&quot;, Gerald penned the following words that give so much pride to Welsh singers of today, especially those who participate in the immensely popular &quot;cymanfaoedd canu&quot; (hymn-singing festivals) held throughout Wales and North America:
Another part of the above work, however, is less positive. As Gerald puts it, &quot;an attention to order now requires that, in this second part, we should employ our pen in pointing out those particulars in which it seems to transgress the line of virtue and commendation&quot;. David Powel published an abridged version of &quot;Itinerarium Cambriae&quot; and &quot;Descriptio Cambriae&quot; in 1585 omitting Gerald&#x27;s negative comments about the Welsh. Due to translations into English, the first being done by Sir Richard Colt Hoare, Bart., and other translations such as in Everyman&#x27;s Library and Penguin Classics, Gerald&#x27;s works on Wales are well known today.

In Gerald&#x27;s writing on Ireland, his love of music is very evident too.
Gerald&#x27;s works on Ireland, although invaluable for their detail, are obviously biased, and have been attacked by Irish writers such as Stephen White. The following passage from his &quot;Topographia Hibernica&quot; shows why the Irish might not always be too enamoured with Gerald&#x27;s views: 

Gerald was a keen and observant student of natural history, but the value of his observations is lessened by credulity and the inability to distinguish fact from legend. He gives a vivid and accurate description of the last colony of the Eurasian beaver in Wales on the Teifi, but spoils it by repeating the legend that beavers castrate themselves to avoid danger. Likewise he gives a good description of an osprey fishing, but adds the mythical detail that the bird has one webbed foot. His description of Irish wildlife has been the subject of much adverse comment for its inaccuracies and lapses into fiction but nonetheless, despite its faults, some have argued that it gives an important glimpse of Irish fauna in the 1180s. Certainly the book has valuable details about Irish birds: while the common kingfisher is now common in Ireland, Gerald states clearly that it was not found there in his time: on the other hand the white-throated dipper, which he had evidently not seen before, was very common in Ireland. He also observed the great numbers of birds of prey in Ireland, including the golden eagle and the Eurasian sparrowhawk, which he said were more numerous in Ireland than in England.

===List of works===

* &quot;Topographia Hibernica&quot; (&quot;Topography of Ireland&quot;, 1187)
* &quot;Expugnatio Hibernica&quot; (&quot;Conquest of Ireland&quot;, 1189)
* &quot;Itinerarium Cambriae&quot; (&quot;Journey through Wales&quot;, 1191)
* &quot;Descriptio Cambriae&quot; (&quot;Description of Wales&quot;, 1194)
* &quot;De instructione principis&quot; (&quot;Education of a prince&quot;)
* &quot;De rebus a se gestis&quot; (&quot;Autobiography&quot;)
* &quot;De iure et statu Menevensis ecclesiae&quot; (&quot;Rights and privileges of the Church of St Davids&quot;)
* &quot;Gemma ecclesiastica&quot; (&quot;Jewel of the church&quot;)
* &quot;Speculum ecclesiae&quot; (&quot;Mirror of the church&quot;)
* &quot;Symbolum electorum&quot;
* &quot;Invectiones&quot;
* &quot;Retractationes&quot;
* &quot;Speculum duorum&quot; (&quot;A mirror of two men&quot;) (Described at this link)
* &quot;Life of St Hugh of Lincoln&quot;
* &quot;Life of Geoffrey, Archbishop of York&quot;
* &quot;Life of St Ethelbert&quot;
* &quot;Life of St Remigius&quot;
* &quot;Life of St David&quot;

====Lost works====
* &quot;Vita sancti Karadoci&quot; (&quot;Life of St Caradoc&quot;)
* &quot;De fidei fructu fideique defectu&quot; (&quot;About the fruit of faith and [about] the lack of faith&quot;)
* &quot;Totius Kambriae mappa&quot; (&quot;Map of all Wales&quot;, c. 1205)
* &quot;De philosophicis flosculis&quot; (&quot;The Flowers of Philosophy&quot;)

====Online editions====
* The Historical Works of Giraldus Cambrensis, containing The Topography of Ireland, and the History of the Conquest of Ireland, translated by Thomas Forester, and The Itinerary through Wales, and the Description of Wales, translated by Sir Richard Colt Hoare, 1905

==In popular culture==
* Gerald&#x27;s tour of Wales in 1188 was detailed in a 1988 cartoon voiced by comedian Max Boyce.
* Gerald of Wales was 4th in the series of 8 by Nicholas Crane in &quot;Great British Journeys&quot;.
* James Goldman&#x27;s novel &quot;Myself As Witness&quot; is written from Gerald of Wales&#x27; point of view, though in the novel he is referred to as Giraldus Cambrensis, which means Gerald of Wales in Latin.
* A train service between Holyhead and Cardiff operated by Transport for Wales Rail is named &quot;Gerald of Wales&quot;.

==See also==
* Cambridge University Library, Ff. i.27, a composite manuscript containing some of Gerald of Wales&#x27;s works such as &quot;De Descriptione Hybernie&quot;, &quot;Expugnatio Hibernica&quot; and &quot;Vita Sancti Patricii Episcopi&quot;
* Adam of Usk
* Geoffrey of Monmouth
* Laudabiliter

==References==

===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* &quot;The Autobiography of Giraldus Cambrensis&quot; tr. H. E. Butler. London: Cape, 1937.
* Gerald of Wales, &quot;Gemma ecclesiastica: The Jewel of the Church: A Translation of Gemma Ecclesiastica&quot;, trans. John J. Hagen. Leiden: Brill, 1979. 
* Gerald of Wales, &quot;Giraldi Cambrensis Opera&quot;, ed. John S. Brewer, James F. Dimock, and George F. Warner. London: Longman, Green, Longman, and Roberts, 1861–1891, repr. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002. [In Latin.]
* Gerald of Wales, &quot;The Journey Through Wales&quot; and &quot;The Description of Wales&quot; tr. Lewis Thorpe. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1978. 
* Gerald of Wales, &quot;The History and Topography of Ireland&quot; tr. John J. O&#x27;Meara. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1982. 
* Gerald of Wales, &quot;Speculum Duorum&quot; ed. Yves Lefevre and R. C. Huygens, tr. Brian Dawson. Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 1974. 
* Kathryn Hurlock, &quot;Wales and the Crusades, c., 1095-1291&quot;, Cardiff: University of Wales Press 2011 Book

==External links==
* 
* 
* Latin Chroniclers from the Eleventh to the Thirteenth Centuries: Giraldus Cambrensis from &quot;The Cambridge History of English and American Literature&quot;, Volume I, 1907–21.
* Full text of Gerald of Wales&#x27;s &quot;The Description of Wales&quot; on &quot;A Vision of Britain through Time&quot;, with links to the places named.
* Full text of Gerald of Wales&#x27;s &quot;The Itinerary of Archbishop Baldwin through Wales&quot; on &quot;A Vision of Britain through Time&quot;, with links to the places named.
* &quot;Giraldus Cambrensis, The Itinerary and Description of Wales&quot;, Everyman&#x27;s Library, Edited by Ernest Rhys, with an Introduction by W. Llewelyn Williams, January 1908</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q357824" start="0" end="15" title="Gerald of Wales" label="Gerald of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q599661" start="31" end="44" title="Cambro-Norman" label="Cambro-Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773318" start="56" end="65" title="English historians in the Middle Ages" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q21791459" start="327" end="346" title="Bishop of St Davids" label="Bishop of St Davids"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148044" start="421" end="441" title="Archdeacon of Brecon" label="Archdeacon of Brecon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508342" start="579" end="595" title="Manorbier Castle" label="Manorbier Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q213361" start="599" end="612" title="Pembrokeshire" label="Pembrokeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="641" end="647" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q188353" start="652" end="657" title="Welsh people" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244235" start="763" end="778" title="De Barry family" label="De Barry family"/>
<link wikidata="Q697750" start="853" end="873" title="Arnulf de Montgomery" label="Arnulf de Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394789" start="878" end="895" title="Gerald de Windsor" label="Gerald de Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q541508" start="926" end="938" title="Anglo-Normans" label="Anglo-Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="939" end="944" title="baron" label="baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394789" start="1006" end="1034" title="Gerald de Windsor" label="Gerald FitzWalter of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422235" start="1049" end="1064" title="Pembroke Castle" label="Pembroke Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q449000" start="1079" end="1094" title="Nest ferch Rhys" label="Nest ferch Rhys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381003" start="1108" end="1122" title="Rhys ap Tewdwr" label="Rhys ap Tewdwr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="1141" end="1152" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233665" start="1206" end="1222" title="David FitzGerald" label="David FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705901" start="1274" end="1290" title="Gruffydd ap Rhys" label="Gruffydd ap Rhys"/>
<link wikidata="Q741855" start="1344" end="1360" title="Rhys ap Gruffydd" label="Rhys ap Gruffydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="1477" end="1487" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q205186" start="1559" end="1566" title="trivium" label="trivium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770782" start="1587" end="1603" title="Richard of Dover" label="Richard of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q774347" start="1750" end="1763" title="consanguinity" label="consanguinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148044" start="1850" end="1870" title="Archdeacon of Brecon" label="Archdeacon of Brecon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661160" start="1909" end="1917" title="Llanddew" label="Llanddew"/>
<link wikidata="Q648732" start="2248" end="2257" title="St Davids" label="St Davids"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="2470" end="2489" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="2531" end="2544" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177893" start="2584" end="2597" title="Peter de Leia" label="Peter de Leia"/>
<link wikidata="Q837136" start="2704" end="2714" title="Deheubarth" label="Deheubarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="2960" end="2969" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="3196" end="3215" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q741855" start="3591" end="3607" title="Rhys ap Gruffydd" label="Rhys ap Gruffydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="3665" end="3669" title="John, King of England" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547651" start="3674" end="3678" title="1185 in Ireland" label="1185"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217306" start="3682" end="3721" title="John&amp;#x27;s first expedition to Ireland" label="John&amp;#x27;s first expedition to Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087155" start="3785" end="3806" title="Topographia Hibernica" label="Topographia Hibernica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400910" start="4452" end="4470" title="Robert FitzStephen" label="Robert FitzStephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670013" start="4475" end="4493" title="Raymond FitzGerald" label="Raymond FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="4742" end="4766" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q660426" start="4768" end="4784" title="Baldwin of Forde" label="Baldwin of Forde"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="4862" end="4875" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q13128947" start="4916" end="4936" title="Itinerarium Cambriae" label="Itinerarium Cambriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21999654" start="4976" end="4995" title="Descriptio Cambriae" label="Descriptio Cambriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="5254" end="5267" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q209126" start="5537" end="5544" title="Wexford" label="Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q873607" start="5608" end="5614" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Ossory" label="Ossory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002183" start="5640" end="5646" title="Cashel, County Tipperary" label="Cashel"/>
<link wikidata="Q234178" start="5675" end="5681" title="Bangor, Gwynedd" label="Bangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244613" start="5714" end="5722" title="Llandaff" label="Llandaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q431324" start="5846" end="5856" title="Walter Map" label="Walter Map"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535021" start="5996" end="6015" title="William de Montibus" label="William de Montibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q767392" start="6071" end="6096" title="De principis instructione" label="De principis instructione"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536511" start="6260" end="6283" title="MacAlpin&amp;#x27;s treason" label="MacAlpin&amp;#x27;s treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q106151" start="6339" end="6346" title="House of Plantagenet" label="Angevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="6389" end="6397" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q924107" start="6457" end="6472" title="Hugh of Lincoln" label="Hugh of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q620877" start="6631" end="6644" title="Hubert Walter" label="Hubert Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q128076" start="7152" end="7169" title="Pope Innocent III" label="Pope Innocent III"/>
<link wikidata="Q189854" start="7540" end="7552" title="Metropolitan bishop" label="Metropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400660" start="7642" end="7652" title="Rhygyfarch" label="Rhygyfarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q822215" start="7657" end="7684" title="Bernard (bishop of St Davids)" label="Bishop Bernard of St Davids"/>
<link wikidata="Q467685" start="7911" end="7929" title="Llywelyn the Great" label="Llywelyn the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253212" start="7935" end="7954" title="Gruffydd ap Rhys II" label="Gruffydd ap Rhys II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8478" end="8496" title="Geoffrey of Henlaw" label="Geoffrey of Henlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q165284" start="9861" end="9881" title="Louis VIII of France" label="Louis VIII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086498" start="9914" end="9936" title="First Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="First Barons&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q204720" start="10017" end="10025" title="Hereford" label="Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300003" start="10075" end="10094" title="St Davids Cathedral" label="St Davids Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727134" start="10119" end="10130" title="Henry Poole (sculptor)" label="Henry Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974562" start="10144" end="10162" title="City Hall, Cardiff" label="City Hall, Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394804" start="10199" end="10215" title="100 Welsh Heroes" label="100 Welsh Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292269" start="10675" end="10698" title="Edward Augustus Freeman" label="Edward Augustus Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q22004500" start="10713" end="10728" title="The History of the Norman Conquest of England" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q27406" start="11133" end="11140" title="polemic" label="polemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193398" start="11605" end="11660" title="cultural relationship between the Welsh and the English" label="cultural relationship between the Welsh and the English"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756973" start="11779" end="11793" title="Marcher Lord" label="Norman Marcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162285" start="12100" end="12108" title="Pencader, Carmarthenshire" label="Pencader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147983" start="12561" end="12571" title="cynghanedd" label="cynghanedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q670265" start="12780" end="12790" title="eisteddfod" label="eisteddfod"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13166" end="13194" title="cymanfa ganu" label="&amp;quot;cymanfaoedd canu&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238679" start="13541" end="13552" title="David Powel" label="David Powel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363258" start="13779" end="13808" title="Sir Richard Colt Hoare, Bart." label="Sir Richard Colt Hoare, Bart."/>
<link wikidata="Q5417845" start="13844" end="13867" title="Everyman&amp;#x27;s Library" label="Everyman&amp;#x27;s Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q11281443" start="13872" end="13888" title="Penguin Classics" label="Penguin Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610838" start="14158" end="14171" title="Stephen White (Jesuit)" label="Stephen White"/>
<link wikidata="Q181191" start="14558" end="14573" title="Eurasian beaver" label="Eurasian beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523834" start="14590" end="14595" title="River Teifi" label="Teifi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25332" start="14728" end="14734" title="osprey" label="osprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q79915" start="15119" end="15136" title="common kingfisher" label="common kingfisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q201831" start="15248" end="15269" title="white-throated dipper" label="white-throated dipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="15377" end="15390" title="birds of prey" label="birds of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="15417" end="15429" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25380" start="15438" end="15458" title="Eurasian sparrowhawk" label="Eurasian sparrowhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087155" start="15551" end="15572" title="Topographia Hibernica" label="Topographia Hibernica"/>
<link wikidata="Q13128947" start="15704" end="15724" title="Itinerarium Cambriae" label="Itinerarium Cambriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21999654" start="15781" end="15800" title="Descriptio Cambriae" label="Descriptio Cambriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q767392" start="15856" end="15881" title="De instructione principis" label="De instructione principis"/>
<link wikidata="Q924107" start="16434" end="16449" title="Hugh of Lincoln" label="Hugh of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357271" start="16472" end="16500" title="Geoffrey, Archbishop of York" label="Geoffrey, Archbishop of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q272180" start="16523" end="16535" title="Æthelberht II of East Anglia" label="St Ethelbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143224" start="16558" end="16569" title="Remigius de Fécamp" label="St Remigius"/>
<link wikidata="Q331697" start="16592" end="16600" title="St David" label="St David"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401077" start="16677" end="16687" title="Saint Caradoc" label="St Caradoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363258" start="17230" end="17252" title="Sir Richard Hoare, 2nd Baronet" label="Sir Richard Colt Hoare"/>
<link wikidata="Q356091" start="17371" end="17380" title="Max Boyce" label="Max Boyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7025264" start="17430" end="17444" title="Nicholas Crane" label="Nicholas Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q541868" start="17486" end="17499" title="James Goldman" label="James Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398052" start="17722" end="17730" title="Holyhead railway station" label="Holyhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292817" start="17735" end="17742" title="Cardiff Central railway station" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878180" start="17755" end="17779" title="Transport for Wales Rail" label="Transport for Wales Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q55619632" start="17795" end="17810" title="Premier Service" label="Gerald of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025600" start="17834" end="17872" title="Cambridge University Library, Ff. i.27" label="Cambridge University Library, Ff. i.27"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680071" start="18072" end="18083" title="Adam of Usk" label="Adam of Usk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188344" start="18086" end="18106" title="Geoffrey of Monmouth" label="Geoffrey of Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319101" start="18109" end="18121" title="Laudabiliter" label="Laudabiliter"/>
<link wikidata="Q648344" start="18764" end="18776" title="Lewis Thorpe" label="Lewis Thorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241234" start="18882" end="18902" title="John J. O&amp;#x27;Meara" label="John J. O&amp;#x27;Meara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734877" start="19318" end="19374" title="The Cambridge History of English and American Literature" label="The Cambridge History of English and American Literature"/>
</links>
</doc>
