<doc id="53842" wikidata="Q34404" url="?curid=53842" title="New Orleans">
<text>New Orleans (commonly known as NOLA or The Big Easy among other nicknames) is a consolidated city-parish located along the Mississippi River in the southeastern region of the U.S. state of Louisiana. With a population of 383,997 according to the 2020 U.S. census, it is the most populous city in Louisiana and the French Louisiana region; the second-most populous city in the Deep South; and the twelfth-most populous city in the Southeastern United States. Serving as a major port, New Orleans is considered an economic and commercial hub for the broader Gulf Coast region of the United States.

New Orleans is world-renowned for its distinctive music, Creole cuisine, unique dialects, and its annual celebrations and festivals, most notably Mardi Gras. The historic heart of the city is the French Quarter, known for its French and Spanish Creole architecture and vibrant nightlife along Bourbon Street. The city has been described as the &quot;most unique&quot; in the United States, owing in large part to its cross-cultural and multilingual heritage. Additionally, New Orleans has increasingly been known as &quot;Hollywood South&quot; due to its prominent role in the film industry and in pop culture.

Founded in 1718 by French colonists, New Orleans was once the territorial capital of French Louisiana before becoming part of the United States in the Louisiana Purchase of 1803. New Orleans in 1840 was the third most populous city in the United States, and it was the largest city in the American South from the Antebellum era until after World War II. The city has historically been very vulnerable to flooding, due to its high rainfall, low lying elevation, poor natural drainage, and proximity to multiple bodies of water. State and federal authorities have installed a complex system of levees and drainage pumps in an effort to protect the city.

New Orleans was severely affected by Hurricane Katrina in late August 2005, which flooded more than 80% of the city, killed more than 1,800 people, and displaced thousands of residents, causing a population decline of over 50%. Since Katrina, major redevelopment efforts have led to a rebound in the city&#x27;s population. Concerns have been expressed about gentrification, new residents buying property in formerly close-knit communities, and displacement of longtime residents. Additionally, high rates of violent crime continue to plague the city with New Orleans experiencing 280 murders in 2022, resulting in the highest per capita homicide rate in the United States.

The city and Orleans Parish () are coterminous. As of 2017, Orleans Parish is the third most populous parish in Louisiana, behind East Baton Rouge Parish and neighboring Jefferson Parish. The city and parish are bounded by St. Tammany Parish and Lake Pontchartrain to the north, St. Bernard Parish and Lake Borgne to the east, Plaquemines Parish to the south, and Jefferson Parish to the south and west. The city anchors the larger Greater New Orleans metropolitan area, which had a population of 1,271,845 in 2020. Greater New Orleans is the most populous metropolitan statistical area (MSA) in Louisiana and, since the 2020 census, has been the 46th most populous MSA in the United States.
==Etymology and nicknames==
Before the arrival of European colonists, the indigenous Choctaw people called the area of present-day New Orleans , which translates as &quot;land of many tongues&quot;. It appears to have been a contraction of , which means &quot;there are foreign speakers&quot;. In his book , Antoine-Simon Le Page du Pratz wrote that the indigenous name referred to the Mississippi River and that the use of the same name for the settlement relates to Native American concepts of the close interaction between rivers and their surrounding land.

The name of New Orleans derives from the original French name, , which was given to the city in honor of Philippe II, Duke of Orléans, who served as Louis XV&#x27;s regent from 1715 to 1723. The French city of Orléans itself is named after the Roman emperor Aurelian, originally being known as Aurelianum. Thus, by extension, since New Orleans is also named after Aurelian, its name in Latin would translate to Nova Aurelia.

Following the defeat in the Seven Years&#x27; War, France formally transferred the possession of Louisiana to Spain, with which France had secretly signed the Treaty of Fontainebleau a year earlier, in the Treaty of Paris of 1763. The Spanish renamed the city (), which was used until 1800. The United States, which had acquired possession from France in 1803, adopted the French name and anglicized it to &quot;New Orleans&quot;.

New Orleans has several nicknames, including these:
* &quot;Crescent City&quot;, alluding to the course of the Lower Mississippi River around and through the city.
* &quot;The Big Easy&quot;, possibly a reference by musicians in the early 20th century to the relative ease of finding work there.
* &quot;The City that Care Forgot&quot;, used since at least 1938, referring to the outwardly easygoing, carefree nature of the residents.
* &quot;NOLA&quot;, the acronym for New Orleans, Louisiana.

==History==


===French–Spanish colonial era===


&quot;La Nouvelle-Orléans&quot; (New Orleans) was founded in the spring of 1718 (May 7 has become the traditional date to mark the anniversary, but the actual day is unknown) by the French Mississippi Company, under the direction of Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville, on land inhabited by the Chitimacha. It was named for Philippe II, Duke of Orléans, who was regent of the Kingdom of France at the time. His title came from the French city of Orléans.
As a French colony, Louisiana faced struggles with numerous Native American tribes, who were navigating the competing interests of France, Spain, and England, as well as traditional rivals. Notably, the Natchez, whose traditional lands were along the Mississippi near the modern city of Natchez, Mississippi, had a series of wars culminating in the Natchez Revolt that began in 1729 with the Natchez overrunning Fort Rosalie. Approximately 230 French colonists were killed and the Natchez settlement destroyed, causing fear and concern in New Orleans and the rest of the territory. In retaliation, then-governor Étienne Perier launched a campaign to completely destroy the Natchez nation and its Native allies. By 1731, the Natchez people had been killed, enslaved, or dispersed among other tribes, but the campaign soured relations between France and the territory&#x27;s Native Americans leading directly into the Chickasaw Wars of the 1730s.

Relations with Louisiana&#x27;s Native American population remained a concern into the 1740s for governor Marquis de Vaudreuil. In the early 1740s traders from the Thirteen Colonies crossed into the Appalachian Mountains. The Native American tribes would now operate dependent on which of various European colonists would most benefit them. Several of these tribes and especially the Chickasaw and Choctaw would trade goods and gifts for their loyalty. The economic issue in the colony, which continued under Vaudreuil, resulted in many raids by Native American tribes, taking advantage of the French weakness. In 1747 and 1748, the Chickasaw would raid along the east bank of the Mississippi all the way south to Baton Rouge. These raids would often force residents of French Louisiana to take refuge in New Orleans proper.

Inability to find labor was the most pressing issue in the young colony. The colonists turned to sub-Saharan African slaves to make their investments in Louisiana profitable. In the late 1710s the transatlantic slave trade imported enslaved Africans into the colony. This led to the biggest shipment in 1716 where several trading ships appeared with slaves as cargo to the local residents in a one-year span. By 1724, the large number of blacks in Louisiana prompted the institutionalizing of laws governing slavery within the colony. These laws required that slaves be baptized in the Roman Catholic faith, slaves be married in the church; the slave law formed in the 1720s is known as the Code Noir, which would bleed into the antebellum period of the American South as well. Louisiana slave culture had its own distinct Afro-Creole society that called on past cultures and the situation for slaves in the New World. Afro-Creole was present in religious beliefs and the Louisiana Creole language. The religion most associated with this period was called Voodoo.

In the city of New Orleans an inspiring mixture of foreign influences created a melting pot of culture that is still celebrated today. By the end of French colonization in Louisiana, New Orleans was recognized commercially in the Atlantic world. Its inhabitants traded across the French commercial system. New Orleans was a hub for this trade both physically and culturally because it served as the exit point to the rest of the globe for the interior of the North American continent. In one instance the French government established a chapter house of sisters in New Orleans. The Ursuline sisters after being sponsored by the Company of the Indies, founded a convent in the city in 1727. At the end of the colonial era, the Ursuline Academy maintained a house of 70 boarding and 100 day students. Today numerous schools in New Orleans can trace their lineage from this academy.
Another notable example is the street plan and architecture still distinguishing New Orleans today. French Louisiana had early architects in the province who were trained as military engineers and were now assigned to design government buildings. Pierre Le Blond de Tour and Adrien de Pauger, for example, planned many early fortifications, along with the street plan for the city of New Orleans. After them in the 1740s, Ignace François Broutin, as engineer-in-chief of Louisiana, reworked the architecture of New Orleans with an extensive public works program. French policy-makers in Paris attempted to set political and economic norms for New Orleans. The city acted autonomously in much of its cultural and physical aspects, but stayed in communication with the foreign trends as well.

The French colony of Louisiana was ceded to the Spanish Empire in the 1763 Treaty of Paris, following France&#x27;s defeat by Great Britain in the Seven Years&#x27; War. After the French relinquished West Louisiana to the Spanish, New Orleans merchants attempted to ignore Spanish rule and even re-institute French control on the colony. The citizens of New Orleans held a series of public meetings during 1765 to keep the populace in opposition of the establishment of Spanish rule. Anti-Spanish passions in New Orleans reached their highest level after two years of Spanish administration in Louisiana. On October 27, 1768, a mob of local residents, spiked the guns guarding New Orleans and took control of the city from the Spanish. The rebellion organized a group to sail for Paris, where it met with officials of the French government. This group brought with them a long memorial to summarize the abuses the colony had endured from the Spanish. King Louis XV and his ministers reaffirmed Spain&#x27;s sovereignty over Louisiana. Nearly all of the surviving 18th-century architecture of the Vieux Carré (French Quarter) dates from the Spanish period, notably excepting the Old Ursuline Convent.

During the American Revolutionary War, New Orleans was an important port for smuggling aid to the American revolutionaries, and transporting military equipment and supplies up the Mississippi River. Beginning in the 1760s, Filipinos began to settle in and around New Orleans. Bernardo de Gálvez y Madrid, Count of Gálvez successfully directed a southern campaign against the British from the city in 1779.

===United States territorial era===

The Third Treaty of San Ildefonso in 1800 restored French control of New Orleans and Louisiana, but Napoleon sold both to the United States in the Louisiana Purchase in 1803. Thereafter, the city grew rapidly with influxes of Americans, French, Creoles and Africans. Later immigrants were Irish, Germans, Poles and Italians. Major commodity crops of sugar and cotton were cultivated with slave labor on nearby large plantations.

Between 1791 and 1810, thousands of St. Dominican refugees from the Haitian Revolution, both whites and free people of color (&quot;affranchis&quot; or &quot;gens de couleur libres&quot;), arrived in New Orleans; a number brought their slaves with them, many of whom were native Africans or of full-blood descent. While Governor Claiborne and other officials wanted to keep out additional free black people, the French Creoles wanted to increase the French-speaking population. In addition to bolstering the territory&#x27;s French-speaking population, these refugees had a significant impact on the culture of Louisiana, including developing its sugar industry and cultural institutions.

As more refugees were allowed into the Territory of Orleans, St. Dominican refugees who had first gone to Cuba also arrived. Many of the white Francophones had been deported by officials in Cuba in 1809 as retaliation for Bonapartist schemes. Nearly 90 percent of these immigrants settled in New Orleans. The 1809 migration brought 2,731 whites, 3,102 free people of color (of mixed-race European and African descent), and 3,226 slaves of primarily African descent, doubling the city&#x27;s population. The city became 63 percent black, a greater proportion than Charleston, South Carolina&#x27;s 53 percent at that time.

====Slave rebellion ====
On January 8–11, 1811, about 500 enslaved Africans in St. Charles and St. John the Baptist parishes rose up in rebellion against their enslavers, killing two white men in the process. They proceeded to march south toward New Orleans and were eventually controlled by the local militia, with numerous casualties on both sides.
The uprising has been called the &quot;largest slave rebellion in US history.&quot;

===Battle of New Orleans===

During the final campaign of the War of 1812, the British sent a force of 11,000 in an attempt to capture New Orleans. Despite great challenges, General Andrew Jackson, with support from the U.S. Navy, successfully cobbled together a force of militia from Louisiana and Mississippi, U.S. Army regulars, a large contingent of Tennessee state militia, Kentucky frontiersmen and local privateers (the latter led by the pirate Jean Lafitte), to decisively defeat the British, led by Sir Edward Pakenham, in the Battle of New Orleans on January 8, 1815.

The armies had not learned of the Treaty of Ghent, which had been signed on December 24, 1814 (however, the treaty did not call for cessation of hostilities until after both governments had ratified it. The U.S. government ratified it on February 16, 1815). The fighting in Louisiana began in December 1814 and did not end until late January, after the Americans held off the Royal Navy during a ten-day siege of Fort St. Philip (the Royal Navy went on to capture Fort Bowyer near Mobile, before the commanders received news of the peace treaty).

===Port===
As a port, New Orleans played a major role during the antebellum period in the Atlantic slave trade. The port handled commodities for export from the interior and imported goods from other countries, which were warehoused and transferred in New Orleans to smaller vessels and distributed along the Mississippi River watershed. The river was filled with steamboats, flatboats and sailing ships. Despite its role in the slave trade, New Orleans at the time also had the largest and most prosperous community of free persons of color in the nation, who were often educated, middle-class property owners.

Dwarfing the other cities in the Antebellum South, New Orleans had the U.S.&#x27; largest slave market. The market expanded after the United States ended the international trade in 1808. Two-thirds of the more than one million slaves brought to the Deep South arrived via forced migration in the domestic slave trade. The money generated by the sale of slaves in the Upper South has been estimated at 15 percent of the value of the staple crop economy. The slaves were collectively valued at half a billion dollars. The trade spawned an ancillary economy—transportation, housing and clothing, fees, etc., estimated at 13.5 percent of the price per person, amounting to tens of billions of dollars (2005 dollars, adjusted for inflation) during the antebellum period, with New Orleans as a prime beneficiary.

According to historian Paul Lachance,

After the Louisiana Purchase, numerous Anglo-Americans migrated to the city. The population doubled in the 1830s and by 1840, New Orleans had become the nation&#x27;s wealthiest and the third-most populous city, after New York and Baltimore. German and Irish immigrants began arriving in the 1840s, working as port laborers. In this period, the state legislature passed more restrictions on manumissions of slaves and virtually ended it in 1852.

In the 1850s, white Francophones remained an intact and vibrant community in New Orleans. They maintained instruction in French in two of the city&#x27;s four school districts (all served white students). In 1860, the city had 13,000 free people of color (&quot;gens de couleur libres&quot;), the class of free, mostly mixed-race people that expanded in number during French and Spanish rule. They set up some private schools for their children. The census recorded 81 percent of the free people of color as mulatto, a term used to cover all degrees of mixed race. Mostly part of the Francophone group, they constituted the artisan, educated and professional class of African Americans. The mass of blacks were still enslaved, working at the port, in domestic service, in crafts, and mostly on the many large, surrounding sugarcane plantations.

Throughout New Orleans&#x27; history, until the early 20th century when medical and scientific advances ameliorated the situation, the city suffered repeated epidemics of yellow fever and other tropical and infectious diseases. In the first half of the 19th century, yellow fever epidemics killed over 150,000 people in New Orleans.

After growing by 45 percent in the 1850s, by 1860, the city had nearly 170,000 people. It had grown in wealth, with a &quot;per capita income [that] was second in the nation and the highest in the South.&quot; The city had a role as the &quot;primary commercial gateway for the nation&#x27;s booming midsection.&quot; The port was the nation&#x27;s third largest in terms of tonnage of imported goods, after Boston and New York, handling 659,000 tons in 1859.

===Civil War–Reconstruction era===


As the Creole elite feared, the American Civil War changed their world. In April 1862, following the city&#x27;s occupation by the Union Navy after the Battle of Forts Jackson and St. Philip, Gen. Benjamin F. Butler – a respected Massachusetts lawyer serving in that state&#x27;s militia – was appointed military governor. New Orleans residents supportive of the Confederacy nicknamed him &quot;Beast&quot; Butler, because of an order he issued. After his troops had been assaulted and harassed in the streets by women still loyal to the Confederate cause, his order warned that such future occurrences would result in his men treating such women as those &quot;plying their avocation in the streets&quot;, implying that they would treat the women like prostitutes. Accounts of this spread widely. He also came to be called &quot;Spoons&quot; Butler because of the alleged looting that his troops did while occupying the city, during which time he himself supposedly pilfered silver flatware.

Significantly, Butler abolished French-language instruction in city schools. Statewide measures in 1864 and, after the war, 1868 further strengthened the English-only policy imposed by federal representatives. With the predominance of English speakers, that language had already become dominant in business and government. By the end of the 19th century, French usage had faded. It was also under pressure from Irish, Italian and German immigrants. However, as late as 1902 &quot;one-fourth of the population of the city spoke French in ordinary daily intercourse, while another two-fourths was able to understand the language perfectly,&quot; and as late as 1945, many elderly Creole women spoke no English. The last major French language newspaper, &quot;L&#x27;Abeille de la Nouvelle-Orléans&quot; (New Orleans Bee), ceased publication on December 27, 1923, after 96 years. According to some sources, &quot;Le Courrier de la Nouvelle Orleans&quot; continued until 1955.

As the city was captured and occupied early in the war, it was spared the destruction through warfare suffered by many other cities of the American South. The Union Army eventually extended its control north along the Mississippi River and along the coastal areas. As a result, most of the southern portion of Louisiana was originally exempted from the liberating provisions of the 1863 Emancipation Proclamation issued by President Abraham Lincoln. Large numbers of rural ex-slaves and some free people of color from the city volunteered for the first regiments of Black troops in the War. Led by Brigadier General Daniel Ullman (1810–1892), of the 78th Regiment of New York State Volunteers Militia, they were known as the &quot;Corps d&#x27;Afrique&quot;. While that name had been used by a militia before the war, that group was composed of free people of color. The new group was made up mostly of former slaves. They were supplemented in the last two years of the War by newly organized United States Colored Troops, who played an increasingly important part in the war.

Violence throughout the South, especially the Memphis Riots of 1866 followed by the New Orleans Riot in the same year, led Congress to pass the Reconstruction Act and the Fourteenth Amendment, extending the protections of full citizenship to freedmen and free people of color. Louisiana and Texas were put under the authority of the &quot;Fifth Military District&quot; of the United States during Reconstruction. Louisiana was readmitted to the Union in 1868. Its Constitution of 1868 granted universal male suffrage and established universal public education. Both blacks and whites were elected to local and state offices. In 1872, lieutenant governor P.B.S. Pinchback, who was of mixed race, succeeded Henry Clay Warmouth for a brief period as Republican governor of Louisiana, becoming the first governor of African descent of a U.S. state (the next African American to serve as governor of a U.S. state was Douglas Wilder, elected in Virginia in 1989). New Orleans operated a racially integrated public school system during this period.

Wartime damage to levees and cities along the Mississippi River adversely affected southern crops and trade. The federal government contributed to restoring infrastructure. The nationwide financial recession and Panic of 1873 adversely affected businesses and slowed economic recovery.

From 1868, elections in Louisiana were marked by violence, as white insurgents tried to suppress black voting and disrupt Republican Party gatherings. The disputed 1872 gubernatorial election resulted in conflicts that ran for years. The &quot;White League&quot;, an insurgent paramilitary group that supported the Democratic Party, was organized in 1874 and operated in the open, violently suppressing the black vote and running off Republican officeholders. In 1874, in the Battle of Liberty Place, 5,000 members of the White League fought with city police to take over the state offices for the Democratic candidate for governor, holding them for three days. By 1876, such tactics resulted in the white Democrats, the so-called Redeemers, regaining political control of the state legislature. The federal government gave up and withdrew its troops in 1877, ending Reconstruction.

In 1892 the racially integrated unions of New Orleans led a general strike in the city from November 8 to 12, shutting down the city &amp; winning the vast majority of their demands.

===Jim Crow era===
Dixiecrats passed Jim Crow laws, establishing racial segregation in public facilities. In 1889, the legislature passed a constitutional amendment incorporating a &quot;grandfather clause&quot; that effectively disfranchised freedmen as well as the propertied people of color manumitted before the war. Unable to vote, African Americans could not serve on juries or in local office, and were closed out of formal politics for generations. The Southern U.S. was ruled by a white Democratic Party. Public schools were racially segregated and remained so until 1960.

New Orleans&#x27; large community of well-educated, often French-speaking free persons of color (&quot;gens de couleur libres&quot;), who had been free prior to the Civil War, fought against Jim Crow. They organized the &quot;Comité des Citoyens&quot; (Citizens Committee) to work for civil rights. As part of their legal campaign, they recruited one of their own, Homer Plessy, to test whether Louisiana&#x27;s newly enacted Separate Car Act was constitutional. Plessy boarded a commuter train departing New Orleans for Covington, Louisiana, sat in the car reserved for whites only, and was arrested. The case resulting from this incident, &quot;Plessy v. Ferguson&quot;, was heard by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1896. The court ruled that &quot;separate but equal&quot; accommodations were constitutional, effectively upholding Jim Crow measures.

In practice, African American public schools and facilities were underfunded across the South. The Supreme Court ruling contributed to this period as the nadir of race relations in the United States. The rate of lynchings of black men was high across the South, as other states also disfranchised blacks and sought to impose Jim Crow. Nativist prejudices also surfaced. Anti-Italian sentiment in 1891 contributed to the lynchings of 11 Italians, some of whom had been acquitted of the murder of the police chief. Some were shot and killed in the jail where they were detained. It was the largest mass lynching in U.S. history. In July 1900 the city was swept by white mobs rioting after Robert Charles, a young African American, killed a policeman and temporarily escaped. The mob killed him and an estimated 20 other blacks; seven whites died in the days-long conflict, until a state militia suppressed it.

===20th century===

New Orleans&#x27; economic and population zenith in relation to other American cities occurred in the antebellum period. It was the nation&#x27;s fifth-largest city in 1860 (after New York, Philadelphia, Boston and Baltimore) and was significantly larger than all other southern cities. From the mid-19th century onward rapid economic growth shifted to other areas, while New Orleans&#x27; relative importance steadily declined. The growth of railways and highways decreased river traffic, diverting goods to other transportation corridors and markets. Thousands of the most ambitious people of color left the state in the Great Migration around World War II and after, many for West Coast destinations. From the late 1800s, most censuses recorded New Orleans slipping down the ranks in the list of largest American cities (New Orleans&#x27; population still continued to increase throughout the period, but at a slower rate than before the Civil War).

In 1929 the New Orleans streetcar strike during which serious unrest occurred. It is also credited for the creation of the distinctly Louisianan Po&#x27; boy sandwich.

By the mid-20th century, New Orleanians recognized that their city was no longer the leading urban area in the South. By 1950, Houston, Dallas, and Atlanta exceeded New Orleans in size, and in 1960 Miami eclipsed New Orleans, even as the latter&#x27;s population reached its historic peak. As with other older American cities, highway construction and suburban development drew residents from the center city to newer housing outside. The 1970 census recorded the first absolute decline in population since the city became part of the United States in 1803. The Greater New Orleans metropolitan area continued expanding in population, albeit more slowly than other major Sun Belt cities. While the port remained one of the nation&#x27;s largest, automation and containerization cost many jobs. The city&#x27;s former role as banker to the South was supplanted by larger peer cities. New Orleans&#x27; economy had always been based more on trade and financial services than on manufacturing, but the city&#x27;s relatively small manufacturing sector also shrank after World War II. Despite some economic development successes under the administrations of DeLesseps &quot;Chep&quot; Morrison (1946–1961) and Victor &quot;Vic&quot; Schiro (1961–1970), metropolitan New Orleans&#x27; growth rate consistently lagged behind more vigorous cities.

====Civil Rights movement====
During the later years of Morrison&#x27;s administration, and for the entirety of Schiro&#x27;s, the city was a center of the Civil Rights movement. The Southern Christian Leadership Conference was founded in New Orleans, and lunch counter sit-ins were held in Canal Street department stores. A prominent and violent series of confrontations occurred in 1960 when the city attempted school desegregation, following the Supreme Court ruling in &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot; (1954). When six-year-old Ruby Bridges integrated William Frantz Elementary School in the Ninth Ward, she was the first child of color to attend a previously all-white school in the South. Much controversy preceded the 1956 Sugar Bowl at Tulane Stadium, when the Pitt Panthers, with African-American fullback Bobby Grier on the roster, met the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets. There had been controversy over whether Grier should be allowed to play due to his race, and whether Georgia Tech should even play at all due to Georgia&#x27;s Governor Marvin Griffin&#x27;s opposition to racial integration. After Griffin publicly sent a telegram to the state&#x27;s Board Of Regents requesting Georgia Tech not to engage in racially integrated events, Georgia Tech&#x27;s president Blake R. Van Leer rejected the request and threatened to resign. The game went on as planned.

The Civil Rights movement&#x27;s success in gaining federal passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 renewed constitutional rights, including voting for blacks. Together, these resulted in the most far-reaching changes in New Orleans&#x27; 20th century history. Though legal and civil equality were re-established by the end of the 1960s, a large gap in income levels and educational attainment persisted between the city&#x27;s White and African American communities. As the middle class and wealthier members of both races left the center city, its population&#x27;s income level dropped, and it became proportionately more African American. From 1980, the African American majority elected primarily officials from its own community. They struggled to narrow the gap by creating conditions conducive to the economic uplift of the African American community.

New Orleans became increasingly dependent on tourism as an economic mainstay during the administrations of Sidney Barthelemy (1986–1994) and Marc Morial (1994–2002). Relatively low levels of educational attainment, high rates of household poverty, and rising crime threatened the city&#x27;s prosperity in the later decades of the century. The negative effects of these socioeconomic conditions aligned poorly with the changes in the late-20th century to the economy of the United States, which reflected a post-industrial, knowledge-based paradigm in which mental skills and education were more important to advancement than manual skills.

====Drainage and flood control====


In the 20th century, New Orleans&#x27; government and business leaders believed they needed to drain and develop outlying areas to provide for the city&#x27;s expansion. The most ambitious development during this period was a drainage plan devised by engineer and inventor A. Baldwin Wood, designed to break the surrounding swamp&#x27;s stranglehold on the city&#x27;s geographic expansion. Until then, urban development in New Orleans was largely limited to higher ground along the natural river levees and bayous.

Wood&#x27;s pump system allowed the city to drain huge tracts of swamp and marshland and expand into low-lying areas. Over the 20th century, rapid subsidence, both natural and human-induced, resulted in these newly populated areas subsiding to several feet below sea level.

New Orleans was vulnerable to flooding even before the city&#x27;s footprint departed from the natural high ground near the Mississippi River. In the late 20th century, however, scientists and New Orleans residents gradually became aware of the city&#x27;s increased vulnerability. In 1965, flooding from Hurricane Betsy killed dozens of residents, although the majority of the city remained dry. The rain-induced flood of May 8, 1995, demonstrated the weakness of the pumping system. After that event, measures were undertaken to dramatically upgrade pumping capacity. By the 1980s and 1990s, scientists observed that extensive, rapid, and ongoing erosion of the marshlands and swamp surrounding New Orleans, especially that related to the Mississippi River–Gulf Outlet Canal, had the unintended result of leaving the city more vulnerable than before to hurricane-induced catastrophic storm surges.

===21st century===

====Hurricane Katrina====

New Orleans was catastrophically affected by what Raymond B. Seed called &quot;the worst engineering disaster in the world since Chernobyl&quot;, when the federal levee system failed during Hurricane Katrina on August 29, 2005. By the time the hurricane approached the city on August 29, 2005, most residents had evacuated. As the hurricane passed through the Gulf Coast region that day, the city&#x27;s federal flood protection system failed, resulting in the worst civil engineering disaster in American history at the time. Floodwalls and levees constructed by the United States Army Corps of Engineers failed below design specifications and 80% of the city flooded. Tens of thousands of residents who had remained were rescued or otherwise made their way to shelters of last resort at the Louisiana Superdome or the New Orleans Morial Convention Center. More than 1,500 people were recorded as having died in Louisiana, most in New Orleans, while others remain unaccounted for. Before Hurricane Katrina, the city called for the first mandatory evacuation in its history, to be followed by another mandatory evacuation three years later with Hurricane Gustav.

====Hurricane Rita====

The city was declared off-limits to residents while efforts to clean up after Hurricane Katrina began. The approach of Hurricane Rita in September 2005 caused repopulation efforts to be postponed, and the Lower Ninth Ward was reflooded by Rita&#x27;s storm surge.

====Post-disaster recovery====
Because of the scale of damage, many people resettled permanently outside the area. Federal, state, and local efforts supported recovery and rebuilding in severely damaged neighborhoods. The U.S. Census Bureau in July 2006 estimated the population to be 223,000; a subsequent study estimated that 32,000 additional residents had moved to the city as of March 2007, bringing the estimated population to 255,000, approximately 56% of the pre-Katrina population level. Another estimate, based on utility usage from July 2007, estimated the population to be approximately 274,000 or 60% of the pre-Katrina population. These estimates are somewhat smaller to a third estimate, based on mail delivery records, from the Greater New Orleans Community Data Center in June 2007, which indicated that the city had regained approximately two-thirds of its pre-Katrina population. In 2008, the U.S. Census Bureau revised its population estimate for the city upward, to 336,644. Most recently, by July 2015, the population was back up to 386,617—80% of what it was in 2000.

Several major tourist events and other forms of revenue for the city have returned. Large conventions returned. College bowl games returned for the 2006–2007 season. The New Orleans Saints returned that season. The New Orleans Hornets (now named the Pelicans) returned to the city for the 2007–2008 season. New Orleans hosted the 2008 NBA All-Star Game in addition to Super Bowl XLVII.

Major annual events such as Mardi Gras, Voodoo Experience, and the Jazz &amp; Heritage Festival were never displaced or canceled. A new annual festival, &quot;The Running of the Bulls New Orleans&quot;, was created in 2007.

==== Hurricane Ida ====

On August 29, 2021, coincidentally the 16th anniversary of the landfall of Hurricane Katrina, Hurricane Ida, a category 4 hurricane, made landfall near Port Fourchon, where the Hurricane Ida tornado outbreak caused damage.

==== Truck Attack ====

On January 1, 2025, a truck attack occurred in New Orleans, killing 15 people and injuring 35. The attack was carried out as an act of domestic terrorism and was committed by Shamsud-Din Jabbar.

==Geography==
New Orleans is located in the Mississippi River Delta, south of Lake Pontchartrain, on the banks of the Mississippi River, approximately upriver from the Gulf of Mexico. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city&#x27;s area is , of which is land and (52%) is water. The area along the river is characterized by ridges and hollows.

===Elevation===


New Orleans was originally settled on the river&#x27;s natural levees or high ground. After the Flood Control Act of 1965, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers built floodwalls and man-made levees around a much larger geographic footprint that included previous marshland and swamp. Over time, pumping of water from marshland allowed for development into lower elevation areas. Today, half of the city is at or below local mean sea level, while the other half is slightly above sea level. Evidence suggests that portions of the city may be dropping in elevation due to subsidence.

A 2007 study by Tulane and Xavier University suggested that &quot;51%... of the contiguous urbanized portions of Orleans, Jefferson, and St. Bernard parishes lie at or above sea level,&quot; with the more densely populated areas generally on higher ground. The average elevation of the city is currently between below sea level, with some portions of the city as high as at the base of the river levee in Uptown and others as low as below sea level in the farthest reaches of Eastern New Orleans. A study published by the ASCE &quot;Journal of Hydrologic Engineering&quot; in 2016, however, stated:

The magnitude of subsidence potentially caused by the draining of natural marsh in the New Orleans area and southeast Louisiana is a topic of debate. A study published in &quot;Geology&quot; in 2006 by an associate professor at Tulane University claims:

The study noted, however, that the results did not necessarily apply to the Mississippi River Delta, nor the New Orleans metropolitan area proper. On the other hand, a report by the American Society of Civil Engineers claims that &quot;New Orleans is subsiding (sinking)&quot;:

In May 2016, NASA published a study which suggested that most areas were, in fact, experiencing subsidence at a &quot;highly variable rate&quot; which was &quot;generally consistent with, but somewhat higher than, previous studies.&quot;

===Cityscape===

The Central Business District is located immediately north and west of the Mississippi and was historically called the &quot;American Quarter&quot; or &quot;American Sector&quot;. It was developed after the heart of French and Spanish settlement. It includes Lafayette Square. Most streets in this area fan out from a central point. Major streets include Canal Street, Poydras Street, Tulane Avenue and Loyola Avenue. Canal Street divides the traditional &quot;downtown&quot; area from the &quot;uptown&quot; area.

Every street crossing Canal Street between the Mississippi River and Rampart Street, which is the northern edge of the French Quarter, has a different name for the &quot;uptown&quot; and &quot;downtown&quot; portions. For example, St. Charles Avenue, known for its street car line, is called Royal Street below Canal Street, though where it traverses the Central Business District between Canal and Lee Circle, it is properly called St. Charles Street. Elsewhere in the city, Canal Street serves as the dividing point between the &quot;South&quot; and &quot;North&quot; portions of various streets. In the local &quot;downtown&quot; means &quot;downriver from Canal Street&quot;, while &quot;uptown&quot; means &quot;upriver from Canal Street&quot;. Downtown neighborhoods include the French Quarter, Tremé, the 7th Ward, Faubourg Marigny, Bywater (the Upper Ninth Ward), and the Lower Ninth Ward. Uptown neighborhoods include the Warehouse District, the Lower Garden District, the Garden District, the Irish Channel, the University District, Carrollton, Gert Town, Fontainebleau and Broadmoor. However, the Warehouse and the Central Business District are frequently called &quot;Downtown&quot; as a specific region, as in the Downtown Development District.

Other major districts within the city include Bayou St. John, Mid-City, Gentilly, Lakeview, Lakefront, New Orleans East and Algiers.

====Historic and residential architecture====
 New Orleans is world-famous for its abundance of architectural styles that reflect the city&#x27;s multicultural heritage. Though New Orleans possesses numerous structures of national architectural significance, it is equally, if not more, revered for its enormous, largely intact (even post-Katrina) historic built environment. Twenty National Register Historic Districts have been established, and fourteen local historic districts aid in preservation. Thirteen of the districts are administered by the New Orleans Historic District Landmarks Commission (HDLC), while one—the French Quarter—is administered by the Vieux Carre Commission (VCC). Additionally, both the National Park Service, via the National Register of Historic Places, and the HDLC have landmarked individual buildings, many of which lie outside the boundaries of existing historic districts.

Housing styles include the shotgun house and the bungalow style. Creole cottages and townhouses, notable for their large courtyards and intricate iron balconies, line the streets of the French Quarter. American townhouses, double-gallery houses, and Raised Center-Hall Cottages are notable. St. Charles Avenue is famed for its large antebellum homes. Its mansions are in various styles, such as Greek Revival, American Colonial and the Victorian styles of Queen Anne and Italianate architecture. New Orleans is also noted for its large, European-style Catholic cemeteries.

====Tallest buildings====
For much of its history, New Orleans&#x27; skyline displayed only low- and mid-rise structures. The soft soils are susceptible to subsidence, and there was doubt about the feasibility of constructing high rises. Developments in engineering throughout the 20th century eventually made it possible to build sturdy foundations in the foundations that underlie the structures. In the 1960s, the World Trade Center New Orleans and Plaza Tower demonstrated skyscrapers&#x27; viability. One Shell Square became the city&#x27;s tallest building in 1972. The oil boom of the 1970s and early 1980s redefined New Orleans&#x27; skyline with the development of the Poydras Street corridor. Most are clustered along Canal Street and Poydras Street in the Central Business District.

===Climate===

The climate of New Orleans is humid subtropical (Köppen: &quot;Cfa&quot;), with short, generally mild winters and hot, humid summers; in the 1991-2020 climate normals the USDA hardiness zone is 9b, with the coldest temperature in most years being about . The monthly daily average temperature ranges from in January to in August. Officially, as measured at New Orleans International Airport, temperature records range from on December 23, 1989, and August 27, 2023, respectively; Audubon Park has recorded temperatures ranging from on February 13, 1899, up to on June 24, 2009, and August 28, 2023. Dewpoints in the summer months (June–August) are relatively high, ranging from .

The average precipitation is annually; the summer months are the wettest, while October is the driest month. Precipitation in winter usually accompanies the passing of a cold front. There are a median of over 80 days of + highs, 9 days per winter where the high does not exceed , and less than 8 nights with freezing lows annually, although it is not uncommon for entire winter seasons to pass with no freezing temperatures at all, such as the 2003-04 winter, the 2012-13 winter, the 2015-16 winter and the consecutive winters of 2018-19 and 2019–20. It is rare for the temperature to reach , with the last occurrence of each being January 17, 2018, and August 27, 2023, respectively.

New Orleans experiences snowfall only on rare occasions. A small amount of snow fell during the 2004 Christmas Eve Snowstorm and again on Christmas (December 25) when a combination of rain, sleet, and snow fell on the city, leaving some bridges icy. The New Year&#x27;s Eve 1963 snowstorm affected New Orleans and brought . Snow fell again on December 22, 1989, during the December 1989 United States cold wave, when most of the city received .

The last significant snowfall in New Orleans was on January 21, 2025, when the city received of snow. 
===Threat from tropical cyclones===

Hurricanes pose a severe threat to the area, and the city is particularly at risk due to its low elevation, the city being surrounded by water from the north, east, and south, and Louisiana&#x27;s sinking coast. According to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, New Orleans is the nation&#x27;s most vulnerable city to hurricanes. Indeed, portions of Greater New Orleans have been flooded by the Grand Isle Hurricane of 1909, the New Orleans Hurricane of 1915, 1947 Fort Lauderdale Hurricane, Hurricane Flossy in 1956, Hurricane Betsy in 1965, Hurricane Georges in 1998, Hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005, Hurricane Gustav in 2008, Hurricane Isaac in 2012, Hurricane Zeta in 2020 (Zeta was also the most intense hurricane to pass over New Orleans) and Hurricane Ida in 2021. The flooding from Betsy was significant and in a few neighborhoods severe, and that from Katrina was disastrous for the majority of the city.

On August 29, 2005, storm surge from Hurricane Katrina caused catastrophic failure of the federally designed and built levees, flooding 80% of the city. A report by the American Society of Civil Engineers says that &quot;had the levees and floodwalls not failed and had the pump stations operated, nearly two-thirds of the deaths would not have occurred&quot;.

New Orleans has always had to consider the risk of hurricanes, but the risks are dramatically greater today due to coastal erosion from human interference. Since the beginning of the 20th century, it has been estimated that Louisiana has lost of coast (including many of its barrier islands), which once protected New Orleans against storm surge. Following Hurricane Katrina, the Army Corps of Engineers has instituted massive levee repair and hurricane protection measures to protect the city.

In 2006, Louisiana voters overwhelmingly adopted an amendment to the state&#x27;s constitution to dedicate all revenues from off-shore drilling to restore Louisiana&#x27;s eroding coast line. U.S. Congress has allocated $7 billion to bolster New Orleans&#x27; flood protection.

According to a study by the National Academy of Engineering and the National Research Council, levees and floodwalls surrounding New Orleans—no matter how large or sturdy—cannot provide absolute protection against overtopping or failure in extreme events. Levees and floodwalls should be viewed as a way to reduce risks from hurricanes and storm surges, not as measures that eliminate risk. For structures in hazardous areas and residents who do not relocate, the committee recommended major floodproofing measures—such as elevating the first floor of buildings to at least the 100-year flood level.

==Demographics==

From the 2010 U.S. census to 2014 census estimates the city grew by 12%, adding an average of more than 10,000 new residents each year following the official decennial census. According to the 2020 United States census, there were 383,997 people, 151,753 households, and 69,370 families residing in the city. Prior to 1960, the population of New Orleans steadily increased to a historic 627,525.

Beginning in 1960, the population decreased due to factors such as the cycles of oil production and tourism, and as suburbanization increased (as with many cities), and jobs migrated to surrounding parishes. This economic and population decline resulted in high levels of poverty in the city; in 1960 it had the fifth-highest poverty rate of all U.S. cities, and was almost twice the national average in 2005, at 24.5%. New Orleans experienced an increase in residential segregation from 1900 to 1980, leaving the disproportionately Black and African American poor in older, low-lying locations. These areas were especially susceptible to flood and storm damage.

The last population estimate before Hurricane Katrina was 454,865, as of July 1, 2005. A population analysis released in August 2007 estimated the population to be 273,000, 60% of the pre-Katrina population and an increase of about 50,000 since July 2006. A September 2007 report by The Greater New Orleans Community Data Center, which tracks population based on U.S. Postal Service figures, found that in August 2007, just over 137,000 households received mail. That compares with about 198,000 households in July 2005, representing about 70% of pre-Katrina population. In 2010, the U.S. Census Bureau revised upward its 2008 population estimate for the city, to 336,644 inhabitants. Estimates from 2010 showed that neighborhoods that did not flood were near or even greater than 100% of their pre-Katrina populations.

Katrina displaced 800,000 people, contributing significantly to the decline. Black and African Americans, renters, the elderly, and people with low income were disproportionately affected by Katrina, compared to affluent and White residents. Those same groups also had the slowest growth rate in the city after Katrina primarily due to the rising cost of living and high crime in lower income neighborhoods. In Katrina&#x27;s aftermath, city government commissioned groups such as Bring New Orleans Back Commission, the New Orleans Neighborhood Rebuilding Plan, the Unified New Orleans Plan, and the Office of Recovery Management to contribute to plans addressing depopulation. Their ideas included shrinking the city&#x27;s footprint from before the storm, incorporating community voices into development plans, and creating green spaces, some of which incited controversy.

A 2006 study by researchers at Tulane University and the University of California, Berkeley determined that as many as 10,000 to 14,000 undocumented immigrants, many from Mexico, resided in New Orleans. In 2016, the Pew Research Center estimated at least 35,000 undocumented immigrants lived in New Orleans and its metropolitan area. The New Orleans Police Department began a new policy to &quot;no longer cooperate with federal immigration enforcement&quot; beginning on February 28, 2016.

, 90.3% of residents age five and older spoke English at home as a primary language, while 4.8% spoke Spanish, 1.9% Vietnamese, and 1.1% spoke French. In total, 9.7% population age five and older spoke a mother language other than English.

=== Race and ethnicity ===


Growing into a predominantly Black and African American city by race and ethnicity since 1990, in 2010 the racial and ethnic makeup of New Orleans was 60.2% Black and African American, 33.0% White, 2.9% Asian (1.7% Vietnamese, 0.3% Indian, 0.3% Chinese, 0.1% Filipino, 0.1% Korean), 0.0% Pacific Islander, and 1.7% people of two or more races. People of Hispanic or Latino American origin made up 5.3% of the population; 1.3% were Mexican, 1.3% Honduran, 0.4% Cuban, 0.3% Puerto Rican, and 0.3% Nicaraguan. In 2020, the racial and ethnic makeup of the city was 53.61% Black or African American, 31.61% non-Hispanic white, 0.2% American Indian and Alaska Native, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 3.71% multiracial or of another race, and 8.08% Hispanic and Latino American of any race. The growth of the Hispanic and Latino population in New Orleans proper from 2010 to 2020 reflected national demographic trends of diversification throughout regions once predominantly non-Hispanic white. Additionally, the 2020 census revealed the city now has a more diverse population than it did before Katrina, yet 21% fewer people than it had in 2000.

, the Hispanic and Latino American population had also grown in the Greater New Orleans area alongside Black and African American residents, including in Kenner, central Metairie, and Terrytown in Jefferson Parish and Eastern New Orleans and Mid-City in New Orleans proper. Janet Murguía, president and chief executive officer of the UnidosUS, stated that up to 120,000 Hispanic and Latino Americans workers lived in New Orleans. In June 2007, one study stated that the Hispanic and Latino American population had risen from 15,000, pre-Katrina, to over 50,000.
After Katrina the small Brazilian American population expanded. Portuguese speakers were the second most numerous group to take English as a second language classes in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New Orleans, after Spanish speakers. Many Brazilians worked in skilled trades such as tile and flooring, although fewer worked as day laborers than other Hispanic and Latino Americans. Many had moved from Brazilian communities in the northeastern United States, and Florida and Georgia. Brazilians settled throughout the metropolitan area; most were undocumented. In January 2008, the New Orleans Brazilian population had a mid-range estimate of 3,000 people. By 2008, Brazilians had opened many small churches, shops and restaurants catering to their community.

Among the growing Asian American community, the earliest Filipino Americans to live within the city arrived in the early 1800s. The Vietnamese American community grew to become the largest by 2010 as many fled the aftermath of the Vietnam War in the 1970s.

=== Sexual orientation and gender identity ===

New Orleans and its metropolitan area have historically been popular destinations for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender communities. In 2015, a Gallup survey determined New Orleans was one of the largest cities in the American South with a significant LGBT population. Much of the LGBT community in New Orleans lives near the Central Business District, Mid-City, and Uptown; several gay bars and nightclubs are present in those areas.

===Religion===
New Orleans&#x27; colonial history of French and Spanish settlement generated a strong Roman Catholic tradition. Catholic missions ministered to slaves and free people of color and established schools for them. In addition, many late 19th and early 20th century European immigrants, such as the Irish, some Germans, and Italians were Catholic. Within the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New Orleans (which includes not only the city but the surrounding parishes as well), 40% percent of the population was Roman Catholic since 2016. Catholicism is reflected in French and Spanish cultural traditions, including its many parochial schools, street names, architecture and festivals, including Mardi Gras. Within the city and metropolitan area, Catholicism is also reflected in the Black and African cultural traditions with Gospel Mass. The statue of Our Lady of Prompt Succor is a notable symbol of the Catholic faith in New Orleans and throughout Louisiana.

Influenced by the Bible Belt&#x27;s prominent Protestant population, New Orleans also has a sizable non-Catholic Christian demographic. Roughly the majority of Protestant Christians were Baptist, and the city proper&#x27;s largest non-Catholic bodies were the Southern Baptist Convention, the National Missionary Baptist Convention of America, non-denominationals, the National Baptist Convention, the United Methodist Church, the Episcopal Church, the African Methodist Episcopal Church, the National Baptist Convention of America, and the Church of God in Christ according to the Association of Religion Data Archives in 2020.

New Orleans displays a distinctive variety of Louisiana Voodoo, due in part to syncretism with African and Afro-Caribbean Roman Catholic beliefs. The fame of voodoo practitioner Marie Laveau contributed to this, as did New Orleans&#x27; Caribbean cultural influences. Although the tourism industry strongly associated Voodoo with the city, only a small number of people are serious adherents.

New Orleans was also home to the occultist Mary Oneida Toups, who was nicknamed the &quot;Witch Queen of New Orleans&quot;. Toups&#x27; coven, The Religious Order of Witchcraft, was the first coven to be officially recognized as a religious institution by the state of Louisiana. They would meet at Popp Fountain in City Park.

Jewish settlers, primarily Sephardim, settled in New Orleans from the early nineteenth century. Some migrated from the communities established in the colonial years in Charleston, South Carolina and Savannah, Georgia. The merchant Abraham Cohen Labatt helped found the first Jewish congregation in New Orleans in the 1830s, which became known as the Portuguese Jewish Nefutzot Yehudah congregation (he and some other members were Sephardic Jews, whose ancestors had lived in Portugal and Spain). Ashkenazi Jews from eastern Europe immigrated in the late 19th and 20th centuries.

By the beginning of the 21st century, 10,000 Jews lived in New Orleans. This number dropped to 7,000 after Hurricane Katrina, but rose again after efforts to incentivize the community&#x27;s growth resulted in the arrival of about an additional 2,000 Jews. New Orleans synagogues lost members, but most re-opened in their original locations. The exception was Congregation Beth Israel, the oldest and most prominent Orthodox synagogue in the New Orleans region. Beth Israel&#x27;s building in Lakeview was destroyed by flooding. After seven years of holding services in temporary quarters, the congregation consecrated a new synagogue on land purchased from the Reform Congregation Gates of Prayer in Metairie.

A visible religious minority, Muslims constituted 0.6% of the religious population as of 2019 according to Sperling&#x27;s BestPlaces. The Association of Religion Data Archives in 2020 estimated that there were 6,150 Muslims in the city proper. The Islamic demographic in New Orleans and its metropolitan area have been mainly made up of Middle Eastern immigrants and African Americans.

==Economy==
New Orleans operates one of the world&#x27;s largest and busiest ports and metropolitan New Orleans is a center of maritime industry. The region accounts for a significant portion of the nation&#x27;s oil refining and petrochemical production, and serves as a white-collar corporate base for onshore and offshore petroleum and natural gas production. Since the beginning of the 21st century, New Orleans has also grown into a technology hub.

New Orleans is also a center for higher learning, with over 50,000 students enrolled in the region&#x27;s eleven two- and four-year degree-granting institutions. Tulane University, a top-50 research university, is located in Uptown. Metropolitan New Orleans is a major regional hub for the health care industry and boasts a small, globally competitive manufacturing sector. The center city possesses a rapidly growing, entrepreneurial creative industries sector and is renowned for its cultural tourism. Greater New Orleans, Inc. (GNO, Inc.) acts as the first point-of-contact for regional economic development, coordinating between Louisiana&#x27;s Department of Economic Development and the various business development agencies.

===Port===
New Orleans began as a strategically located trading &quot;entrepôt&quot; and it remains, above all, a crucial transportation hub and distribution center for waterborne commerce. The Port of New Orleans is the fifth-largest in the United States based on cargo volume, and second-largest in the state after the Port of South Louisiana. It is the twelfth-largest in the U.S. based on cargo value. The Port of South Louisiana, also located in the New Orleans area, is the world&#x27;s busiest in terms of bulk tonnage. When combined with Port of New Orleans, it forms the 4th-largest port system in volume. Many shipbuilding, shipping, logistics, freight forwarding and commodity brokerage firms either are based in metropolitan New Orleans or maintain a local presence. Examples include Intermarine, Bisso Towboat, Northrop Grumman Ship Systems, Trinity Yachts, Expeditors International, Bollinger Shipyards, IMTT, International Coffee Corp, Boasso America, Transoceanic Shipping, Transportation Consultants Inc., Dupuy Storage &amp; Forwarding and Silocaf. The largest coffee-roasting plant in the world, operated by Folgers, is located in New Orleans East.

New Orleans is located near to the Gulf of Mexico and its many oil rigs. Louisiana ranks fifth among states in oil production and eighth in reserves. It has two of the four Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) storage facilities: West Hackberry in Cameron Parish and Bayou Choctaw in Iberville Parish. The area hosts 17 petroleum refineries, with a combined crude oil distillation capacity of nearly , the second highest after Texas. Louisiana&#x27;s numerous ports include the Louisiana Offshore Oil Port (LOOP), which is capable of receiving the largest oil tankers. Given the quantity of oil imports, Louisiana is home to many major pipelines: Crude Oil (Exxon, Chevron, BP, Texaco, Shell, Scurloch-Permian, Mid-Valley, Calumet, Conoco, Koch Industries, Unocal, U.S. Dept. of Energy, Locap); Product (TEPPCO Partners, Colonial, Plantation, Explorer, Texaco, Collins); and Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Dixie, TEPPCO, Black Lake, Koch, Chevron, Dynegy, Kinder Morgan Energy Partners, Dow Chemical Company, Bridgeline, FMP, Tejas, Texaco, UTP). Several energy companies have regional headquarters in the area, including Shell plc, Eni and Chevron. Other energy producers and oilfield services companies are headquartered in the city or region, and the sector supports a large professional services base of specialized engineering and design firms, as well as a term office for the federal government&#x27;s Minerals Management Service.

===Business===
The city is the home to a single Fortune 500 company: Entergy, a power generation utility and nuclear power plant operations specialist. After Katrina, the city lost its other Fortune 500 company, Freeport-McMoRan, when it merged its copper and gold exploration unit with an Arizona company and relocated that division to Phoenix. Its McMoRan Exploration affiliate remains headquartered in New Orleans.

Companies with significant operations or headquarters in New Orleans include: Pan American Life Insurance, Pool Corp, Rolls-Royce, Newpark Resources, AT&amp;T, TurboSquid, iSeatz, IBM, Navtech, Superior Energy Services, Textron Marine &amp; Land Systems, McDermott International, Pellerin Milnor, Lockheed Martin, Imperial Trading, Laitram, Harrah&#x27;s Entertainment, Stewart Enterprises, Edison Chouest Offshore, Zatarain&#x27;s, Waldemar S. Nelson &amp; Co., Whitney National Bank, Capital One, Tidewater Marine, Popeyes Chicken &amp; Biscuits, Parsons Brinckerhoff, MWH Global, CH2M Hill, Energy Partners Ltd, The Receivables Exchange, GE Capital, and Smoothie King.

Entrepreneurship is encouraged, with a number of initiatives designed to support small business and start-ups, including Entrepreneurs&#x27; Row and the New Orleans Startup Fund.

===Tourist and convention business===
Tourism is a staple of the city&#x27;s economy. Perhaps more visible than any other sector, New Orleans&#x27; tourist and convention industry is a $5.5 billion industry that accounts for 40 percent of city tax revenues. In 2004, the hospitality industry employed 85,000 people, making it the city&#x27;s top economic sector as measured by employment. New Orleans also hosts the World Cultural Economic Forum (WCEF). The forum, held annually at the New Orleans Morial Convention Center, is directed toward promoting cultural and economic development opportunities through the strategic convening of cultural ambassadors and leaders from around the world. The first WCEF took place in October 2008.

===Federal and military agencies===

Federal agencies and the Armed forces operate significant facilities there. The U.S. Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals operates at the US. Courthouse downtown. NASA&#x27;s Michoud Assembly Facility is located in New Orleans East and has multiple tenants including Lockheed Martin and Boeing. It is a huge manufacturing complex that produced the external fuel tanks for the Space Shuttles, the Saturn V first stage, the Integrated Truss Structure of the International Space Station, and is now used for the construction of NASA&#x27;s Space Launch System. The rocket factory lies within the enormous New Orleans Regional Business Park, also home to the National Finance Center, operated by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the Crescent Crown distribution center. Other large governmental installations include the U.S. Navy&#x27;s Space and Naval Warfare (SPAWAR) Systems Command, located within the University of New Orleans Research and Technology Park in Gentilly, Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base New Orleans; and the headquarters for the Marine Force Reserves in Federal City in Algiers.

==Culture and contemporary life==
===Tourism===
New Orleans has many visitor attractions, from the world-renowned French Quarter to St. Charles Avenue, (home of Tulane and Loyola universities, the historic Pontchartrain Hotel and many 19th-century mansions) to Magazine Street with its boutique stores and antique shops.

According to current travel guides, New Orleans is one of the top ten most-visited cities in the United States; 10.1 million visitors came to New Orleans in 2004. Prior to Katrina, 265 hotels with 38,338 rooms operated in the Greater New Orleans Area. In May 2007, that had declined to some 140 hotels and motels with over 31,000 rooms.

A 2009 &quot;Travel + Leisure&quot; poll of &quot;America&#x27;s Favorite Cities&quot; ranked New Orleans first in ten categories, the most first-place rankings of the 30 cities included. According to the poll, New Orleans was the best U.S. city as a spring break destination and for &quot;wild weekends&quot;, stylish boutique hotels, cocktail hours, singles/bar scenes, live music/concerts and bands, antique and vintage shops, cafés/coffee bars, neighborhood restaurants, and people watching. The city ranked second for: friendliness (behind Charleston, South Carolina), gay-friendliness (behind San Francisco), bed and breakfast hotels/inns, and ethnic food. However, the city placed near the bottom in cleanliness, safety and as a family destination.

The French Quarter (known locally as &quot;the Quarter&quot; or &quot;Vieux Carré&quot;), which was the colonial-era city and is bounded by the Mississippi River, Rampart Street, Canal Street, and Esplanade Avenue, contains popular hotels, bars and nightclubs. Notable tourist attractions in the Quarter include Bourbon Street, Jackson Square, St. Louis Cathedral, the French Market (including Café du Monde, famous for café au lait and beignets) and Preservation Hall. Also in the French Quarter is the old New Orleans Mint, a former branch of the United States Mint which now operates as a museum, and The Historic New Orleans Collection, a museum and research center housing art and artifacts relating to the history and the Gulf South.

Close to the Quarter is the Tremé community, which contains the New Orleans Jazz National Historical Park and the New Orleans African American Museum—a site which is listed on the Louisiana African American Heritage Trail.

The &quot;Natchez&quot; is an authentic steamboat with a calliope that cruises the length of the city twice daily. Unlike most other places in the United States, New Orleans has become widely known for its elegant decay. The city&#x27;s historic cemeteries and their distinct above-ground tombs are attractions in themselves, the oldest and most famous of which, Saint Louis Cemetery, greatly resembles Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.
The National WWII Museum offers a multi-building odyssey through the history of the Pacific and European theaters. Nearby, Confederate Memorial Hall Museum, the oldest continually operating museum in Louisiana (although under renovation since Hurricane Katrina), contains the second-largest collection of Confederate memorabilia. Art museums include the Contemporary Arts Center, the New Orleans Museum of Art (NOMA) in City Park, and the Ogden Museum of Southern Art.

New Orleans is home to the Audubon Nature Institute (which consists of Audubon Park, the Audubon Zoo, the Aquarium of the Americas and the Audubon Insectarium), and home to gardens which include Longue Vue House and Gardens and the New Orleans Botanical Garden. City Park, one of the country&#x27;s most expansive and visited urban parks, has one of the largest stands of oak trees in the world.

Other points of interest can be found in the surrounding areas. Many wetlands are found nearby, including Honey Island Swamp and Barataria Preserve. Chalmette Battlefield and National Cemetery, located just south of the city, is the site of the 1815 Battle of New Orleans.

===Entertainment and performing arts===


The New Orleans area is home to numerous annual celebrations. The most well known is Carnival, or Mardi Gras. Carnival officially begins on the Feast of the Epiphany, also known in some Christian traditions as the &quot;Twelfth Night&quot; of Christmas. &quot;Mardi Gras&quot; (French for &quot;Fat Tuesday&quot;), the final and grandest day of traditional Catholic festivities, is the last Tuesday before the Christian liturgical season of Lent, which commences on Ash Wednesday.

The largest of the city&#x27;s many music festivals is the New Orleans Jazz &amp; Heritage Festival. Commonly referred to simply as &quot;Jazz Fest&quot;, it is one of the nation&#x27;s largest music festivals. The festival features a variety of music, including both native Louisiana and international artists. Along with Jazz Fest, New Orleans&#x27; Voodoo Experience (&quot;Voodoo Fest&quot;) and the Essence Music Festival also feature local and international artists.

Other major festivals include Southern Decadence, the French Quarter Festival, and the Tennessee Williams/New Orleans Literary Festival. The American playwright lived and wrote in New Orleans early in his career, and set his play, &quot;Streetcar Named Desire,&quot; there.

In 2002, Louisiana began offering tax incentives for film and television production. This has resulted in a substantial increase in activity and brought the nickname of &quot;Hollywood South&quot; for New Orleans. Films produced in and around the city include &quot;Ray&quot;, &quot;Runaway Jury&quot;, &quot;The Pelican Brief&quot;, &quot;Glory Road&quot;, &quot;All the King&#x27;s Men&quot;, &quot;Déjà Vu&quot;, &quot;Last Holiday&quot;, &quot;The Curious Case of Benjamin Button&quot;, &quot;12 Years a Slave&quot;, and &quot;Project Power&quot;. In 2006, work began on the Louisiana Film &amp; Television studio complex, based in the Tremé neighborhood. Louisiana began to offer similar tax incentives for music and theater productions in 2007, and some commentators began to refer to New Orleans as &quot;Broadway South&quot;.

The first theatre in New Orleans was the French-language Theatre de la Rue Saint Pierre, which opened in 1792. The first opera in New Orleans was performed there in 1796. In the nineteenth century, the city was the home of two of America&#x27;s most important venues for French opera, the Théâtre d&#x27;Orléans and later the French Opera House. Today, opera is performed by the New Orleans Opera. The Marigny Opera House is home to the Marigny Opera Ballet and also hosts opera, jazz, and classical music performances.

New Orleans has long been a significant center for music, showcasing its intertwined European, African and Latino American cultures. The city&#x27;s unique musical heritage was born in its colonial and early American days from a unique blending of European musical instruments with African rhythms. As the only North American city to have allowed slaves to gather in public and play their native music (largely in Congo Square, now located within Louis Armstrong Park), New Orleans gave birth in the early 20th century to an epochal indigenous music: jazz. Soon, African American brass bands formed, beginning a century-long tradition. The Louis Armstrong Park area, near the French Quarter in Tremé, contains the New Orleans Jazz National Historical Park. The city&#x27;s music was later also significantly influenced by Acadiana, home of Cajun and Zydeco music, and by Delta blues.

New Orleans&#x27; unique musical culture is on display in its traditional funerals. A spin on military funerals, New Orleans&#x27; traditional funerals feature sad music (mostly dirges and hymns) in processions on the way to the cemetery and happier music (hot jazz) on the way back. Until the 1990s, most locals preferred to call these &quot;funerals with music&quot;. Visitors to the city have long dubbed them &quot;jazz funerals&quot;.

Much later in its musical development, New Orleans was home to a distinctive brand of rhythm and blues that contributed greatly to the growth of rock and roll. An example of the New Orleans&#x27; sound in the 1960s is the No. 1 U.S. hit &quot;Chapel of Love&quot; by the Dixie Cups, a song which knocked the Beatles out of the top spot on the Billboard Hot 100. New Orleans became a hotbed for funk music in the 1960s and 1970s, and by the late 1980s, it had developed its own localized variant of hip hop, called bounce music. While not commercially successful outside of the Deep South, bounce music was immensely popular in poorer neighborhoods throughout the 1990s.

A cousin of bounce, New Orleans hip hop achieved commercial success locally and internationally, producing Lil Wayne, Master P, Birdman, Juvenile, Suicideboys, Cash Money Records and No Limit Records. Additionally, the popularity of cowpunk, a fast form of southern rock, originated with the help of several local bands, such as The Radiators, Better Than Ezra, Cowboy Mouth and Dash Rip Rock. Throughout the 1990s, many sludge metal bands started. New Orleans&#x27; heavy metal bands such as Eyehategod, Soilent Green, Crowbar, and Down incorporated styles such as hardcore punk, doom metal, and southern rock to create an original and heady brew of swampy and aggravated metal that has largely avoided standardization.

New Orleans is the southern terminus of the famed Highway 61, made musically famous by musician Bob Dylan in his song, &quot;Highway 61 Revisited&quot;.

===Cuisine===
New Orleans is world-famous for its cuisine. The indigenous cuisine is distinctive and influential. New Orleans food combined local Creole, haute Creole and New Orleans French cuisines. Local ingredients, French, Spanish, Italian, African, Native American, Cajun, Chinese, and a hint of Cuban traditions combine to produce a truly unique and easily recognizable New Orleans flavor.

New Orleans is known for specialties including beignets (locally pronounced like &quot;ben-yays&quot;), square-shaped fried dough that could be called &quot;French doughnuts&quot; (served with &quot;café au lait&quot; made with a blend of coffee and chicory rather than only coffee); and po&#x27; boy and Italian muffuletta sandwiches; Gulf oysters on the half-shell, fried oysters, boiled crawfish and other seafood; étouffée, jambalaya, gumbo and other Creole dishes; and the Monday favorite of red beans and rice (Louis Armstrong often signed his letters, &quot;Red beans and ricely yours&quot;). Another New Orleans specialty is the praline , a candy made with brown sugar, granulated sugar, cream, butter, and pecans. The city offers notable street food including the Asian inspired beef Yaka mein.

===Dialect===

New Orleans developed a distinctive local dialect that is neither Cajun English nor the stereotypical Southern accent that is often misportrayed by film and television actors. Like earlier Southern Englishes, it features frequent deletion of the pre-consonantal &quot;r&quot;, though the local white dialect also came to be quite similar to New York accents. No consensus describes how this happened, but it likely resulted from New Orleans&#x27; geographic isolation by water and the fact that the city was a major immigration port throughout the 19th century and early 20th century. Specifically, many members of European immigrant families originally raised in the cities of the Northeast, namely New York, moved to New Orleans during this time frame, bringing their Northeastern accents along with their Irish, Italian (especially Sicilian), German, and Jewish culture.

One of the strongest varieties of the New Orleans accent is sometimes identified as the Yat dialect, from the greeting &quot;Where y&#x27;at?&quot; This distinctive accent is dying out in the city, but remains strong in the surrounding parishes.

Less visibly, various ethnic groups throughout the area have retained distinct language traditions. The French-speaking community has had a cultural center, the Alliance Française of New Orleans, since 1984. The association is a chapter of the international Alliance Française organization and promotes French language and culture in New Orleans and the surrounding region. Since Louisiana became the first U.S. state to join the in 2018, New Orleans has reemerged as an important center for the state&#x27;s francophone and creolophone cultures and languages, as seen in new organizations such as the Nous Foundation. Although rare, Louisiana French and Louisiana Creole are still spoken in the city. There is also Louisiana-Canarian Spanish dialect, the Isleño Spanish, spoken by the Isleño people and older members of the population.

==Sports==


New Orleans&#x27; professional sports teams include the 2009 Super Bowl XLIV champion New Orleans Saints (NFL) and the New Orleans Pelicans (NBA). It is also home to the Big Easy Rollergirls, an all-female flat track roller derby team, and the New Orleans Blaze, a women&#x27;s football team. New Orleans is also home to two NCAA Division I athletic programs, the Tulane Green Wave of the American Athletic Conference and the UNO Privateers of the Southland Conference.

The Caesars Superdome is the home of the Saints, the Sugar Bowl, and other prominent events. It has hosted the Super Bowl a record eight times (1978, 1981, 1986, 1990, 1997, 2002, 2013, and 2025). The Smoothie King Center is the home of the Pelicans, VooDoo, and many events that are not large enough to need the Superdome. New Orleans is also home to the Fair Grounds Race Course, the nation&#x27;s third-oldest thoroughbred track. The city&#x27;s Lakefront Arena has also been home to sporting events.

Each year New Orleans plays host to the Sugar Bowl, the New Orleans Bowl, the Bayou Classic, and the Zurich Classic, a golf tournament on the PGA Tour. In addition, it has often hosted major sporting events that have no permanent home, such as the Super Bowl, ArenaBowl, NBA All-Star Game, BCS National Championship Game, and the NCAA Final Four. The Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll Mardi Gras Marathon and the Crescent City Classic are two annual road running events.

In 2017, Major League Rugby had its inaugural season, and NOLA Gold were one of the first teams in the league. They play at the Gold Mine on Airline, a former minor league baseball stadium in the suburb of Metairie. In 2022, a consortium started an attempt to bring professional soccer to New Orleans, hoping to place teams in the male USL Championship and women&#x27;s USL Super League by 2025.

==National protected areas==
* Bayou Sauvage National Wildlife Refuge
* Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve
* New Orleans Jazz National Historical Park
* Vieux Carre Historic District

==Government==












The city of New Orleans is a political subdivision of the U.S. state of Louisiana. The city and the parish of Orleans operate as a merged city-parish government. The original city was composed of what are now the 1st through 9th wards. The city of Lafayette (including the Garden District) was added in 1852 as the 10th and 11th wards. In 1870, Jefferson City, including Faubourg Bouligny and much of the Audubon and University areas, was annexed as the 12th, 13th, and 14th wards. Algiers, on the west bank of the Mississippi, was also annexed in 1870, becoming the 15th ward.

New Orleans has a mayor-council government, following a home rule charter adopted in 1954, as later amended. The city council consists of seven members, five elected from single-member districts and two members elected at-large, that is, across the city-parish. LaToya Cantrell assumed the mayor&#x27;s office in 2018 as the first female mayor of the city. An ordinance in 2006 established an Office of Inspector General to review city government activities.

New Orleans&#x27; government is largely centralized in the city council and mayor&#x27;s office, but it maintains earlier systems from when various sections of the city managed their affairs separately. For example, New Orleans had seven elected tax assessors, each with their own staff, representing various districts of the city, rather than one centralized office. A constitutional amendment passed on November 7, 2006, consolidated the seven assessors into one in 2010.

The City of New Orleans, used Archon Information Systems software and services to host multiple online tax sales. The first tax sale was held after Hurricane Katrina. The New Orleans government operates both a fire department and the New Orleans Emergency Medical Services.

New Orleans is the only city in Louisiana that refuses to pay court-ordered judgments when it loses a case that were awarded to the other party. The city uses a provision in the Louisiana Constitution that prohibits the seizure of a city&#x27;s property to pay a judgment when it loses a lawsuit. According to an article, &quot;The constitution says the funds can&#x27;t be seized and can only be paid out if the government appropriates the money. In other words, if the City of New Orleans doesn&#x27;t budget the funds for judgments, no judge can force the city to pay.&quot; Only if the city council chooses to vote to pay a judgment can the other party be paid. Since the city cannot be forced to pay judgments unless it chooses to do so, it simply does not pay. More than $36 million in over 500 unpaid judgments issued against the city are simply ignored, some going as far back as 1996.

The Orleans Parish Civil Sheriff&#x27;s Office serves papers involving lawsuits, provides court security, and operates the city&#x27;s correctional facilities, including Orleans Parish Prison. The sheriff&#x27;s office shares legal jurisdiction with the New Orleans Police Department and provides it with backup on an as-needed basis. Before 2010, New Orleans (and all other parishes in Louisiana) had separate criminal and civil sheriff&#x27;s offices, corresponding to the separate criminal and civil courts: these were merged in 2010 by Louisiana Revised Statute 33:1500. the sheriff is Susan Hutson, who defeated 17-year incumbent Marlin Gusman in the 2021 New Orleans City Election.

==Crime==

Crime is a notable ongoing problem in New Orleans. As in comparable U.S. cities, the incidence of homicide and other violent crimes is usually highly concentrated in certain lower income neighborhoods. Arrested offenders in New Orleans are almost exclusively black males from impoverished communities: in 2011, 97% were black and 95% were male; 91% of victims were black as well. The city&#x27;s murder rate has been historically high and consistently among the highest rates nationwide since the 1970s. From 1994 to 2013, New Orleans was the country&#x27;s &quot;Murder Capital&quot;, annually averaging over 200 murders. The first record was broken in 1979 when the city reached 242 homicides. The record was broken again reaching 250 by 1989 to 345 by the end of 1991. By 1993, New Orleans had 395 murders: 80.5 for every 100,000 residents. In 1994, the city was officially named the &quot;Murder Capital of America&quot;, hitting a historic peak of 424 murders. The murder count was one of the highest in the world and surpassed that of such cities as Gary, Indiana, Washington, D.C., and Baltimore. In 1999, the city&#x27;s murder rate dropped down to a low of 158 and climbed to the high 200s in the early 2000s. Between 2000 and 2004, New Orleans had the highest homicide rate per capita of any city in the U.S., with 59 people killed per year per 100,000 citizens.

In 2006, with nearly half the population gone and widespread disruption and dislocation because of deaths and refugee relocations from Hurricane Katrina, the city hit another record of homicides. It was ranked as the most dangerous city in the country. By 2009, there was a 17% decrease in violent crime, a decrease seen in other cities across the country. But the homicide rate remained among the highest in the United States, at between 55 and 64 per 100,000 residents. In 2010, New Orleans&#x27; homicide rate dropped to 49.1 per 100,000, but increased again in 2012, to 53.2, the highest rate among cities of 250,000 population or larger.

The violent crime rate is a key issue in every modern mayoral race. In January 2007, several thousand New Orleans residents marched to City Hall for a rally demanding police and city leaders tackle the crime problem. Then-Mayor Ray Nagin said he was &quot;totally and solely focused&quot; on addressing the problem. Later, the city implemented checkpoints during late night hours in problem areas. The murder rate climbed 14% in 2011 to 57.88 per 100,000 rising to No. 21 in the world. In 2016, according to annual crime statistics released by the New Orleans Police Department (NOPD), 176 were murdered. In 2017, New Orleans had the highest rate of gun violence, surpassing the more populated Chicago and Detroit. In 2020, murders increased 68% from 2019 with a total of 202 murders. Criminal justice observers blamed impacts from COVID-19 and changes in police strategies for the uptick. In 2022, New Orleans&#x27; homicide rate skyrocketed, leading every major city, hence the city again being declared as the &quot;Murder Capital of America&quot;. The 2022 city homicide count increased to 280 which was a 26-year high. The NOPD dropped to under 1,000 officers in 2022 which meant the department was severely understaffed for the city&#x27;s population. NOPD is actively working to reduce violent crime by offering attractive incentives to recruit and retain more officers.

==Education==

===Colleges and universities===

New Orleans has the highest concentration of colleges and universities in Louisiana and one of the highest in the Southern United States. New Orleans also has the third highest concentration of historically black collegiate institutions in the U.S.
Colleges and universities based within the city include:
* Tulane University
* Loyola University New Orleans
* University of New Orleans
* Xavier University of Louisiana
* Southern University at New Orleans
* Dillard University
* Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
* University of Holy Cross
* Notre Dame Seminary
* New Orleans Baptist Theological Seminary
* Delgado Community College
* William Carey College School of Nursing
===Primary and secondary schools===

Orleans Parish School Board (OPSB), also known as New Orleans Public Schools (NOPS), is the public school district for the entire city. Katrina was a watershed moment for the school system. Pre-Katrina, NOPS was one of the area&#x27;s largest systems (along with the Jefferson Parish public school system). It was also the lowest-performing school district in Louisiana. According to researchers Carl L. Bankston and Stephen J. Caldas, only 12 of the 103 public schools within the city limits showed reasonably good performance.

Following Hurricane Katrina, the state of Louisiana took over most of the schools within the system (all schools that matched a nominal &quot;worst-performing&quot; metric). Many of these schools (and others) were subsequently granted operating charters giving them administrative independence from the Orleans Parish School Board, the Recovery School District or the Louisiana Board of Elementary and Secondary Education (BESE). At the start of the 2014 school year, all public school students in the NOPS system attended these independent public charter schools, the nation&#x27;s first to do so.

The charter schools made significant and sustained gains in student achievement, led by outside operators such as KIPP, the Algiers Charter School Network, and the Capital One–University of New Orleans Charter School Network. An October 2009 assessment demonstrated continued growth in the academic performance of public schools. Considering the scores of all public schools in New Orleans gives an overall school district performance score of 70.6. This score represents a 24% improvement over an equivalent pre-Katrina (2004) metric, when a district score of 56.9 was posted. Notably, this score of 70.6 approaches the score (78.4) posted in 2009 by the adjacent, suburban Jefferson Parish public school system, though that system&#x27;s performance score is itself below the state average of 91.

One particular change was that parents could choose which school to enroll their children in, rather than attending the school nearest them.

===Libraries===
Academic and public libraries as well as archives in New Orleans include Monroe Library at Loyola University, Howard-Tilton Memorial Library at Tulane University, the Law Library of Louisiana, and the Earl K. Long Library at the University of New Orleans.

The New Orleans Public Library operates in 13 locations. The main library includes a Louisiana Division that houses city archives and special collections.

Other research archives are located at the Historic New Orleans Collection and the Old U.S. Mint.

An independently operated lending library called Iron Rail Book Collective specializes in radical and hard-to-find books. The library contains over 8,000 titles and is open to the public.

The Louisiana Historical Association was founded in New Orleans in 1889. It operated first at Howard Memorial Library. A separate Memorial Hall for it was later added to Howard Library, designed by New Orleans architect Thomas Sully.

==Media==

Historically, the major newspaper in the area was &quot;The Times-Picayune&quot;. The paper made headlines of its own in 2012 when owner Advance Publications cut its print schedule to three days each week, instead focusing its efforts on its website, NOLA.com. That action briefly made New Orleans the largest city in the country without a daily newspaper, until the Baton Rouge newspaper &quot;The Advocate&quot; began a New Orleans edition in September 2012. In June 2013, the &quot;Times-Picayune&quot; resumed daily printing with a condensed newsstand tabloid edition, nicknamed &quot;TP Street&quot;, which is published on the three days each week that its namesake broadsheet edition is not printed (the Picayune has not returned to daily delivery). With the resumption of daily print editions from the &quot;Times-Picayune&quot; and the launch of the New Orleans edition of &quot;The Advocate&quot;, now &quot;The New Orleans Advocate&quot;, the city had two daily newspapers for the first time since the afternoon &quot;States-Item&quot; ceased publication on May 31, 1980. In 2019, the papers merged to form &quot;The Times-Picayune/The New Orleans Advocate&quot;.

In addition to the daily newspaper, weekly publications include &quot;The Louisiana Weekly&quot; and &quot;Gambit Weekly&quot;. Also in wide circulation is the &quot;Clarion Herald&quot;, the newspaper of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New Orleans.

Greater New Orleans is the 54th largest designated market area (DMA) in the U.S., serving at least 566,960 homes. Major television network affiliates serving the area include:

* 4 WWL (CBS)
* 6 WDSU (NBC)
* 8 WVUE (Fox)
* 12 WYES (PBS)
* 20 WHNO (LeSEA)
* 26 WGNO (ABC)
* 32 WLAE (Independent)
* 38 WNOL (The CW)
* 42 KGLA (Telemundo)
* 49 WPXL (Ion)
* 54 WUPL (MyNetworkTV)
WWOZ, the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Station, broadcasts modern and traditional jazz, blues, rhythm and blues, brass band, gospel, cajun, zydeco, Caribbean, Latin, Brazilian, African and bluegrass 24 hours per day.

WTUL is Tulane University&#x27;s radio station. Its programming includes 20th century classical, reggae, jazz, showtunes, indie rock, electronic music, soul/funk, goth, punk, hip hop, New Orleans music, opera, folk, hardcore, Americana, country, blues, Latin, cheese, techno, local, world, ska, swing and big band, kids&#x27; shows, and news programming. WTUL is listener-supported and non-commercial. The disc jockeys are volunteers, many of them college students.

Louisiana&#x27;s film and television tax credits spurred growth in the television industry, although to a lesser degree than in the film industry. Many films and advertisements were set there, along with television programs such as &quot;The Real World: New Orleans&quot; in 2000, &quot;The Real World: Back to New Orleans&quot; in 2009 and 2010, and &quot;Bad Girls Club: New Orleans&quot; in 2011.

Two radio stations that were influential in promoting New Orleans–based bands and singers were 50,000-watt WNOE (1060) and 10,000-watt WTIX (690 AM). These two stations competed head-to-head from the late 1950s to the late 1970s.

==Transportation==

===Public transportation===
Hurricane Katrina devastated transit service in 2005. The New Orleans Regional Transit Authority (RTA) was quicker to restore the streetcars to service, while bus service had only been restored to 35% of pre-Katrina levels as recently as the end of 2013. During the same period, streetcars arrived at an average of once every seventeen minutes, compared to bus frequencies of once every thirty-eight minutes. The same priority was demonstrated in RTA&#x27;s spending, increasing the proportion of its budget devoted to streetcars to more than three times compared to its pre-Katrina budget. Through the end of 2017, counting both streetcar and bus trips, only 51% of service had been restored to pre-Katrina levels.

In 2017, the New Orleans Regional Transit Authority began operation on the extension of the RampartSt. Claude streetcar line. Another change to transit service that year was the re-routing of the 15 Freret and 28 Martin Luther King bus routes to Canal Street. These increased the number of jobs accessible by a thirty-minute walk or transit ride: from 83,722 in 2016 to 89,216 in 2017. This resulted in a regional increase in such job access by more than a full percentage point.

====Streetcars====


New Orleans has four active streetcar lines:
* The St. Charles Streetcar Line is the oldest continuously operating streetcar line in the U.S. The line first operated as local rail service in 1835 between Carrollton and downtown New Orleans. Operated by the Carrollton &amp; New Orleans R.R. Co., the locomotives were then powered by steam engines, and a one-way fare cost 25 cents. Each car is a historic landmark. It runs from Canal Street to the other end of St. Charles Avenue, then turns right into South Carrollton Avenue to its terminal at Carrollton and Claiborne.
* The Riverfront Streetcar Line runs parallel to the river from Esplanade Street through the French Quarter to Canal Street to the Convention Center above Julia Street in the Arts District.
* The Canal Streetcar Line uses the Riverfront line tracks from the intersection of Canal Street and Poydras Street, down Canal Street, then branches off and ends at the cemeteries at City Park Avenue, with a spur running from the intersection of Canal and Carrollton Avenue to the entrance of City Park at Esplanade, near the entrance to the New Orleans Museum of Art.
* The Rampart–Loyola Streetcar Line opened on January 28, 2013, as the &quot;Loyola-UPT Streetcar Line&quot; running along Loyola Avenue from New Orleans Union Passenger Terminal to Canal Street, then continuing along Canal Street to the river, and on weekends on the Riverfront line tracks to French Market. The French Quarter Rail Expansion extended the line from the Loyola Avenue/Canal Street intersection along Rampart Street and St. Claude Avenue to Elysian Fields Avenue. It no longer runs along Canal Street to the river, or on weekends on the Riverfront line tracks to French Market.

The city&#x27;s streetcars were featured in the Tennessee Williams play &quot;A Streetcar Named Desire&quot;. The streetcar line to Desire Street became a bus line in 1948.

====Buses====
Public transportation is operated by the New Orleans Regional Transit Authority (&quot;RTA&quot;). Many bus routes connect the city and suburban areas. The RTA lost 200+ buses in the flood. Some of the replacement buses operate on biodiesel. The Jefferson Parish Department of Transit Administration operates Jefferson Transit, which provides service between the city and its suburbs.

====Ferries====

New Orleans has had continuous ferry service since 1827, operating three routes as of 2017. The Canal Street Ferry (or Algiers Ferry) connects downtown New Orleans at the foot of Canal Street with the National Historic Landmark District of Algiers Point across the Mississippi (&quot;West Bank&quot; in local parlance). It services passenger vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians. This same terminal also serves the Canal Street/Gretna Ferry, connecting Gretna, Louisiana for pedestrians and bicyclists only. A third auto/bicycle/pedestrian connects Chalmette, Louisiana and Lower Algiers.

===Bicycling===
The city&#x27;s flat landscape, simple street grid and mild winters facilitate bicycle ridership, helping to make New Orleans eighth among U.S. cities in its rate of bicycle and pedestrian transportation as of 2010, and sixth in terms of the percentage of bicycling commuters. New Orleans is located at the start of the Mississippi River Trail, a bicycle path that stretches from the city&#x27;s Audubon Park to Minnesota. Since Katrina the city has actively sought to promote bicycling by constructing a $1.5 million bike trail from Mid-City to Lake Pontchartrain, and by adding over of bicycle lanes to various streets, including St. Charles Avenue. In 2009, Tulane University contributed to these efforts by converting the main street through its Uptown campus, McAlister Place, into a pedestrian mall open to bicycle traffic. The Lafitte Greenway bicycle and pedestrian trail opened in 2015, and is ultimately planned to extend from the French Quarter to Lakeview. New Orleans has been recognized for its abundance of uniquely decorated and uniquely designed bicycles.

===Roads===

New Orleans is served by Interstate 10, Interstate 610 and Interstate 510. I-10 travels east–west through the city as the Pontchartrain Expressway. In New Orleans East it is known as the Eastern Expressway. I-610 provides a direct shortcut for traffic passing through New Orleans via I-10, allowing that traffic to bypass I-10&#x27;s southward curve.

In addition to the interstates, U.S. 90 travels through the city, while U.S. 61 terminates downtown. In addition, U.S. 11 terminates in the eastern portion of the city.

New Orleans is home to many bridges; Crescent City Connection is perhaps the most notable. It serves as New Orleans&#x27; major bridge across the Mississippi, providing a connection between the city&#x27;s downtown on the eastbank and its westbank suburbs. Other Mississippi crossings are the Huey P. Long Bridge, carrying U.S. 90 and the Hale Boggs Memorial Bridge, carrying Interstate 310.

The Twin Span Bridge, a five-mile (8 km) causeway in eastern New Orleans, carries I-10 across Lake Pontchartrain. Also in eastern New Orleans, Interstate 510/LA 47 travels across the Intracoastal Waterway/Mississippi River-Gulf Outlet Canal via the Paris Road Bridge, connecting New Orleans East and suburban Chalmette.

The tolled Lake Pontchartrain Causeway, consisting of two parallel bridges are, at long, the longest bridges in the world. Built in the 1950s (southbound span) and 1960s (northbound span), the bridges connect New Orleans with its suburbs on the north shore of Lake Pontchartrain via Metairie.

===Taxi service===
United Cab is the city&#x27;s largest taxi service, with a fleet of over 300 cabs. It has operated 365 days a year since its establishment in 1938, with the exception of the month after Hurricane Katrina, in which operations were temporarily shut down due to disruptions in radio service.

United Cab&#x27;s fleet was once larger than 450 cabs, but has been reduced in recent years due to competition from services like Uber and Lyft, according to owner Syed Kazmi. In January 2016, New Orleans-based sweet shop Sucré approached United Cab with to deliver its king cakes locally on-demand. Sucré saw this partnership as a way to alleviate some of the financial pressure being placed on taxi services due to Uber&#x27;s presence in the city.

===Airports===
The metropolitan area is served by the Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport, located in the suburb of Kenner. Regional airports include the Lakefront Airport, Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base New Orleans (Callender Field) in the suburb of Belle Chasse and Southern Seaplane Airport, also located in Belle Chasse. Southern Seaplane has a runway for wheeled planes and a water runway for seaplanes.

Armstrong International is the busiest airport in Louisiana and the only to handle scheduled international passenger flights. As of 2018, more than 13 million passengers passed through Armstrong, on nonstops flights from more than 57 destinations, including foreign nonstops from the United Kingdom, Germany, Canada, Mexico, Jamaica and the Dominican Republic.

===Rail===
The city is served by Amtrak. The New Orleans Union Passenger Terminal is the central rail depot and is served by the &quot;Crescent&quot;, operating between New Orleans and New York City; the &quot;City of New Orleans&quot;, operating between New Orleans and Chicago and the &quot;Sunset Limited&quot;, operating between New Orleans and Los Angeles. Up until August 2005 (when Hurricane Katrina struck), the &quot;Sunset Limited&#x27;s&quot; route continued east to Orlando.

With the strategic benefits of both the port and its double-track Mississippi River crossings, the city attracted all six of the Class I railroads in North America: Union Pacific Railroad, BNSF Railway, Norfolk Southern Railway, Canadian Pacific Kansas City, CSX Transportation and Canadian National Railway. The New Orleans Public Belt Railroad provides interchange services between the railroads.

===Modal characteristics===
According to the 2016 American Community Survey, 67.4% of working city of New Orleans residents commuted by driving alone, 9.7% carpooled, 7.3% used public transportation, and 4.9% walked. About 5% used all other forms of transportation, including taxicab, motorcycle, and bicycle. About 5.7% of working New Orleans residents worked at home.

Many city of New Orleans households own no personal automobiles. In 2015, 18.8% of New Orleans households were without a car, which increased to 20.2% in 2016. The national average was 8.7 percent in 2016. New Orleans averaged 1.26 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8 per household.

New Orleans ranks high among cities in terms of the percentage of working residents who commute by walking or bicycling. In 2013, 5% of working people from New Orleans commuted by walking and 2.8% commuted by cycling. During the same period, New Orleans ranked thirteenth for percentage of workers who commuted by walking or biking among cities not included within the fifty most populous cities. Only nine of the most fifty most populous cities had a higher percentage of commuters who walked or biked than did New Orleans in 2013.

==Notable people==
==Sister cities==
Sister cities of New Orleans are:

* Cap-Haïtien, Haiti
* Caracas, Venezuela
* Durban, South Africa
* Innsbruck, Austria
* Isola del Liri, Italy
* Juan-les-Pins (Antibes), France
* Maracaibo, Venezuela
* Matsue, Japan
* Mérida, Mexico
* Orléans, France
* Pointe-Noire, Republic of the Congo
* San Miguel de Tucumán, Argentina
* Tainan, Taiwan
* Tegucigalpa, Honduras
==See also==
* Buildings and architecture of New Orleans
* Cancer Alley
* The Cabildo
* French Quarter Festival
* Île d&#x27;Orléans, Louisiana
* List of people from New Orleans
* &quot;Mississippi (River) Suite&quot;, with an orchestral portrayal of Mardi Gras
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Orleans Parish, Louisiana
* Neighborhoods in New Orleans
* New Orleans in fiction
* &quot;New Orleans Suite&quot;, Duke Ellington recording
* New Orleans Union Passenger Terminal
* New Orleans Public Schools
* Pontalba Buildings
* The Presbytere
* Southern Food and Beverage Museum
* , 5 ships


==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Adams, Thomas J., and Steve Striffler (eds.). &quot;Working in the Big Easy: The History and Politics of Labor in New Orleans.&quot; Lafayette, Louisiana: University of Louisiana at Lafayette Press, 2014.
* Berry, Jason. &quot;City of a Million Dreams: A History of New Orleans at Year 300.&quot; Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2018.
* Dessens, Nathalie. &quot;Creole City: A Chronicle of Early American New Orleans.&quot; Gainesville, Florida: University Press of Florida, 2015.
* Ermus, Cindy (ed.). &quot;Environmental Disaster in the Gulf South: Two Centuries of Catastrophe, Risk, and Resilience.&quot; Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press, 2018.
* Fertel, Rien. &quot;Imagining the Creole City: The Rise of Literary Culture in Nineteenth-Century New Orleans.&quot; Baton Rouge, Louisiana: Louisiana State University Press, 2014.
* Holli, Melvin G., and Jones, Peter d&#x27;A., eds. &quot;Biographical Dictionary of American Mayors, 1820-1980&quot; (Greenwood Press, 1981) short scholarly biographies each of the city&#x27;s mayors 1820 to 1980. online; see index at p. 409 for list.
* Marler, Scott P. &quot;The Merchants&#x27; Capital: New Orleans and the Political Economy of the Nineteenth-Century South.&quot; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
* Powell, Lawrence N. &quot;The Accidental City: Improvising New Orleans.&quot; Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2012.
* Simmons, LaKisha Michelle. &quot;Crescent City Girls: The Lives of Young Black Women in Segregated New Orleans.&quot; Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2015.
* Solnit, Rebecca, and Rebecca Snedeker, &quot;Unfathomable City: A New Orleans Atlas.&quot; Berkeley, California: University of California Press, 2013.

==External links==
** 
* Official Tourism Website
* History</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="0" end="11" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="31" end="35" title="New Orleans" label="NOLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="39" end="51" title="New Orleans" label="The Big Easy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301053" start="80" end="104" title="Consolidated city-county" label="consolidated city-parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="123" end="140" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="175" end="185" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="189" end="198" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q278377" start="274" end="305" title="List of municipalities in Louisiana" label="most populous city in Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501836" start="314" end="330" title="French Louisiana" label="French Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="376" end="386" title="Deep South" label="Deep South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139046" start="430" end="456" title="Southeastern United States" label="Southeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909043" start="471" end="481" title="List of ports in the United States" label="major port"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="556" end="573" title="Gulf Coast of the United States" label="Gulf Coast region"/>
<link wikidata="Q646656" start="631" end="652" title="Music of New Orleans" label="its distinctive music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645076" start="654" end="668" title="Louisiana Creole cuisine" label="Creole cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050140" start="670" end="685" title="New Orleans English" label="unique dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q195839" start="743" end="753" title="Mardi Gras in New Orleans" label="Mardi Gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q602939" start="793" end="807" title="French Quarter" label="French Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="823" end="861" title="French architecture#America" label="French and Spanish Creole architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594437" start="874" end="883" title="nightlife" label="nightlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105882" start="890" end="904" title="Bourbon Street" label="Bourbon Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="1294" end="1310" title="Louisiana (New France)" label="French Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="1360" end="1378" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="1498" end="1512" title="Southern United States" label="American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201622" start="1522" end="1536" title="Antebellum South" label="Antebellum era"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1549" end="1561" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="1613" end="1618" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305555" start="1781" end="1826" title="Drainage in New Orleans" label="a complex system of levees and drainage pumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q172316" start="1878" end="1895" title="Effects of Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans" label="severely affected"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="1899" end="1916" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970069" start="2058" end="2076" title="New Orleans diaspora" label="population decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="2111" end="2124" title="Urban renewal" label="redevelopment"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="2221" end="2235" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609646" start="2481" end="2513" title="List of cities by homicide rate" label="highest per capita homicide rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="2550" end="2564" title="New Orleans" label="Orleans Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441562" start="2572" end="2583" title="Coterminous municipality" label="coterminous"/>
<link wikidata="Q491949" start="2667" end="2690" title="East Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana" label="East Baton Rouge Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q498276" start="2707" end="2723" title="Jefferson Parish, Louisiana" label="Jefferson Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q506921" start="2760" end="2778" title="St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana" label="St. Tammany Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331750" start="2783" end="2801" title="Lake Pontchartrain" label="Lake Pontchartrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q503883" start="2816" end="2834" title="St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana" label="St. Bernard Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108627" start="2839" end="2850" title="Lake Borgne" label="Lake Borgne"/>
<link wikidata="Q503864" start="2864" end="2882" title="Plaquemines Parish, Louisiana" label="Plaquemines Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010868" start="2969" end="3006" title="New Orleans metropolitan area" label="Greater New Orleans metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="3094" end="3123" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768043" start="3184" end="3202" title="List of metropolitan statistical areas" label="46th most populous"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="3314" end="3321" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775422" start="3537" end="3567" title="Antoine-Simon Le Page du Pratz" label="Antoine-Simon Le Page du Pratz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="3615" end="3632" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q155596" start="3896" end="3924" title="Philippe II, Duke of Orléans" label="Philippe II, Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="3940" end="3948" title="Louis XV" label="Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548" start="4001" end="4008" title="Orléans" label="Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="4035" end="4048" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q46780" start="4049" end="4057" title="Aurelian" label="Aurelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="4245" end="4266" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="4314" end="4323" title="Louisiana (New France)" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q107419889" start="4327" end="4332" title="History of Spain (1700–1808)" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628377" start="4376" end="4399" title="Treaty of Fontainebleau (1762)" label="Treaty of Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q156211" start="4423" end="4438" title="Treaty of Paris (1763)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="4537" end="4556" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="acquired possession"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="4562" end="4568" title="French First Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693623" start="4760" end="4783" title="Lower Mississippi River" label="Lower Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192494" start="5377" end="5403" title="Mississippi Company" label="French Mississippi Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q55266" start="5428" end="5463" title="Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville" label="Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville"/>
<link wikidata="Q56188" start="5490" end="5500" title="Chitimacha" label="Chitimacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q155596" start="5519" end="5547" title="Philippe II, Duke of Orléans" label="Philippe II, Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="5557" end="5563" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="5571" end="5588" title="Kingdom of France" label="Kingdom of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548" start="5641" end="5648" title="Orléans" label="Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501836" start="5670" end="5679" title="French Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="5710" end="5732" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q56389" start="5853" end="5860" title="Natchez people" label="Natchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q944044" start="5937" end="5957" title="Natchez, Mississippi" label="Natchez, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11611" start="5999" end="6013" title="Natchez revolt" label="Natchez Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078002" start="6062" end="6074" title="Fort Rosalie" label="Fort Rosalie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592345" start="6262" end="6276" title="Étienne Perier (governor)" label="Étienne Perier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533462" start="6300" end="6318" title="Genocide of indigenous peoples" label="completely destroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q495858" start="6566" end="6580" title="Chickasaw Wars" label="Chickasaw Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356274" start="6702" end="6722" title="Pierre de Rigaud, marquis de Vaudreuil-Cavagnial" label="Marquis de Vaudreuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="6760" end="6777" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q622728" start="6980" end="6989" title="Chickasaw" label="Chickasaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="6994" end="7001" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="7310" end="7321" title="Baton Rouge" label="Baton Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539285" start="7519" end="7545" title="Slavery in the colonial United States" label="sub-Saharan African slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="7619" end="7644" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="transatlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q222969" start="8113" end="8122" title="Code Noir" label="Code Noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="8330" end="8339" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185127" start="8394" end="8410" title="Louisiana Creole" label="Louisiana Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016589" start="8478" end="8484" title="Louisiana Voodoo" label="Voodoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870679" start="9069" end="9085" title="History of the Ursulines in New Orleans" label="Ursuline sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192494" start="9115" end="9136" title="Company of the Indies" label="Company of the Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825297" start="9642" end="9658" title="Adrien de Pauger" label="Adrien de Pauger"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="10163" end="10176" title="Louisiana (New France)" label="French colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="10207" end="10221" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q156211" start="10229" end="10249" title="Treaty of Paris (1763)" label="1763 Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478434" start="10261" end="10281" title="France in the Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="France&amp;#x27;s defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="10285" end="10298" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="10306" end="10327" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q172313" start="10852" end="10893" title="Louisiana Rebellion of 1768" label="took control of the city from the Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="11235" end="11247" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q602939" start="11268" end="11282" title="French Quarter" label="French Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001753" start="11337" end="11357" title="Old Ursuline Convent, New Orleans" label="Old Ursuline Convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="11371" end="11397" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="11428" end="11432" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q184840" start="11437" end="11446" title="smuggling" label="smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="11458" end="11482" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="American revolutionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="11540" end="11557" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q779126" start="11583" end="11592" title="Overseas Filipinos" label="Filipinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q386687" start="11636" end="11680" title="Bernardo de Gálvez y Madrid, Count of Gálvez" label="Bernardo de Gálvez y Madrid, Count of Gálvez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259275" start="11808" end="11837" title="Third Treaty of San Ildefonso" label="Third Treaty of San Ildefonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="11855" end="11861" title="French First Republic" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="11904" end="11912" title="Napoleon I of France" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="11951" end="11969" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="12041" end="12047" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386404" start="12049" end="12056" title="Louisiana Creole people" label="Creoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037005" start="12061" end="12069" title="Demographics of Africa" label="Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="12093" end="12098" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="12100" end="12107" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="12109" end="12114" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="12119" end="12127" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q932139" start="12135" end="12150" title="commodity crops" label="commodity crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="12154" end="12159" title="sugar cane" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="12164" end="12170" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="12192" end="12197" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="12220" end="12231" title="Plantations in the American South" label="plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973505" start="12270" end="12283" title="Saint Dominicans" label="St. Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="12284" end="12291" title="refugee" label="refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q689128" start="12302" end="12320" title="Haitian Revolution" label="Haitian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="12327" end="12333" title="White people" label="whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500267" start="12338" end="12358" title="free people of color" label="free people of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q878789" start="12563" end="12572" title="William C.C. Claiborne" label="Claiborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534615" start="12623" end="12633" title="Free negro" label="free black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518439" start="12963" end="12983" title="Territory of Orleans" label="Territory of Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973505" start="12985" end="12998" title="Saint Dominicans" label="St. Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="13030" end="13034" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030788" start="13067" end="13079" title="Geographical distribution of French speakers" label="Francophones"/>
<link wikidata="Q672087" start="13146" end="13157" title="Bonapartist" label="Bonapartist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="13301" end="13311" title="mixed-race" label="mixed-race"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="13487" end="13513" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="14045" end="14056" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="14165" end="14179" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="14203" end="14212" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857899" start="14255" end="14262" title="United States Militia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q660384" start="14282" end="14293" title="Mississippi Territory" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="14295" end="14304" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="14337" end="14346" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="14362" end="14370" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981922" start="14371" end="14383" title="American pioneers" label="frontiersmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="14394" end="14403" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="14428" end="14434" title="Piracy" label="pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q454672" start="14435" end="14447" title="Jean Lafitte" label="Jean Lafitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="14475" end="14482" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293005" start="14491" end="14510" title="Edward Pakenham" label="Sir Edward Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324198" start="14596" end="14611" title="Treaty of Ghent" label="Treaty of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="14938" end="14948" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510025" start="14966" end="14990" title="Siege of Fort St. Philip (1815)" label="siege of Fort St. Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470844" start="15026" end="15037" title="Fort Bowyer" label="Fort Bowyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="15043" end="15049" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="15126" end="15130" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201622" start="15175" end="15185" title="Antebellum South" label="antebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="15200" end="15220" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981973" start="15539" end="15550" title="History of slavery" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="15972" end="15982" title="Deep South" label="Deep South"/>
<link wikidata="Q837556" start="15995" end="16011" title="forced migration" label="forced migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399638" start="16090" end="16101" title="Upper South" label="Upper South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="16609" end="16624" title="English Americans" label="Anglo-Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="16788" end="16796" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="16801" end="16810" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454489" start="16961" end="16972" title="manumission" label="manumission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935055" start="17336" end="17346" title="Multiracial Americans" label="mixed-race"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="17525" end="17532" title="mulatto" label="mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="17839" end="17848" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4254860" start="18021" end="18029" title="List of epidemics and pandemics" label="epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="18034" end="18046" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="18070" end="18089" title="Infection" label="infectious diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="18727" end="18745" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647769" start="18847" end="18885" title="Battle of Forts Jackson and St. Philip" label="Battle of Forts Jackson and St. Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q817488" start="18887" end="18910" title="Benjamin Butler (politician)" label="Gen. Benjamin F. Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q388946" start="20446" end="20483" title="L&amp;#x27;Abeille de la Nouvelle-Orléans" label="L&amp;#x27;Abeille de la Nouvelle-Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="20802" end="20816" title="Southern United States" label="American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="20822" end="20832" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="20881" end="20898" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q391358" start="21050" end="21075" title="Emancipation Proclamation" label="Emancipation Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="21096" end="21111" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218951" start="21279" end="21292" title="Daniel Ullman" label="Daniel Ullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550735" start="21394" end="21414" title="United States Colored Troops" label="Corps d&amp;#x27;Afrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500267" start="21508" end="21528" title="free people of color" label="free people of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550735" start="21656" end="21684" title="United States Colored Troops" label="United States Colored Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815868" start="21787" end="21808" title="Memphis Riots of 1866" label="Memphis Riots of 1866"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111026" start="21825" end="21841" title="New Orleans Riot" label="New Orleans Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302779" start="21885" end="21903" title="Reconstruction Act" label="Reconstruction Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="21912" end="21932" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="22032" end="22037" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973004" start="22080" end="22103" title="Fifth Military District" label="Fifth Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895489" start="22234" end="22257" title="Universal manhood suffrage" label="universal male suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="22284" end="22300" title="State school" label="public education"/>
<link wikidata="Q887930" start="22395" end="22411" title="P.B.S. Pinchback" label="P.B.S. Pinchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="22424" end="22434" title="mixed race" label="mixed race"/>
<link wikidata="Q881368" start="22446" end="22465" title="Henry C. Warmouth" label="Henry Clay Warmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q881154" start="22653" end="22667" title="Douglas Wilder" label="Douglas Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010769" start="22742" end="22762" title="New Orleans Public Schools" label="public school system"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="22802" end="22808" title="levees" label="levees"/>
<link wikidata="Q695566" start="22996" end="23009" title="Panic of 1873" label="Panic of 1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="23193" end="23209" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516642" start="23315" end="23327" title="White League" label="White League"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="23386" end="23402" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871555" start="23547" end="23570" title="Battle of Liberty Place" label="Battle of Liberty Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="23777" end="23786" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q607648" start="23802" end="23811" title="Redeemers" label="Redeemers"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="23938" end="23952" title="Reconstruction Era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556632" start="24015" end="24041" title="1892 New Orleans general strike" label="general strike in the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231756" start="24158" end="24168" title="Dixiecrats" label="Dixiecrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="24176" end="24184" title="Jim Crow" label="Jim Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="24204" end="24222" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q53463" start="24279" end="24303" title="constitutional amendment" label="constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q830408" start="24326" end="24344" title="grandfather clause" label="grandfather clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="24368" end="24381" title="Disfranchisement after Reconstruction era" label="disfranchised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454489" start="24433" end="24443" title="Manumission" label="manumitted"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="24673" end="24692" title="Racial segregation" label="racially segregated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500267" start="24796" end="24817" title="free persons of color" label="free persons of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q5890199" start="25087" end="25099" title="Homer Plessy" label="Homer Plessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014171" start="25243" end="25263" title="Covington, Louisiana" label="Covington, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q656660" start="25369" end="25387" title="Plessy v. Ferguson" label="Plessy v. Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="25412" end="25430" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974008" start="25467" end="25485" title="separate but equal" label="separate but equal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163519" start="25724" end="25747" title="Nadir of American race relations" label="nadir of race relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15985086" start="25782" end="25791" title="Lynching in the United States" label="lynchings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25940" end="25952" title="Anti-Italianism#Anti-Italianism in the United States" label="Anti-Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151379" start="25990" end="26014" title="March 14, 1891 lynchings" label="lynchings of 11 Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857899" start="26449" end="26462" title="Militia (United States)" label="state militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="26689" end="26701" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="26703" end="26709" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="27084" end="27099" title="Person of color" label="people of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="27122" end="27137" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="27145" end="27157" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="27178" end="27188" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q107503735" start="27465" end="27493" title="1929 New Orleans streetcar strike" label="New Orleans streetcar strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992018" start="27598" end="27610" title="Po&amp;#x27; boy" label="Po&amp;#x27; boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="27749" end="27756" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="27758" end="27764" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="27770" end="27777" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="27820" end="27825" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010868" start="28184" end="28221" title="New Orleans metropolitan area" label="Greater New Orleans metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058501" start="28293" end="28301" title="Sun Belt" label="Sun Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q773908" start="28320" end="28324" title="Port of New Orleans" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q428072" start="28383" end="28399" title="containerization" label="containerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243989" start="28776" end="28811" title="DeLesseps Story Morrison" label="DeLesseps &amp;quot;Chep&amp;quot; Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925967" start="28828" end="28857" title="Victor H. Schiro" label="Victor &amp;quot;Vic&amp;quot; Schiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="29120" end="29141" title="Civil Rights movement" label="Civil Rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q605130" start="29147" end="29187" title="Southern Christian Leadership Conference" label="Southern Christian Leadership Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031026" start="29255" end="29267" title="Canal Street, New Orleans" label="Canal Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="29443" end="29470" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q469860" start="29503" end="29515" title="Ruby Bridges" label="Ruby Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066252" start="29527" end="29559" title="William Frantz Elementary School" label="William Frantz Elementary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039256" start="29567" end="29577" title="Ninth Ward of New Orleans" label="Ninth Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568797" start="29696" end="29711" title="1956 Sugar Bowl" label="1956 Sugar Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536237" start="29715" end="29729" title="Tulane Stadium" label="Tulane Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18748803" start="29740" end="29753" title="1955 Pittsburgh Panthers football team" label="Pitt Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935073" start="29786" end="29797" title="Bobby Grier (Pittsburgh Panthers)" label="Bobby Grier"/>
<link wikidata="Q28450843" start="29821" end="29848" title="1955 Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets football team" label="Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q29529370" start="30010" end="30018" title="List of governors of Georgia" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q183550" start="30019" end="30033" title="Marvin Griffin" label="Marvin Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924471" start="30250" end="30267" title="Blake R. Van Leer" label="Blake R. Van Leer"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="30420" end="30444" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608064" start="30453" end="30478" title="Voting Rights Act of 1965" label="Voting Rights Act of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105844" start="31347" end="31364" title="Sidney Barthelemy" label="Sidney Barthelemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379645" start="31381" end="31392" title="Marc Morial" label="Marc Morial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647580" start="32192" end="32207" title="A. Baldwin Wood" label="A. Baldwin Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q812585" start="32427" end="32432" title="bayou" label="bayou"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="32583" end="32593" title="subsidence" label="subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087650" start="33016" end="33031" title="Hurricane Betsy" label="Hurricane Betsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981790" start="33125" end="33145" title="May 8th 1995 Louisiana Flood" label="flood of May 8, 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070692" start="33360" end="33419" title="Coastal erosion in Louisiana" label="erosion of the marshlands and swamp surrounding New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935938" start="33452" end="33487" title="Mississippi River–Gulf Outlet Canal" label="Mississippi River–Gulf Outlet Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q121742" start="33597" end="33608" title="storm surge" label="storm surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="33788" end="33797" title="Chernobyl disaster" label="Chernobyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605246" start="33810" end="33841" title="2005 levee failures in Greater New Orleans" label="the federal levee system failed"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="33849" end="33866" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="34019" end="34036" title="Gulf Coast of the United States" label="Gulf Coast region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460044" start="34063" end="34087" title="Flood Control Act of 1965" label="federal flood protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="34126" end="34143" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="34201" end="34206" title="levee" label="levee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="34227" end="34264" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="United States Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q756452" start="34452" end="34471" title="Mercedes-Benz Superdome" label="Louisiana Superdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361075" start="34479" end="34515" title="New Orleans Morial Convention Center" label="New Orleans Morial Convention Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q236126" start="34804" end="34820" title="Hurricane Gustav" label="Hurricane Gustav"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="34925" end="34942" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q737890" start="34966" end="34980" title="Hurricane Rita" label="Hurricane Rita"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693664" start="35052" end="35068" title="Lower Ninth Ward" label="Lower Ninth Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607551" start="36352" end="36368" title="2006–07 NCAA football bowl games" label="2006–2007 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="36374" end="36392" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q172339" start="36419" end="36438" title="New Orleans Hornets" label="New Orleans Hornets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875316" start="36493" end="36509" title="2007–08 New Orleans Hornets season" label="2007–2008 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959925" start="36534" end="36556" title="2008 NBA All-Star Game" label="2008 NBA All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q126291" start="36572" end="36588" title="Super Bowl XLVII" label="Super Bowl XLVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q195839" start="36619" end="36629" title="New Orleans Mardi Gras" label="Mardi Gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976085" start="36631" end="36648" title="Voodoo Experience" label="Voodoo Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338998" start="36658" end="36686" title="New Orleans Jazz &amp;amp; Heritage Festival" label="Jazz &amp;amp; Heritage Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q108300283" start="36935" end="36948" title="Hurricane Ida" label="Hurricane Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709427" start="36993" end="37006" title="Port Fourchon, Louisiana" label="Port Fourchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q108570506" start="37018" end="37048" title="Hurricane Ida tornado outbreak" label="Hurricane Ida tornado outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q131611708" start="37109" end="37123" title="2025 New Orleans truck attack" label="a truck attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5889469" start="37224" end="37242" title="domestic terrorism" label="domestic terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528035" start="37329" end="37352" title="Mississippi River Delta" label="Mississippi River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331750" start="37363" end="37381" title="Lake Pontchartrain" label="Lake Pontchartrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="37403" end="37420" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="37453" end="37467" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="37486" end="37504" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="37716" end="37721" title="levee" label="levee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460044" start="37749" end="37774" title="Flood Control Act of 1965" label="Flood Control Act of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="37780" end="37808" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="37839" end="37844" title="levee" label="levee"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="38218" end="38228" title="subsidence" label="subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193547" start="38247" end="38253" title="Tulane University" label="Tulane"/>
<link wikidata="Q390087" start="38258" end="38275" title="Xavier University of Louisiana" label="Xavier University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899415" start="38636" end="38642" title="Uptown, New Orleans" label="Uptown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330332" start="38707" end="38726" title="Eastern New Orleans" label="Eastern New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q466880" start="38753" end="38757" title="American Society of Civil Engineers" label="ASCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6295312" start="38764" end="38797" title="Journal of Hydrologic Engineering" label="Journal of Hydrologic Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535339" start="39002" end="39021" title="Geology (journal)" label="&amp;quot;Geology&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q466880" start="39268" end="39303" title="American Society of Civil Engineers" label="American Society of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010705" start="39625" end="39650" title="New Orleans Central Business District" label="Central Business District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471528" start="39880" end="39896" title="Lafayette Square, New Orleans" label="Lafayette Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031026" start="39976" end="39988" title="Canal Street, New Orleans" label="Canal Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303522" start="40082" end="40090" title="Downtown New Orleans" label="downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144478" start="40117" end="40123" title="Uptown New Orleans" label="uptown"/>
<link wikidata="Q692231" start="40206" end="40220" title="Rampart Street" label="Rampart Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105822" start="40368" end="40386" title="St. Charles Avenue" label="St. Charles Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146376" start="40429" end="40441" title="Royal Street, New Orleans" label="Royal Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133795" start="40938" end="40943" title="Tremé" label="Tremé"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644216" start="40949" end="40957" title="7th Ward of New Orleans" label="7th Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067307" start="40959" end="40975" title="Faubourg Marigny" label="Faubourg Marigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004681" start="40977" end="40984" title="Bywater, New Orleans" label="Bywater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039256" start="41023" end="41033" title="Ninth Ward of New Orleans" label="Ninth Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144478" start="41035" end="41041" title="Uptown New Orleans" label="Uptown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693486" start="41092" end="41113" title="Lower Garden District, New Orleans" label="Lower Garden District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522239" start="41119" end="41134" title="Garden District, New Orleans" label="Garden District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070587" start="41140" end="41153" title="Irish Channel, New Orleans" label="Irish Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046646" start="41180" end="41190" title="Carrollton, Louisiana" label="Carrollton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553222" start="41192" end="41201" title="Gert Town, New Orleans" label="Gert Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q921648" start="41203" end="41216" title="Fontainebleau, New Orleans" label="Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972251" start="41221" end="41230" title="Broadmoor, New Orleans" label="Broadmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892310" start="41442" end="41456" title="Bayou St. John (neighborhood)" label="Bayou St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840675" start="41458" end="41466" title="Mid-City New Orleans" label="Mid-City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533650" start="41468" end="41476" title="Gentilly, New Orleans" label="Gentilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061083" start="41478" end="41486" title="Lakeview, New Orleans" label="Lakeview"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330332" start="41499" end="41515" title="Eastern New Orleans" label="New Orleans East"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724224" start="41520" end="41527" title="Algiers, New Orleans" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="42246" end="42267" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="42277" end="42313" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458835" start="42467" end="42480" title="shotgun house" label="shotgun house"/>
<link wikidata="Q850107" start="42489" end="42497" title="bungalow" label="bungalow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105822" start="42731" end="42749" title="St. Charles Avenue" label="St. Charles Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q571648" start="42773" end="42789" title="Antebellum architecture" label="antebellum homes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513688" start="42835" end="42848" title="Greek Revival architecture" label="Greek Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q570074" start="42850" end="42867" title="American colonial architecture" label="American Colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="42876" end="42885" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270218" start="42896" end="42906" title="Queen Anne style architecture in the United States" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q615196" start="42911" end="42934" title="Italianate architecture" label="Italianate architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098710" start="43431" end="43461" title="2 Canal Street" label="World Trade Center New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203661" start="43466" end="43477" title="Plaza Tower" label="Plaza Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q28868" start="43520" end="43536" title="One Shell Square" label="One Shell Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031026" start="43742" end="43754" title="Canal Street, New Orleans" label="Canal Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="43854" end="43871" title="Humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="43873" end="43879" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q105616297" start="44247" end="44267" title="December 1989 United States cold wave" label="on December 23, 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598783" start="44359" end="44376" title="Great Blizzard of 1899" label="February 13, 1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602637" start="45287" end="45315" title="2004 Christmas Eve Snowstorm" label="2004 Christmas Eve Snowstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="45329" end="45338" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012716" start="45445" end="45479" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve 1963 snowstorm" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve 1963 snowstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q105616297" start="45564" end="45601" title="December 1989 United States cold wave" label="December 1989 United States cold wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q131873098" start="45689" end="45705" title="January 20–22, 2025 Gulf Coast blizzard" label="January 21, 2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="45777" end="45787" title="Tropical cyclone" label="Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q503010" start="46006" end="46041" title="Federal Emergency Management Agency" label="Federal Emergency Management Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010868" start="46132" end="46151" title="New Orleans metropolitan area" label="Greater New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q198825" start="46177" end="46205" title="Grand Isle Hurricane of 1909" label="Grand Isle Hurricane of 1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q198978" start="46211" end="46240" title="New Orleans Hurricane of 1915" label="New Orleans Hurricane of 1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q207573" start="46242" end="46272" title="1947 Fort Lauderdale Hurricane" label="1947 Fort Lauderdale Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6854309" start="46274" end="46290" title="Hurricane Flossy" label="Hurricane Flossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087650" start="46300" end="46315" title="Hurricane Betsy" label="Hurricane Betsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243975" start="46325" end="46342" title="Hurricane Georges" label="Hurricane Georges"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="46363" end="46370" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q737890" start="46375" end="46379" title="Hurricane Rita" label="Rita"/>
<link wikidata="Q236126" start="46389" end="46405" title="Hurricane Gustav" label="Hurricane Gustav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507877" start="46415" end="46430" title="Hurricane Isaac (2012)" label="Hurricane Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q100935353" start="46440" end="46454" title="Hurricane Zeta" label="Hurricane Zeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q108300283" start="46535" end="46548" title="Hurricane Ida" label="Hurricane Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460044" start="46791" end="46819" title="Flood Control Act of 1965" label="federally designed and built"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493021" start="47866" end="47897" title="National Academy of Engineering" label="National Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233780" start="47906" end="47931" title="United States National Research Council" label="National Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48330" end="48343" title="Flood mitigation#Protection of individual properties" label="floodproofing"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="48466" end="48482" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="48650" end="48675" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091971" start="48970" end="48985" title="suburbanization" label="suburbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q130710914" start="49313" end="49336" title="residential segregation" label="residential segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q234173" start="51064" end="51073" title="Ecological footprint" label="footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q22652" start="51165" end="51177" title="Urban open space" label="green spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193547" start="51246" end="51263" title="Tulane University" label="Tulane University"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="51272" end="51306" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q856681" start="51351" end="51374" title="illegal immigration" label="undocumented immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="51386" end="51392" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="51431" end="51450" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338995" start="51553" end="51582" title="New Orleans Police Department" label="New Orleans Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="51774" end="51790" title="primary language" label="primary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="51911" end="51926" title="mother language" label="mother language"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="52168" end="52173" title="White Americans" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="52180" end="52185" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="52265" end="52281" title="Pacific Islander American" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935055" start="52302" end="52319" title="Multiracial Americans" label="two or more races"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="52331" end="52358" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latino American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="52579" end="52597" title="non-Hispanic white" label="non-Hispanic white"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="52604" end="52637" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="American Indian and Alaska Native"/>
<link wikidata="Q991464" start="53264" end="53270" title="Kenner, Louisiana" label="Kenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q126661" start="53280" end="53288" title="Metairie, Louisiana" label="Metairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2189960" start="53294" end="53303" title="Terrytown, Louisiana" label="Terrytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153519" start="53384" end="53397" title="Janet Murguía" label="Janet Murguía"/>
<link wikidata="Q837983" start="53444" end="53452" title="UnidosUS" label="UnidosUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958704" start="53696" end="53714" title="Brazilian Americans" label="Brazilian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q130192" start="53800" end="53828" title="English as a second language" label="English as a second language"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="54108" end="54134" title="northeastern United States" label="northeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="54456" end="54470" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413685" start="54495" end="54513" title="Filipino Americans" label="Filipino Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="54669" end="54680" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="54830" end="54869" title="LGBT" label="lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="54894" end="54900" title="Gallup (company)" label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="55288" end="55302" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q640317" start="55556" end="55597" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New Orleans" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11318286" start="55819" end="55836" title="parochial schools" label="parochial schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q195839" start="55890" end="55900" title="New Orleans Mardi Gras" label="Mardi Gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q104860646" start="55941" end="55952" title="Black Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110950" start="56048" end="56073" title="Our Lady of Prompt Succor" label="Our Lady of Prompt Succor"/>
<link wikidata="Q210181" start="56176" end="56186" title="Bible Belt" label="Bible Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="56204" end="56214" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="56345" end="56352" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="56418" end="56445" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974370" start="56451" end="56500" title="National Missionary Baptist Convention of America" label="National Missionary Baptist Convention of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049261" start="56502" end="56521" title="Nondenominational Christianity" label="non-denominationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q496651" start="56527" end="56554" title="National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc." label="National Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="56560" end="56583" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="56589" end="56605" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q384121" start="56611" end="56645" title="African Methodist Episcopal Church" label="African Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970937" start="56651" end="56689" title="National Baptist Convention of America International, Inc." label="National Baptist Convention of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q391499" start="56699" end="56722" title="Church of God in Christ" label="Church of God in Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810029" start="56740" end="56777" title="Association of Religion Data Archives" label="Association of Religion Data Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016589" start="56834" end="56850" title="Louisiana Voodoo" label="Louisiana Voodoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="56867" end="56877" title="syncretism" label="syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="Q290249" start="56966" end="56978" title="Marie Laveau" label="Marie Laveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q83628937" start="57225" end="57242" title="Mary Oneida Toups" label="Mary Oneida Toups"/>
<link wikidata="Q166880" start="57498" end="57507" title="City Park (New Orleans)" label="City Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="57537" end="57546" title="Sephardim" label="Sephardim"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="57678" end="57704" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="57709" end="57726" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668809" start="57741" end="57761" title="Abraham Cohen Labatt" label="Abraham Cohen Labatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18707533" start="57860" end="57877" title="Spanish and Portuguese Jews" label="Portuguese Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="57940" end="57954" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="58006" end="58020" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="58135" end="58138" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160621" start="58450" end="58474" title="Congregation Beth Israel (New Orleans)" label="Congregation Beth Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="58506" end="58514" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="58752" end="58758" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q126661" start="58791" end="58799" title="Metairie, Louisiana" label="Metairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="58832" end="58839" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895316" start="58909" end="58935" title="Sperling&amp;#x27;s BestPlaces" label="Sperling&amp;#x27;s BestPlaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q28219783" start="59170" end="59187" title="African-American Muslims" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q773908" start="59223" end="59272" title="Port of New Orleans" label="one of the world&amp;#x27;s largest and busiest ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353044" start="59403" end="59415" title="oil refinery" label="oil refining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364904" start="59420" end="59444" title="Petrochemical" label="petrochemical production"/>
<link wikidata="Q255274" start="59462" end="59474" title="white-collar worker" label="white-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349660" start="59515" end="59524" title="extraction of petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="59529" end="59540" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="59678" end="59693" title="higher learning" label="higher learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193547" start="59807" end="59824" title="Tulane University" label="Tulane University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15067276" start="59935" end="59955" title="health care industry" label="health care industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q969040" start="60080" end="60099" title="creative industries" label="creative industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415049" start="60131" end="60147" title="cultural tourism" label="cultural tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q218739" start="60448" end="60456" title="entrepôt" label="entrepôt"/>
<link wikidata="Q773908" start="60572" end="60591" title="Port of New Orleans" label="Port of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316930" start="60699" end="60722" title="Port of South Louisiana" label="Port of South Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655736" start="61174" end="61185" title="Intermarine" label="Intermarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045482" start="61202" end="61231" title="Northrop Grumman Ship Systems" label="Northrop Grumman Ship Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384324" start="61249" end="61273" title="Expeditors International" label="Expeditors International"/>
<link wikidata="Q691940" start="61505" end="61512" title="Folgers" label="Folgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330332" start="61528" end="61544" title="Eastern New Orleans" label="New Orleans East"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="61582" end="61596" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q115827361" start="61687" end="61695" title="oil reserves" label="reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q609251" start="61720" end="61747" title="Strategic Petroleum Reserve (United States)" label="Strategic Petroleum Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q497964" start="61792" end="61806" title="Cameron Parish, Louisiana" label="Cameron Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q504350" start="61828" end="61844" title="Iberville Parish, Louisiana" label="Iberville Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242994" start="62022" end="62049" title="Louisiana Offshore Oil Port" label="Louisiana Offshore Oil Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="62191" end="62200" title="Petroleum" label="Crude Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="62202" end="62207" title="Exxon" label="Exxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q319642" start="62209" end="62216" title="Chevron Corporation" label="Chevron"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="62218" end="62220" title="BP" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q775060" start="62222" end="62228" title="Texaco" label="Texaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240764" start="62230" end="62235" title="Shell Oil Company" label="Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126518" start="62276" end="62282" title="Conoco Inc." label="Conoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496384" start="62284" end="62299" title="Koch Industries" label="Koch Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393497" start="62301" end="62307" title="Unocal Corporation" label="Unocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="62309" end="62329" title="United States Department of Energy" label="U.S. Dept. of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670013" start="62348" end="62363" title="TEPPCO Partners" label="TEPPCO Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q351609" start="62419" end="62442" title="Liquefied petroleum gas" label="Liquefied Petroleum Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269170" start="62486" end="62492" title="Dynegy" label="Dynegy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410558" start="62494" end="62523" title="Kinder Morgan Energy Partners" label="Kinder Morgan Energy Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q855639" start="62525" end="62545" title="Dow Chemical Company" label="Dow Chemical Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="62660" end="62669" title="Shell plc" label="Shell plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q565594" start="62671" end="62674" title="Eni" label="Eni"/>
<link wikidata="Q319642" start="62679" end="62686" title="Chevron Corporation" label="Chevron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369609" start="62715" end="62742" title="Oilfield services" label="oilfield services companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010540" start="62947" end="62974" title="Minerals Management Service" label="Minerals Management Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="63025" end="63036" title="Fortune 500" label="Fortune 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344587" start="63046" end="63053" title="Entergy" label="Entergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q134447" start="63086" end="63105" title="nuclear power plant" label="nuclear power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453620" start="63189" end="63205" title="Freeport-McMoRan" label="Freeport-McMoRan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="63314" end="63321" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q243278" start="63514" end="63525" title="Rolls-Royce plc" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="63546" end="63554" title="AT&amp;amp;T Inc." label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="63576" end="63579" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q20486937" start="63590" end="63614" title="Superior Energy Services" label="Superior Energy Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932698" start="63616" end="63649" title="Textron Marine &amp;amp; Land Systems" label="Textron Marine &amp;amp; Land Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915079" start="63651" end="63674" title="McDermott International" label="McDermott International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="63693" end="63708" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q892498" start="63737" end="63764" title="Harrah&amp;#x27;s Entertainment" label="Harrah&amp;#x27;s Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338367" start="63787" end="63810" title="Edison Chouest Offshore" label="Edison Chouest Offshore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8067113" start="63812" end="63827" title="Zatarain&amp;#x27;s" label="Zatarain&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647025" start="63859" end="63880" title="Whitney National Bank" label="Whitney National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034654" start="63882" end="63893" title="Capital One" label="Capital One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800873" start="63895" end="63911" title="Tidewater (marine services)" label="Tidewater Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330910" start="63913" end="63943" title="Popeyes Chicken &amp;amp; Biscuits" label="Popeyes Chicken &amp;amp; Biscuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q16912277" start="63945" end="63965" title="Parsons Brinckerhoff" label="Parsons Brinckerhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6720236" start="63967" end="63977" title="MWH Global" label="MWH Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931421" start="63979" end="63988" title="CH2M Hill" label="CH2M Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q969390" start="64037" end="64047" title="GE Capital" label="GE Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491421" start="64053" end="64066" title="Smoothie King" label="Smoothie King"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974659" start="64190" end="64213" title="Entrepreneurs&amp;#x27; Row" label="Entrepreneurs&amp;#x27; Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361075" start="64735" end="64771" title="New Orleans Morial Convention Center" label="New Orleans Morial Convention Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q250456" start="65102" end="65137" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit" label="U.S. Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="65179" end="65183" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441564" start="65191" end="65216" title="Michoud Assembly Facility" label="Michoud Assembly Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330332" start="65231" end="65247" title="Eastern New Orleans" label="New Orleans East"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="65283" end="65298" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="65303" end="65309" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="65392" end="65405" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q54363" start="65412" end="65420" title="Saturn V" label="Saturn V"/>
<link wikidata="Q610615" start="65438" end="65464" title="Integrated Truss Structure" label="Integrated Truss Structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="65472" end="65499" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q64127" start="65553" end="65572" title="Space Launch System" label="Space Launch System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972672" start="65671" end="65694" title="National Finance Center" label="National Finance Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="65712" end="65751" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492612" start="65872" end="65920" title="Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command" label="Space and Naval Warfare (SPAWAR) Systems Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533650" start="65999" end="66007" title="Gentilly, New Orleans" label="Gentilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017125" start="66009" end="66057" title="Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base New Orleans" label="Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724224" start="66129" end="66136" title="Algiers, New Orleans" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105822" start="66271" end="66289" title="St. Charles Avenue" label="St. Charles Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228088" start="66345" end="66364" title="Pontchartrain Hotel" label="Pontchartrain Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729765" start="66400" end="66415" title="Magazine Street" label="Magazine Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505734" start="66812" end="66828" title="Travel + Leisure" label="Travel + Leisure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166039" start="67278" end="67293" title="people watching" label="people watching"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="67344" end="67370" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="67373" end="67376" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q367914" start="67414" end="67431" title="bed and breakfast" label="bed and breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031026" start="67735" end="67747" title="Canal Street, New Orleans" label="Canal Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399026" start="67753" end="67769" title="Esplanade Avenue, New Orleans" label="Esplanade Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087476" start="67925" end="67938" title="French Market" label="French Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933012" start="67950" end="67963" title="Café du Monde" label="Café du Monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q259109" start="67976" end="67988" title="café au lait" label="café au lait"/>
<link wikidata="Q814709" start="67993" end="68000" title="beignet" label="beignet"/>
<link wikidata="Q502333" start="68007" end="68024" title="Preservation Hall" label="Preservation Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q195919" start="68064" end="68080" title="New Orleans Mint" label="New Orleans Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141049" start="68105" end="68123" title="United States Mint" label="United States Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739753" start="68160" end="68195" title="The Historic New Orleans Collection" label="The Historic New Orleans Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865615" start="68268" end="68275" title="history of New Orleans" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="68284" end="68294" title="Gulf South" label="Gulf South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133795" start="68325" end="68330" title="Tremé" label="Tremé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338993" start="68361" end="68402" title="New Orleans Jazz National Historical Park" label="New Orleans Jazz National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010684" start="68411" end="68446" title="New Orleans African American Museum" label="New Orleans African American Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689060" start="68477" end="68518" title="Louisiana African American Heritage Trail" label="Louisiana African American Heritage Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q12062367" start="68531" end="68538" title="Natchez (boat)" label="Natchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q178193" start="68561" end="68570" title="steamboat" label="steamboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158854" start="68578" end="68586" title="Calliope (music)" label="calliope"/>
<link wikidata="Q109607" start="68727" end="68740" title="elegant decay" label="elegant decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q92621693" start="68758" end="68777" title="Historic Cemeteries of New Orleans" label="historic cemeteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q381885" start="68810" end="68814" title="tomb" label="tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q167251" start="68884" end="68904" title="Saint Louis Cemetery" label="Saint Louis Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q311" start="68924" end="68946" title="Père Lachaise Cemetery" label="Père Lachaise Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477833" start="68957" end="68981" title="The National WWII Museum" label="The National WWII Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159685" start="69080" end="69112" title="Confederate Memorial Hall Museum" label="Confederate Memorial Hall Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="69262" end="69273" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164964" start="69311" end="69335" title="Contemporary Arts Center (New Orleans)" label="Contemporary Arts Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063082" start="69341" end="69366" title="New Orleans Museum of Art" label="New Orleans Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q166880" start="69377" end="69386" title="City Park (New Orleans)" label="City Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390897" start="69396" end="69424" title="Ogden Museum of Southern Art" label="Ogden Museum of Southern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820245" start="69454" end="69478" title="Audubon Nature Institute" label="Audubon Nature Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820247" start="69498" end="69510" title="Audubon Park (New Orleans)" label="Audubon Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820263" start="69516" end="69527" title="Audubon Zoo" label="Audubon Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q623162" start="69533" end="69557" title="Aquarium of the Americas" label="Aquarium of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820238" start="69566" end="69585" title="Audubon Insectarium" label="Audubon Insectarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674383" start="69622" end="69650" title="Longue Vue House and Gardens" label="Longue Vue House and Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010698" start="69659" end="69687" title="New Orleans Botanical Garden" label="New Orleans Botanical Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q166880" start="69689" end="69698" title="City Park (New Orleans)" label="City Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q22746" start="69753" end="69763" title="urban park" label="urban park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758722" start="69799" end="69808" title="Southern live oak" label="oak trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893565" start="69930" end="69948" title="Honey Island Swamp" label="Honey Island Swamp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69953" end="69971" title="Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve#Barataria Preserve" label="Barataria Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69973" end="70016" title="Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve#Chalmette unit" label="Chalmette Battlefield and National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q41894" start="70074" end="70095" title="Battle of New Orleans" label="Battle of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618" start="70225" end="70233" title="Carnival" label="Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q195839" start="70238" end="70248" title="New Orleans Mardi Gras" label="Mardi Gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q132001" start="70284" end="70305" title="Epiphany (holiday)" label="Feast of the Epiphany"/>
<link wikidata="Q14260276" start="70360" end="70373" title="Twelfth Night (holiday)" label="Twelfth Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="70550" end="70559" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="70581" end="70585" title="Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q123542" start="70606" end="70619" title="Ash Wednesday" label="Ash Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338998" start="70681" end="70721" title="New Orleans Jazz &amp;amp; Heritage Festival" label="New Orleans Jazz &amp;amp; Heritage Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976085" start="70974" end="70991" title="Voodoo Experience" label="Voodoo Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399458" start="71026" end="71048" title="Essence Music Festival" label="Essence Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4534115" start="71126" end="71144" title="Southern Decadence" label="Southern Decadence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700245" start="71183" end="71231" title="Tennessee Williams/New Orleans Literary Festival" label="Tennessee Williams/New Orleans Literary Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q842106" start="71333" end="71355" title="Streetcar Named Desire" label="Streetcar Named Desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q797242" start="71637" end="71640" title="Ray (film)" label="Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q151870" start="71654" end="71666" title="Runaway Jury" label="Runaway Jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q728404" start="71680" end="71697" title="The Pelican Brief (film)" label="The Pelican Brief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279412" start="71711" end="71721" title="Glory Road (film)" label="Glory Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q581964" start="71735" end="71758" title="All the King&amp;#x27;s Men (2006 film)" label="All the King&amp;#x27;s Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q252409" start="71772" end="71779" title="Deja Vu (2006 film)" label="Déjà Vu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634476" start="71793" end="71805" title="Last Holiday (2006 film)" label="Last Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q183239" start="71819" end="71854" title="The Curious Case of Benjamin Button (film)" label="The Curious Case of Benjamin Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023357" start="71868" end="71884" title="12 Years a Slave (film)" label="12 Years a Slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q57246586" start="71902" end="71915" title="Project Power" label="Project Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133795" start="72011" end="72016" title="Tremé" label="Tremé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527714" start="72263" end="72293" title="Theatre de la Rue Saint Pierre" label="Theatre de la Rue Saint Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q662073" start="72477" end="72489" title="French opera" label="French opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799913" start="72495" end="72517" title="Théâtre d&amp;#x27;Orléans" label="Théâtre d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501861" start="72532" end="72550" title="French Opera House" label="French Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010759" start="72585" end="72602" title="New Orleans Opera" label="New Orleans Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q85783840" start="72608" end="72627" title="Marigny Opera House" label="Marigny Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="73074" end="73080" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105886" start="73141" end="73153" title="Congo Square" label="Congo Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q931042" start="73174" end="73194" title="Louis Armstrong Park (New Orleans)" label="Louis Armstrong Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="73278" end="73282" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244156" start="73307" end="73317" title="brass band" label="brass band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133795" start="73421" end="73426" title="Tremé" label="Tremé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338993" start="73441" end="73482" title="New Orleans Jazz National Historical Park" label="New Orleans Jazz National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q337417" start="73549" end="73557" title="Acadiana" label="Acadiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026089" start="73567" end="73572" title="Cajun music" label="Cajun"/>
<link wikidata="Q245296" start="73577" end="73583" title="Zydeco" label="Zydeco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="73598" end="73609" title="blues" label="Delta blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246270" start="73790" end="73795" title="dirge" label="dirge"/>
<link wikidata="Q484692" start="73801" end="73805" title="hymn" label="hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136972" start="74031" end="74043" title="jazz funeral" label="jazz funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="74139" end="74155" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="74198" end="74211" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492735" start="74296" end="74310" title="Chapel of Love" label="Chapel of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433532" start="74320" end="74334" title="the Dixie Cups" label="the Dixie Cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="74357" end="74368" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="74396" end="74413" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="Billboard Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="74447" end="74451" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="74551" end="74558" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949812" start="74567" end="74579" title="bounce music" label="bounce music"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="74630" end="74640" title="Deep South" label="Deep South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253172" start="74744" end="74763" title="southern hip hop" label="New Orleans hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q15615" start="74831" end="74840" title="Lil Wayne" label="Lil Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q722042" start="74842" end="74850" title="Master P" label="Master P"/>
<link wikidata="Q361661" start="74852" end="74859" title="Birdman (rapper)" label="Birdman"/>
<link wikidata="Q724501" start="74861" end="74869" title="Juvenile (rapper)" label="Juvenile"/>
<link wikidata="Q30196568" start="74871" end="74882" title="Suicideboys" label="Suicideboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047366" start="74884" end="74902" title="Cash Money Records" label="Cash Money Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815770" start="74907" end="74923" title="No Limit Records" label="No Limit Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268922" start="74957" end="74964" title="cowpunk" label="cowpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q852767" start="74981" end="74994" title="southern rock" label="southern rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522403" start="75053" end="75066" title="The Radiators (US)" label="The Radiators"/>
<link wikidata="Q832446" start="75068" end="75084" title="Better Than Ezra" label="Better Than Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179539" start="75086" end="75098" title="Cowboy Mouth" label="Cowboy Mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226558" start="75103" end="75116" title="Dash Rip Rock" label="Dash Rip Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q720959" start="75145" end="75157" title="sludge metal" label="sludge metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="75191" end="75202" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q973113" start="75217" end="75227" title="Eyehategod" label="Eyehategod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750313" start="75229" end="75242" title="Soilent Green" label="Soilent Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q528912" start="75244" end="75251" title="Crowbar (US band)" label="Crowbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q832141" start="75257" end="75261" title="Down (band)" label="Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="75290" end="75303" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q186170" start="75305" end="75315" title="doom metal" label="doom metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q409964" start="75496" end="75506" title="U.S. Route 61" label="Highway 61"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="75542" end="75551" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217211" start="75571" end="75591" title="Highway 61 Revisited" label="Highway 61 Revisited"/>
<link wikidata="Q814709" start="76044" end="76051" title="beignet" label="beignet"/>
<link wikidata="Q259109" start="76196" end="76208" title="café au lait" label="café au lait"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992018" start="76285" end="76297" title="po&amp;#x27; boy" label="po&amp;#x27; boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q655235" start="76310" end="76320" title="muffuletta" label="muffuletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211742" start="76387" end="76395" title="crayfish" label="crawfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q192935" start="76406" end="76413" title="seafood" label="seafood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642869" start="76415" end="76423" title="étouffée" label="étouffée"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364509" start="76425" end="76434" title="jambalaya" label="jambalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160522" start="76436" end="76441" title="gumbo" label="gumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q489703" start="76494" end="76512" title="red beans and rice" label="red beans and rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="76514" end="76529" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q116150719" start="76634" end="76640" title="pralin" label="pralin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047029" start="76790" end="76799" title="Yaka mein" label="Yaka mein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849611" start="76883" end="76896" title="Cajun English" label="Cajun English"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144345" start="76919" end="76934" title="Southern American English" label="Southern accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q26677" start="77047" end="77092" title="Rhotic and non-rhotic accents" label="deletion of the pre-consonantal &amp;quot;r&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588197" start="77158" end="77173" title="New York accent" label="New York accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="77625" end="77630" title="Irish American" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="77632" end="77639" title="Italian American" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507476" start="77652" end="77660" title="Sicilian American" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="77663" end="77669" title="German American" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="77675" end="77681" title="Jewish American" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050140" start="77780" end="77791" title="Yat dialect" label="Yat dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q132320708" start="78100" end="78133" title="Alliance Française of New Orleans" label="Alliance Française of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q655810" start="78197" end="78215" title="Alliance Française" label="Alliance Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083213" start="78573" end="78589" title="Louisiana French" label="Louisiana French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185127" start="78594" end="78610" title="Louisiana Creole" label="Louisiana Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q85846190" start="78695" end="78709" title="Isleño Spanish" label="Isleño Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674276" start="78725" end="78731" title="Isleño" label="Isleño"/>
<link wikidata="Q268882" start="78851" end="78866" title="Super Bowl XLIV" label="Super Bowl XLIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="78876" end="78894" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="78896" end="78899" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q172339" start="78909" end="78929" title="New Orleans Pelicans" label="New Orleans Pelicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="78931" end="78934" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905628" start="78960" end="78980" title="Big Easy Rollergirls" label="Big Easy Rollergirls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543683" start="78996" end="79019" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Flat Track Derby Association" label="flat track roller derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010691" start="79034" end="79051" title="New Orleans Blaze" label="New Orleans Blaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979435" start="79055" end="79076" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Football Association" label="women&amp;#x27;s football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="79115" end="79130" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q576483" start="79154" end="79171" title="Tulane Green Wave" label="Tulane Green Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312525" start="79179" end="79207" title="American Athletic Conference" label="American Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891250" start="79216" end="79230" title="UNO Privateers" label="UNO Privateers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304770" start="79238" end="79258" title="Southland Conference" label="Southland Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q756452" start="79265" end="79282" title="Caesars Superdome" label="Caesars Superdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="79372" end="79382" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q632774" start="79405" end="79409" title="Super Bowl XII" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q766921" start="79411" end="79415" title="Super Bowl XV" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073454" start="79417" end="79421" title="Super Bowl XX" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064807" start="79423" end="79427" title="Super Bowl XXIV" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q598389" start="79429" end="79433" title="Super Bowl XXXI" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073479" start="79435" end="79439" title="Super Bowl XXXVI" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q126291" start="79441" end="79445" title="Super Bowl XLVII" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q91157899" start="79451" end="79455" title="Super Bowl LIX" label="2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515840" start="79462" end="79482" title="Smoothie King Center" label="Smoothie King Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429810" start="79617" end="79641" title="Fair Grounds Race Course" label="Fair Grounds Race Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478725" start="79710" end="79725" title="Lakefront Arena" label="Lakefront Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299288" start="79806" end="79816" title="Sugar Bowl" label="Sugar Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338992" start="79822" end="79838" title="New Orleans Bowl" label="New Orleans Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874720" start="79844" end="79857" title="Bayou Classic" label="Bayou Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777773" start="79867" end="79881" title="Zurich Classic of New Orleans" label="Zurich Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="79908" end="79916" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="80014" end="80024" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756581" start="80026" end="80035" title="ArenaBowl" label="ArenaBowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q137341" start="80037" end="80054" title="NBA All-Star Game" label="NBA All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q744040" start="80056" end="80086" title="BCS National Championship Game" label="BCS National Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q996954" start="80096" end="80111" title="NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Division I Basketball Championship" label="NCAA Final Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q743892" start="80117" end="80160" title="Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll Mardi Gras Marathon" label="Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll Mardi Gras Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184342" start="80169" end="80190" title="Crescent City Classic" label="Crescent City Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934817" start="80206" end="80218" title="road running" label="road running"/>
<link wikidata="Q30592108" start="80237" end="80255" title="Major League Rugby" label="Major League Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q42531020" start="80286" end="80295" title="New Orleans Gold" label="NOLA Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575242" start="80356" end="80376" title="Gold Mine on Airline" label="Gold Mine on Airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="80387" end="80408" title="Minor League Baseball" label="minor league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q126661" start="80434" end="80442" title="Metairie, Louisiana" label="Metairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="80507" end="80513" title="Association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362411" start="80564" end="80580" title="USL Championship" label="USL Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q108809393" start="80598" end="80614" title="USL Super League" label="USL Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874737" start="80656" end="80694" title="Bayou Sauvage National Wildlife Refuge" label="Bayou Sauvage National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364383" start="80697" end="80747" title="Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve" label="Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338993" start="80750" end="80791" title="New Orleans Jazz National Historical Park" label="New Orleans Jazz National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q602939" start="80794" end="80823" title="Vieux Carre Historic District" label="Vieux Carre Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q47205" start="80952" end="80958" title="List of parishes in Louisiana" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301053" start="80990" end="81012" title="Consolidated city–county" label="city-parish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053278" start="81100" end="81109" title="Faubourg Lafayette" label="Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724224" start="81334" end="81341" title="Algiers, New Orleans" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="81449" end="81473" title="mayor-council government" label="mayor-council government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191952" start="81487" end="81496" title="home rule" label="home rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="81544" end="81556" title="city council" label="city council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052894" start="81602" end="81625" title="single-member districts" label="single-member districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="81650" end="81658" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q33977478" start="81693" end="81708" title="LaToya Cantrell" label="LaToya Cantrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q30673425" start="81824" end="81851" title="New Orleans Office of Inspector General" label="Office of Inspector General"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787331" start="82396" end="82422" title="Archon Information Systems" label="Archon Information Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010719" start="82576" end="82591" title="New Orleans Fire Department" label="fire department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010715" start="82600" end="82638" title="New Orleans Emergency Medical Services" label="New Orleans Emergency Medical Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q230981" start="83583" end="83589" title="Service of process" label="serves"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919341" start="83706" end="83727" title="Orleans Parish Prison" label="Orleans Parish Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338995" start="83790" end="83819" title="New Orleans Police Department" label="New Orleans Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q129947786" start="84126" end="84138" title="Susan Hutson" label="Susan Hutson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="84512" end="84536" title="impoverished" label="impoverished communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q184116" start="85292" end="85296" title="Gary, Indiana" label="Gary"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="85307" end="85323" title="Washington D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="85329" end="85338" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="85745" end="85762" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q558034" start="86482" end="86491" title="Ray Nagin" label="Ray Nagin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="86948" end="86955" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="86960" end="86967" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="87086" end="87094" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="87875" end="87917" title="HBCU" label="historically black collegiate institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193547" start="87989" end="88006" title="Tulane University" label="Tulane University"/>
<link wikidata="Q172430" start="88009" end="88038" title="Loyola University New Orleans" label="Loyola University New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474157" start="88041" end="88066" title="University of New Orleans" label="University of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q390087" start="88069" end="88099" title="Xavier University of Louisiana" label="Xavier University of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002144" start="88102" end="88136" title="Southern University at New Orleans" label="Southern University at New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4359655" start="88139" end="88157" title="Dillard University" label="Dillard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460011" start="88160" end="88209" title="LSU Health Sciences Center New Orleans" label="Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q12065026" start="88212" end="88236" title="University of Holy Cross" label="University of Holy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063476" start="88239" end="88258" title="Notre Dame Seminary" label="Notre Dame Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283766" start="88261" end="88301" title="New Orleans Baptist Theological Seminary" label="New Orleans Baptist Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253711" start="88304" end="88329" title="Delgado Community College" label="Delgado Community College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88332" end="88371" title="William Carey College#School of Nursing" label="William Carey College School of Nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010769" start="88409" end="88436" title="Orleans Parish School Board" label="Orleans Parish School Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175551" start="88676" end="88713" title="Jefferson Parish Public Schools" label="Jefferson Parish public school system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040443" start="88805" end="88821" title="Carl L. Bankston" label="Carl L. Bankston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303003" start="89275" end="89299" title="Recovery School District" label="Recovery School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689077" start="89307" end="89360" title="Louisiana Board of Elementary and Secondary Education" label="Louisiana Board of Elementary and Secondary Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q12241709" start="89480" end="89502" title="Charter school" label="public charter schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423304" start="89653" end="89657" title="Knowledge Is Power Program" label="KIPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175551" start="90214" end="90251" title="Jefferson Parish Public Schools" label="Jefferson Parish public school system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90384" end="90431" title="School choice#United States" label="choose which school to enroll their children in"/>
<link wikidata="Q28564" start="90510" end="90526" title="public library" label="public libraries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90570" end="90584" title="Loyola University New Orleans#Monroe Library" label="Monroe Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193547" start="90641" end="90658" title="Tulane University" label="Tulane University"/>
<link wikidata="Q888586" start="90698" end="90710" title="Earl Long" label="Earl K. Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010768" start="90758" end="90784" title="New Orleans Public Library" label="New Orleans Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739753" start="90949" end="90984" title="the Historic New Orleans Collection" label="the Historic New Orleans Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q195919" start="90993" end="91006" title="New Orleans Mint" label="Old U.S. Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072784" start="91058" end="91083" title="Iron Rail Book Collective" label="Iron Rail Book Collective"/>
<link wikidata="Q16625726" start="91202" end="91234" title="Louisiana Historical Association" label="Louisiana Historical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794268" start="91418" end="91430" title="Thomas Sully (architect)" label="Thomas Sully"/>
<link wikidata="Q379222" start="91581" end="91601" title="Advance Publications" label="Advance Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="91811" end="91822" title="Baton Rouge" label="Baton Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712726" start="91839" end="91851" title="The Advocate (Louisiana)" label="The Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528905" start="91990" end="91999" title="newsstand" label="newsstand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449648" start="92000" end="92007" title="tabloid (newspaper format)" label="tabloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q665319" start="92115" end="92125" title="broadsheet" label="broadsheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q116886708" start="92567" end="92610" title="The Times-Picayune/The New Orleans Advocate" label="The Times-Picayune/The New Orleans Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748851" start="92689" end="92709" title="The Louisiana Weekly" label="The Louisiana Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519643" start="92726" end="92739" title="Gambit Weekly" label="Gambit Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127030" start="92785" end="92799" title="Clarion Herald" label="Clarion Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270014" start="92912" end="92934" title="Media market" label="designated market area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957347" start="93053" end="93056" title="WWL-TV" label="WWL"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="93058" end="93061" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948586" start="93067" end="93071" title="WDSU" label="WDSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="93073" end="93076" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564823" start="93082" end="93086" title="WVUE-DT" label="WVUE"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="93088" end="93091" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958003" start="93098" end="93102" title="WYES-TV" label="WYES"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="93104" end="93107" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950311" start="93114" end="93118" title="WHNO" label="WHNO"/>
<link wikidata="Q555634" start="93120" end="93125" title="Lester Sumrall" label="LeSEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q959353" start="93132" end="93136" title="WGNO" label="WGNO"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="93138" end="93141" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952094" start="93148" end="93152" title="WLAE-TV" label="WLAE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919007" start="93154" end="93165" title="Independent station (North America)" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953538" start="93172" end="93176" title="WNOL-TV" label="WNOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="93178" end="93184" title="The CW Television Network" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q6329707" start="93191" end="93195" title="KGLA-DT" label="KGLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q136538" start="93197" end="93206" title="Telemundo" label="Telemundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954560" start="93213" end="93217" title="WPXL" label="WPXL"/>
<link wikidata="Q210500" start="93219" end="93222" title="Ion Television" label="Ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956652" start="93229" end="93233" title="WUPL" label="WUPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148579" start="93235" end="93246" title="MyNetworkTV" label="MyNetworkTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957423" start="93248" end="93252" title="WWOZ" label="WWOZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="93374" end="93380" title="gospel music" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026089" start="93382" end="93387" title="cajun music" label="cajun"/>
<link wikidata="Q245296" start="93389" end="93395" title="zydeco" label="zydeco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956454" start="93467" end="93471" title="WTUL" label="WTUL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407862" start="93693" end="93702" title="Americana (music)" label="Americana"/>
<link wikidata="" start="94172" end="94199" title="The Real World: New Orleans" label="The Real World: New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="" start="94221" end="94256" title="The Real World: Back to New Orleans" label="The Real World: Back to New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840310" start="94291" end="94318" title="Bad Girls Club (season 7)" label="Bad Girls Club: New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="94339" end="94353" title="radio broadcasting" label="radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952371" start="94442" end="94446" title="WLNO" label="WNOE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954729" start="94470" end="94474" title="WQNO" label="WTIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="95861" end="95876" title="Tram" label="streetcar lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155455" start="95884" end="95910" title="St. Charles Streetcar Line" label="St. Charles Streetcar Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155116" start="96411" end="96436" title="Riverfront Streetcar Line" label="Riverfront Streetcar Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514103" start="96601" end="96621" title="Canal Streetcar Line" label="Canal Streetcar Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153875" start="96971" end="97000" title="Rampart–Loyola Streetcar Line" label="Rampart–Loyola Streetcar Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691825" start="97107" end="97143" title="New Orleans Union Passenger Terminal" label="New Orleans Union Passenger Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q134262" start="97607" end="97625" title="Tennessee Williams" label="Tennessee Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q842106" start="97637" end="97661" title="A Streetcar Named Desire (play)" label="A Streetcar Named Desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="97747" end="97763" title="Public transport" label="Public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138272" start="97788" end="97826" title="New Orleans Regional Transit Authority" label="New Orleans Regional Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="97851" end="97854" title="bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q167947" start="97978" end="97987" title="biodiesel" label="biodiesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q498276" start="97993" end="98009" title="Jefferson Parish, Louisiana" label="Jefferson Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031027" start="98246" end="98264" title="Canal Street Ferry" label="Canal Street Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031026" start="98329" end="98341" title="Canal Street, New Orleans" label="Canal Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q39616793" start="98351" end="98386" title="National Historic Landmark District" label="National Historic Landmark District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724230" start="98390" end="98403" title="Algiers Point" label="Algiers Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q748191" start="98601" end="98618" title="Gretna, Louisiana" label="Gretna, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q528541" start="98697" end="98717" title="Chalmette, Louisiana" label="Chalmette, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11442" start="98833" end="98840" title="bicycle" label="bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q221488" start="98932" end="98942" title="pedestrian" label="pedestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879287" start="99074" end="99097" title="Mississippi River Trail" label="Mississippi River Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820247" start="99150" end="99162" title="Audubon Park, New Orleans" label="Audubon Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="99166" end="99175" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840675" start="99288" end="99296" title="Mid-City New Orleans" label="Mid-City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331750" start="99300" end="99318" title="Lake Pontchartrain" label="Lake Pontchartrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378400" start="99342" end="99354" title="bicycle lane" label="bicycle lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105822" start="99386" end="99404" title="St. Charles Avenue" label="St. Charles Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193547" start="99415" end="99432" title="Tulane University" label="Tulane University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144478" start="99504" end="99510" title="Uptown New Orleans" label="Uptown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6799899" start="99519" end="99534" title="McAlister Place, New Orleans" label="McAlister Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q369730" start="99543" end="99558" title="pedestrian mall" label="pedestrian mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q24435935" start="99588" end="99604" title="Lafitte Greenway" label="Lafitte Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q79914" start="99866" end="99879" title="Interstate 10" label="Interstate 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400560" start="99881" end="99895" title="Interstate 610 (Louisiana)" label="Interstate 610"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400489" start="99900" end="99914" title="Interstate 510" label="Interstate 510"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228087" start="99963" end="99987" title="Pontchartrain Expressway" label="Pontchartrain Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330332" start="99992" end="100008" title="Eastern New Orleans" label="New Orleans East"/>
<link wikidata="Q410756" start="100225" end="100232" title="U.S. Route 90" label="U.S. 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q409964" start="100265" end="100272" title="U.S. Route 61" label="U.S. 61"/>
<link wikidata="Q407534" start="100307" end="100314" title="U.S. Route 11" label="U.S. 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002486" start="100400" end="100424" title="Crescent City Connection" label="Crescent City Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q579088" start="100656" end="100675" title="Huey P. Long Bridge (Jefferson Parish)" label="Huey P. Long Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12059375" start="100702" end="100728" title="Luling Bridge" label="Hale Boggs Memorial Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q48834205" start="100739" end="100753" title="Interstate 310 (Louisiana)" label="Interstate 310"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967495" start="100760" end="100776" title="I-10 Twin Span Bridge" label="Twin Span Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q892168" start="100797" end="100805" title="causeway" label="causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400489" start="100899" end="100913" title="Interstate 510" label="Interstate 510"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434509" start="100914" end="100919" title="Louisiana Highway 47" label="LA 47"/>
<link wikidata="Q756421" start="100939" end="100960" title="Intracoastal Waterway" label="Intracoastal Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935938" start="100961" end="100996" title="Mississippi River-Gulf Outlet Canal" label="Mississippi River-Gulf Outlet Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602369" start="101005" end="101022" title="Green Bridge (New Orleans)" label="Paris Road Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330332" start="101035" end="101051" title="Eastern New Orleans" label="New Orleans East"/>
<link wikidata="Q528541" start="101065" end="101074" title="Chalmette, Louisiana" label="Chalmette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132510" start="101088" end="101115" title="Lake Pontchartrain Causeway" label="Lake Pontchartrain Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q126661" start="101360" end="101368" title="Metairie, Louisiana" label="Metairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="101576" end="101593" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q780442" start="101810" end="101814" title="Uber" label="Uber"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077936" start="101819" end="101823" title="Lyft" label="Lyft"/>
<link wikidata="Q177166" start="101950" end="101959" title="king cake" label="king cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461076" start="102186" end="102235" title="Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport" label="Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q991464" start="102262" end="102268" title="Kenner, Louisiana" label="Kenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853543" start="102300" end="102317" title="New Orleans Lakefront Airport" label="Lakefront Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017125" start="102319" end="102367" title="Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base New Orleans" label="Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570460" start="102420" end="102445" title="Southern Seaplane Airport" label="Southern Seaplane Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="102957" end="102963" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691825" start="102969" end="103005" title="New Orleans Union Passenger Terminal" label="New Orleans Union Passenger Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q756508" start="103059" end="103067" title="Crescent (Amtrak)" label="Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q633026" start="103134" end="103153" title="City of New Orleans (train)" label="City of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q906130" start="103217" end="103231" title="Sunset Limited" label="Sunset Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="103313" end="103330" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428122" start="103541" end="103557" title="Class I railroad" label="Class I railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="103577" end="103599" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="103601" end="103613" title="BNSF Railway" label="BNSF Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="103615" end="103639" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q117706368" start="103641" end="103669" title="Canadian Pacific Kansas City" label="Canadian Pacific Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="103671" end="103689" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q624798" start="103694" end="103719" title="Canadian National Railway" label="Canadian National Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982804" start="103725" end="103757" title="New Orleans Public Belt Railroad" label="New Orleans Public Belt Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="103862" end="103887" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="105068" end="105081" title="Sister cities" label="Sister cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q216835" start="105105" end="105116" title="Cap-Haïtien" label="Cap-Haïtien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533" start="105126" end="105133" title="Caracas" label="Caracas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468" start="105147" end="105153" title="Durban" label="Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735" start="105170" end="105179" title="Innsbruck" label="Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q116948" start="105191" end="105205" title="Isola del Liri" label="Isola del Liri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026520" start="105215" end="105238" title="Juan-les-Pins" label="Juan-les-Pins (Antibes)"/>
<link wikidata="Q171632" start="105249" end="105258" title="Maracaibo" label="Maracaibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207321" start="105272" end="105278" title="Matsue" label="Matsue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651972" start="105288" end="105294" title="Mérida Municipality" label="Mérida"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548" start="105305" end="105312" title="Orléans" label="Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q223920" start="105323" end="105335" title="Pointe-Noire" label="Pointe-Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44255" start="105361" end="105382" title="San Miguel de Tucumán" label="San Miguel de Tucumán"/>
<link wikidata="Q140631" start="105396" end="105402" title="Tainan" label="Tainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238" start="105413" end="105424" title="Tegucigalpa" label="Tegucigalpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986624" start="105450" end="105491" title="Buildings and architecture of New Orleans" label="Buildings and architecture of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031395" start="105494" end="105506" title="Cancer Alley" label="Cancer Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720883" start="105509" end="105520" title="The Cabildo" label="The Cabildo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501892" start="105523" end="105546" title="French Quarter Festival" label="French Quarter Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078636" start="105549" end="105578" title="Île d&amp;#x27;Orléans, Louisiana" label="Île d&amp;#x27;Orléans, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864539" start="105581" end="105612" title="List of people from New Orleans" label="List of people from New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879332" start="105621" end="105646" title="Mississippi Suite" label="Mississippi (River) Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977102" start="105699" end="105773" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Orleans Parish, Louisiana" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Orleans Parish, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988074" start="105776" end="105804" title="Neighborhoods in New Orleans" label="Neighborhoods in New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q13476424" start="105807" end="105829" title="New Orleans in fiction" label="New Orleans in fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q17065078" start="105838" end="105855" title="New Orleans Suite" label="New Orleans Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691825" start="105890" end="105926" title="New Orleans Union Passenger Terminal" label="New Orleans Union Passenger Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010769" start="105929" end="105955" title="Orleans Parish School Board" label="New Orleans Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228064" start="105958" end="105976" title="Pontalba Buildings" label="Pontalba Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q12066398" start="105979" end="105993" title="The Presbytere" label="The Presbytere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569917" start="105996" end="106029" title="Southern Food and Beverage Museum" label="Southern Food and Beverage Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53846" wikidata="Q8652" url="?curid=53846" title="Miami">
<text>Miami is a coastal city in the U.S. state of Florida and the county seat of Miami-Dade County in South Florida. It is the core of the Miami metropolitan area, which, with a population of 6.14 million, is the second-largest metropolitan area in the Southeast after Atlanta, and the ninth-largest in the United States. With a population of 442,241 as of the 2020 census, Miami is the second-most populous city in Florida, after Jacksonville. Miami has the third-largest skyline in the U.S. with over 300 high-rises, 70 of which exceed .

Miami is a major center and leader in finance, commerce, culture, arts, and international trade. Miami&#x27;s metropolitan area is by far the largest urban economy in Florida, with a 2017 gross domestic product of $344.9 billion. In a 2018 UBS study of 77 world cities, Miami was the third-richest city in the U.S. and the third-richest globally in purchasing power. Miami is a majority-minority city with a Hispanic and Latino population of 310,472, or 70.2 percent of the city&#x27;s population, as of 2020.

Downtown Miami has among the largest concentrations of international banks in the U.S. and is home to several large national and international companies. The Health District is home to several major University of Miami-affiliated hospital and health facilities, including Jackson Memorial Hospital, the nation&#x27;s largest hospital with 1,547 beds, and the Miller School of Medicine, the University of Miami&#x27;s academic medical center and teaching hospital, and others engaged in health-related care and research. PortMiami, the city&#x27;s seaport, is the busiest cruise port in the world in both passenger traffic and cruise lines.

The Miami metropolitan area is the second-most visited city or metropolitan statistical area in the U.S. after New York City, with over four million visitors in 2022. Miami has sometimes been called the &quot;Gateway to Latin America&quot; because of the magnitude of its commercial and cultural ties to Latin America. In 2022, Miami ranked seventh in the U.S. in business activity, human capital, information exchange, cultural experience, and political engagement.

==Toponymy==
Miami was named after the Miami River, derived from Mayaimi, the historic name of Lake Okeechobee and the Native Americans who lived around it. Miami is sometimes colloquially referred to as &quot;The 305&quot;, &quot;Magic City&quot;, &quot;Gateway to the Americas&quot;, &quot;Gateway to Latin America&quot;, &quot;Capital of Latin America&quot;, and &quot;Vice City&quot;.

==History==


The Tequesta tribe occupied the Miami area for around 2,000 years before contact with Europeans. A village of hundreds of people, dating to 500–600 BCE, was located at the mouth of the Miami River. It is believed that the entire tribe migrated to Cuba by the mid-1700s.

===Settlement===
In 1566, admiral Pedro Menéndez de Avilés, Florida&#x27;s first governor, claimed the area for Spain. A Spanish mission was constructed one year later. Spain, and briefly Britain, ruled Florida until it ceded it to the United States in 1821. In 1836, the U.S. built Fort Dallas on the banks of the Miami River as part of their development of the Florida Territory and their attempt to suppress and remove the Seminoles. As a result, the Miami area became a site of fighting in the Second Seminole War.

===Founding===
Miami is noted as the only major city in the United States founded by a woman. Julia Tuttle, a local citrus grower and a wealthy Cleveland native, was the original owner of the land upon which Miami was built. In the late 19th century, the area was known as &quot;Biscayne Bay Country&quot;, and reports described it as a promising wilderness and &quot;one of the finest building sites in Florida&quot;. The Great Freeze of 1894–1895 hastened Miami&#x27;s growth, as the crops there were the only ones in Florida that survived. Julia Tuttle subsequently convinced railroad tycoon Henry Flagler to extend his Florida East Coast Railway to the region, for which she became known as &quot;the mother of Miami&quot;. Miami was officially incorporated as a city on July 28, 1896, with a population of just over 300.

===20th century===

During the early 20th century, migrants from the Bahamas and African-Americans constituted 40 percent of the city&#x27;s population. When landlords began to rent homes to African-Americans around Avenue J, what would later become NW Fifth Avenue, a gang of white men with torches marched through the neighborhood and warned the residents to move or be bombed.

Miami prospered during the 1920s with an increase in population and development in infrastructure as northerners moved to the city. The legacy of Jim Crow was embedded in these developments. Miami&#x27;s chief of police at the time, H. Leslie Quigg, did not hide the fact that he, like many other white Miami police officers, was a member of the Ku Klux Klan. Unsurprisingly, these officers enforced social codes far beyond the written law. Quigg, for example, &quot;personally and publicly beat a colored bellboy to death for speaking directly to a white woman&quot;.

The collapse of the Florida land boom of the 1920s, the 1926 Miami Hurricane, and the Great Depression in the 1930s slowed development. When World War II began, Miami became a base for U.S. defense against German submarines due to its prime location on the southern coast of Florida. This brought an increase in Miami&#x27;s population; 172,172 people lived in the city by 1940. The city&#x27;s nickname, &quot;The Magic City&quot;, came from its rapid growth, which was noticed by winter visitors who remarked that the city grew so much from one year to the next that it was like magic.

After Fidel Castro rose to power in Cuba following the Revolution in 1959, many wealthy Cubans sought refuge in Miami, further increasing the city&#x27;s population. Miami&#x27;s national profile expanded dramatically in the 1970s, particularly in 1972. The region hosted both the Democratic and Republican National Conventions in the 1972 Presidential election. The Miami Dolphins also made history with their undefeated &quot;perfect&quot; season. The area&#x27;s educational and cultural institutions also developed significantly in this period, positioning the city to service a larger and increasingly international population.

Miami developed new businesses and cultural amenities as part of the New South in the 1980s and 1990s. At the same time, South Florida weathered social problems related to drug wars, immigration from Haiti and Latin America, and the widespread destruction of Hurricane Andrew. Racial and cultural tensions sometimes sparked, but Miami developed in the latter half of the 20th century as a major international, financial, and cultural center. It is the second-largest U.S. city with a Spanish-speaking majority (after El Paso, Texas), and the largest city with a Cuban-American plurality.

==Geography==
Miami and its suburbs are located on a broad plain between the Everglades to the west and Biscayne Bay to the east, which extends from Lake Okeechobee southward to Florida Bay. The elevation of the area averages at around above sea level in most neighborhoods, especially near the coast. The highest points are found along the Miami Rock Ridge, which lies under most of the eastern Miami metro. The main portion of Miami is on the shores of Biscayne Bay, which contains several hundred natural and artificial barrier islands, the largest of which contains Miami Beach and South Beach. The Gulf Stream, a warm ocean current, runs northward just off the coast, allowing Miami&#x27;s climate to stay warm and mild all year.

===Geology===
The surface bedrock under the Miami area is called Miami oolite or Miami limestone. This bedrock is covered by a thin layer of soil, and is no more than thick. Miami limestone formed as the result of the drastic changes in sea level associated with recent glacial periods, or ice ages. Beginning some 130,000 years ago, the Sangamonian Stage raised sea levels to approximately above the current level. All of southern Florida was covered by a shallow sea. Several parallel lines of reef formed along the edge of the submerged Florida plateau, stretching from the present Miami area to what is now the Dry Tortugas.

The area behind this reef line was a large lagoon. Miami limestone formed throughout the area from the deposition of oolites and the shells of bryozoans. Starting about 100,000 years ago, the Wisconsin glaciation began lowering sea levels, exposing the floor of the lagoon. By 15,000 years ago, the sea level had dropped below the current level. The sea level rose quickly after that, stabilizing at the current level about 4,000 years ago, leaving the mainland of South Florida just above sea level.

Beneath the plain lies the Biscayne Aquifer, a natural underground source of fresh water that extends from southern Palm Beach County to Florida Bay. It comes closest to the surface around the cities of Miami Springs and Hialeah. Most of the Miami metropolitan area obtains its drinking water from the Biscayne Aquifer. As a result of the aquifer, it is not possible to dig more than beneath the city without hitting water, which impedes underground construction, though some underground parking garages exist. For this reason, the mass transit systems in and around Miami are elevated or at-grade.

Most of the western fringes of Miami border the Everglades, a tropical marshland covering most of the southern portion of Florida. Alligators that live in the marshes have ventured into Miami communities and onto major highways.

===Cityscape===

====Neighborhoods====

Miami is split roughly into north, south, west, and Downtown areas. The heart of the city is Downtown Miami, which is on the eastern side and includes the neighborhoods of Brickell, Virginia Key, Watson Island, and PortMiami. Downtown Miami is Florida&#x27;s largest and most influential central business district, with many major banks, courthouses, financial headquarters, cultural and tourist attractions, schools, parks, and a large residential population. Brickell Avenue has the largest concentration of international banks in the United States. Just northwest of Downtown is the Health District, which is Miami&#x27;s center for hospitals, research institutes and biotechnology, with hospitals such as Jackson Memorial Hospital, Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, and the University of Miami&#x27;s Miller School of Medicine.

The southern side of Miami includes the neighborhoods of Coral Way, The Roads, and Coconut Grove. Coral Way is a historic residential neighborhood built in 1922 between Downtown and Coral Gables, and is home to many old homes and tree-lined streets. Coconut Grove, settled in 1825, and annexed into Miami in 1925, is a historic neighborhood with narrow, winding roads and a heavy tree canopy. It is the location of Miami&#x27;s City Hall at Dinner Key, the former Coconut Grove Playhouse, CocoWalk, and the Coconut Grove Convention Center. It is home to many nightclubs, bars, restaurants, and bohemian shops, which makes it very popular with local college students. Coconut Grove is known for its many parks and gardens, such as Vizcaya Museum, The Kampong, The Barnacle Historic State Park, and numerous other historic homes and estates.

The western side of Miami includes the neighborhoods of Little Havana, West Flagler, and Flagami. Although at one time a mostly Jewish neighborhood, today western Miami is home to immigrants from mostly Central America and Cuba. The west central neighborhood of Allapattah is a multicultural community of many ethnicities.

The northern side of Miami includes Midtown, a district with a great mix of diversity ranging from West Indians to Hispanics to European Americans. The Edgewater neighborhood of Midtown is mostly composed of high-rise residential towers and is home to the Adrienne Arsht Center for the Performing Arts. Wynwood is an art district with ten galleries in former warehouses, as well as a large outdoor mural project. The wealthier residents of Miami usually live in the Design District and the Upper Eastside, which has many 1920s homes as well as examples of Miami Modern architecture in the MiMo Historic District. The northern side of Miami also has notable African-American and Caribbean immigrant communities, including Little Haiti, Overtown (home of the Lyric Theater), and Liberty City.

===Climate===
Miami has a tropical monsoon climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;Am&quot;) with hot and wet summers and warm and dry winters.

Miami&#x27;s sea-level elevation, coastal location, position just above the Tropic of Cancer, and proximity to the Gulf Stream shape its climate. Average winter high temperatures, from December to March, range from . January is the coolest month with an average daily temperature of . Low temperatures fall below about 3 to 4 nights during the winter season, after the passage of cold fronts that produce what little rainfall that falls in the winter.

There are two basic seasons in Miami, a hot and wet season from May to October, and a warm and dry season from November to April. During the hot and wet season, daily thundershowers occur in the humid unstable air masses. The wet season in Miami is defined as the period during which the average daily dew point temperature is above . The rainy season typically begins on the first day that occurs, or within a few days later.

Daily rainfall in Miami decreases sharply when the average daily dew point falls to or below. In some years, a stalled front to the south of the Florida peninsula may cause rains to continue for a few more days. From 1956 to 1997, the date summer began ranged from April 16 to June 3, with a median date of May 21. In those same years, the date summer ended ranged from September 24 to November 1, with a median date of October 17.

During summer, temperatures range from the mid-80s to low 90s °F (29–35 °C) and are accompanied by high humidity. The heat is often relieved in the afternoon by thunderstorms or a sea breeze that develops off the Atlantic Ocean. Much of the year&#x27;s of rainfall occurs during this period. Dew points in the warm months range from in June to in August.

Historical temperature extremes range from on February 3, 1917, to on July 21, 1942. While Miami has never recorded snowfall at any official weather station since records have been kept, snow flurries fell in some parts of Miami on January 19, 1977. The coldest daytime maximum temperature on record is in December 1989 during the December 1989 United States cold wave. The coldest maximum temperature average between 1991 and 2020 stood at . The warmest overnight low measured is on several occasions. The stability of summer overnight lows is underlined by the mean maximum annual overnight low of just one degree lower.

Hurricane season officially runs from June 1 to November 30, although hurricanes can develop beyond those dates. The most likely time for Miami to be hit is during the peak of the Cape Verde season, which is mid-August to the end of September. Although tornadoes are uncommon in the area, one struck in 1925 and another in 1997. Around 40% of homes in Miami are built upon floodplains and are considered as flood-risk zones.

Miami falls within the Department of Agriculture&#x27;s 10b/11a plant hardiness zone.

Miami is one of the major coastal cities and major cities in the United States that will be most affected by climate change. Globally, it is one of the most at-risk cities, according to a 2020 report by Resources for the Future. Global sea level rise, which in Miami is projected to be to by 2070, will lead to an increase in storm damage, more intense flooding, and will threaten Miami&#x27;s water supply. Other potential impacts of climate change include higher hurricane wind speeds and severe thunderstorms, which can bring about hail or tornadoes. Some protective efforts are in place, including nourishing beaches and adding protective barriers, raising buildings and roads that are vulnerable, and restoring natural habitats such as wetlands. Miami Beach has invested $500 million to protect roads, buildings, and water systems. Real estate prices in Miami already reflect the increase in prices for real estate at a higher elevation within the city compared to real estate at a lower elevation.

==Demographics==

Miami is the largest city in South Florida, the second-largest city in Florida, and is the anchor of the largest metropolitan area in Florida: the Miami metropolitan area, which has over 6 million residents. Despite Miami being home to less than a fourteenth (1/14) of the population of the metro area, it is an outlier compared to its neighbors, being nearly twice the size of the next-largest city in the metro: Hialeah. Miami has approximately a sixth of the population of its own county, Miami-Dade, which is the state&#x27;s largest.

Miami had rapid growth in the first half of the twentieth century. Its population grew from 1,681 in the 1900 census to 249,276 in the 1950 census. This made it Florida&#x27;s largest city, a title it retained until the Jacksonville Consolidation, when the city of Jacksonville absorbed most of Duval County, nearly tripling its population. Since then, Miami has retained its spot as Florida&#x27;s second-largest city.

Throughout the latter half of the twentieth century, Miami experienced a certain amount of stagnation in its population, with expansion slowing during the 1950s and 1960s before nearly halting in the next three decades as suburbanization occurred. Miami grew by 34.3% in the 1950s and 1960s as its population reached 334,859 at the 1970 census. In the next three decades, it only grew 8.2%. By the time of the 2000 census, Miami&#x27;s population stood at 362,470.

In the 2000s and 2010s, spurred by high-rise construction in Downtown Miami, Edgewater, and Brickell, Miami&#x27;s population began to grow quickly once more. An estimate by the American Community Survey found that the downtown population, from Brickell north to Midtown Miami, grew nearly 40% between 2010 and 2018. From 2000 to 2010, Miami&#x27;s population grew by 10.2% and reached 399,457 in 2010. In the early 2010s, Miami&#x27;s population crossed a milestone of 400,000 people. In the 2020 census, it had grown by a further 10.7%, up to a population of 442,241.

In 1970, the Census Bureau reported Miami&#x27;s population as 45.3% Hispanic, 32.9% non-Hispanic White, and 22.7% Black. Miami&#x27;s explosive population growth has been driven by internal migration from other parts of the country, up until the 1960s. From 1970 to 2000, population growth in Miami was stagnant, as non-Hispanic White Miamians left and significant immigration from Latin America, particularly Cuba, made up the balance. Miami&#x27;s Hispanic majority solidified itself in this period of time, and in 1985, Miami elected its first Cuban-born mayor, Xavier Suarez.

The non-Hispanic Black population of the city of Miami peaked in 1990 at almost 90,000, making up nearly a quarter of the population of Miami. Since then, Miami&#x27;s non-Hispanic Black population has experienced a precipitous and steady decline. In the 2020 census, it was 52,447, only 11.7% of the population. Reasons for this include high costs in areas such as Liberty City and Little Haiti, compounded with gentrification.

The non-Hispanic White population began to rebound in the twenty-first century, as the monolithically Hispanic areas in the Western and Central parts of Miami experienced population stagnation. This caused them to begin to be outweighed by migration into the Downtown region, from Latin America and the rest of the United States. This caused the non-Hispanic White population to rise from a nadir of 11.8% at the time of the 2000 census to 11.9% at the time of the 2010 census. After this, the non-Hispanic White population grew significantly faster than Miami as a whole did during the 2010s. In the 2020 census, non-Hispanic Whites were 14.0% of the population of Miami and numbered 61,829, the highest number since the 1980s. The non-Hispanic White population of Miami surpassed the non-Hispanic Black population of Miami in the 2010s.


In 2010, 34.4% of city residents were of Cuban origin, 15.8% had a Central American background (7.2% Nicaraguan, 5.8% Honduran, 1.2% Salvadoran, and 1.0% Guatemalan), 8.7% were of South American descent (3.2% Colombian, 1.4% Venezuelan, 1.2% Peruvian, 1.2% Argentine, 1.0% Chilean and 0.7% Ecuadorian), 4.0% had other Hispanic or Latino origins (0.5% Spaniard), 3.2% descended from Puerto Ricans, 2.4% were Dominican, and 1.5% had Mexican ancestry.

In 2010, 5.6% of city residents were West Indian or Afro-Caribbean American origin (4.4% Haitian, 0.4% Jamaican, 0.4% Bahamian, 0.1% British West Indian, and 0.1% Trinidadian and Tobagonian, 0.1% Other or Unspecified West Indian), 3.0% were Black Hispanics, and 0.4% were Subsaharan African origin.

In 2010, those of (non-Hispanic white) European ancestry were 11.9% of Miami&#x27;s population. Of the city&#x27;s total population, 1.7% were German, 1.6% Italian, 1.4% Irish, 1.0% English, 0.8% French, 0.6% Russian, and 0.5% were Polish.

In 2010, those of Asian ancestry were 1.0% of Miami&#x27;s population. Of the city&#x27;s total population, 0.3% were Indian/Indo-Caribbean (1,206 people), 0.3% Chinese/Chinese Caribbean (1,804 people), 0.2% Filipino (647 people), 0.1% were other Asian (433 people), 0.1% Japanese (245 people), 0.1% Korean (213 people), and 0.0% were Vietnamese (125 people).

In 2010, 1.9% of the population considered themselves to be of only American ancestry (regardless of race or ethnicity), while 0.5% were of Arab ancestry, in 2010.

In a 2014 Pew Research Center study, Christianity was the most-practiced religion in Miami (68%), with 39% professing attendance at a variety of churches that could be considered Protestant, and 27% professing Catholicism. Followed by Judaism (9%); Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism, and a variety of other religions have smaller followings; atheism or no self-identifying organized religious affiliation was practiced by 21%.

There has been a Norwegian Seamen&#x27;s church in Miami since the early 1980s. In November 2011, Crown Princess of Norway Mette-Marit opened a new building for the church. The church was built as a center for the 10,000 Scandinavians that live in Florida. Around 4,000 of them are Norwegian. The church is also an important place for the 150 Norwegians that work at Walt Disney World in Central Florida.

In a 2022 Point-In-Time Homeless Count, there were 3,440 homeless people in Miami-Dade County, 970 of which were on the streets. In the city limits of Miami, there were 591 unsheltered homeless people on the streets, up from 555 in 2021.

According to National Immigration Forum, the top countries of origin for Miami&#x27;s immigrants are Latin America (86%): Cuba (741,666), Haiti (213,000), Colombia (166,338), Jamaica (144,445); Europe (6.1%): United Kingdom (23,334), Germany (15,611), Italy (14,240) and Asia (5.2%): India (23,602), China (21,580) and the Philippines (15,078).

==Economy==

Miami is a major center of commerce and finance and has a strong international business community. According to the 2020 ranking of world cities undertaken by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network (GaWC) based on the level of presence of global corporate service organizations, Miami is considered a Beta + level world city, along with Atlanta, Dallas, and Houston. However, according to the U.S. census between 2015–2019, Miami lacks in terms of owner-occupied housing, computer and internet usage, education of bachelor&#x27;s degree or higher, median household income, per capita income, while having a higher percentage of persons in poverty. In 2013, Miami had a Gross Metropolitan Product of $257 billion, ranking 11th in the United States and 20th worldwide in GMP.

Several large companies are headquartered in Miami, including but not limited to Akerman LLP, Alienware, Arquitectonica, Brightstar Corporation, Celebrity Cruises, Carnival Corporation, Duany Plater-Zyberk, Greenberg Traurig, Inktel Direct, Lennar Corporation, Norwegian Cruise Line, Oceania Cruises, OPKO Health, Parkjockey, RCTV International, Royal Caribbean International, Sitel, Southern Wine &amp; Spirits, Telemundo, Vector Group, Watsco and World Fuel Services. Over 1,400 multinational firms are located in Miami, with many major global organizations headquartering their Latin American operations (or regional offices) in the city including Walmart. Companies based in nearby cities or unincorporated areas of Miami-Dade County include, Benihana, Burger King, Carnival Cruise Line, Navarro Discount Pharmacies, Perry Ellis International, Ryder, Sedano&#x27;s, UniMás, and U.S. Century Bank.

Miami is a major television production center, and the most important city in the United States for Spanish language media. Telemundo and UniMás have their headquarters in the Miami area. Univisión Studios and Telemundo Global Studios produce much of the original programming for their respective parent networks, such as telenovelas, news, sports, and talk shows. In 2011, 85% of Telemundo&#x27;s original programming was filmed in Miami. Miami is a significant music recording center, with the Sony Music Latin headquarters in the city, along with many other smaller record labels. Miami also attracts many artists for music video and film shoots.

During the mid-2000s, Miami witnessed its largest real estate boom since the Florida land boom of the 1920s, and the city had well over a hundred approved high-rise construction projects. However, only 50 were actually built. Rapid high-rise construction led to fast population growth in Miami&#x27;s inner neighborhoods, with Downtown, Brickell and Edgewater becoming the fastest-growing areas of Miami. Miami currently has the seven tallest, as well as fifteen of top twenty, skyscrapers in the state of Florida, with the tallest being the Panorama Tower.

The housing market crash of 2007 caused a foreclosure crisis in the area. Like other metro areas in the United States, crime in Miami is localized to specific neighborhoods.

Miami International Airport (IATA: MIA) and PortMiami are among the nation&#x27;s busiest ports of entry, especially for cargo from South America and the Caribbean. PortMiami is the world&#x27;s busiest cruise port. Miami International Airport is the busiest airport in Florida and the largest gateway between the United States and Latin America. Due to its strength in international business, finance and trade, Miami has among the largest concentration of international banks in the country, primarily along Brickell Avenue in Brickell, Miami&#x27;s financial district. Miami was the host city of the 2003 Free Trade Area of the Americas negotiations.

Miami is the home to the National Hurricane Center and the headquarters of the United States Southern Command, responsible for military operations in Central and South America. Miami is also an industrial center, especially for stone quarrying and warehousing. These industries are centered largely on the western fringes of Miami near Doral and Hialeah.

In the 2012 census, Miami had the fourth highest percentage of family incomes below the federal poverty line out of all large cities in the United States, behind Detroit, Cleveland, and Cincinnati, respectively. Miami is also one of the very few cities in the U.S. where the local government has gone bankrupt, in 2001.

The Little Fire Ant, &quot;Wasmannia auropunctata&quot;, is an invasive agricultural pest in parts of Miami.

===PortMiami===
PortMiami in Miami is the largest cruise ship port in the world. It has retained its status as the number one cruise and passenger port in the world for well over a decade, accommodating the largest cruise ships and the major cruise lines. In 2017, the port served 5,340,559 cruise passengers. The port is one of the nation&#x27;s busiest cargo ports, importing 9,162,340 tons of cargo in 2017.

Among North American ports, it ranks second to New Orleans&#x27; Port of South Louisiana in cargo tonnage imported from Latin America. The port sits on and has seven passenger terminals. China is the port&#x27;s number one import country and number one export country. Miami has the world&#x27;s largest amount of cruise line headquarters, home to Carnival Cruise Line, Celebrity Cruises, Norwegian Cruise Line, Oceania Cruises, and Royal Caribbean International. In 2014, the Port of Miami Tunnel opened, connecting the MacArthur Causeway to PortMiami.

===Tourism and conventions===

Tourism is one of the Miami&#x27;s largest private-sector industries, accounting for more than 144,800 jobs in Miami-Dade County. Miami&#x27;s frequent portrayal in music, film, and popular culture has made Miami and its landmarks recognizable worldwide. In 2016, it attracted the second-highest number of foreign tourists of any city in the United States, after New York City, and is among the top 20 cities worldwide by international visitor spending. More than 15.9 million visitors arrived in Miami in 2017, adding $26.1 billion to the economy. With a large hotel infrastructure and the newly renovated Miami Beach Convention Center, Miami is a popular destination for annual conventions and conferences.

Some of the most popular tourist destinations in Miami include South Beach, Lincoln Road, Bayside Marketplace, Downtown Miami, and Brickell City Centre. The Art Deco District in Miami Beach is reputed as one of the most glamorous in the world for its nightclubs, beaches, historical buildings, and shopping. Annual events such as the Miami Open, Art Basel, the Winter Music Conference, the South Beach Wine and Food Festival, and Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week Miami attract millions to the metropolis every year.

==Culture==
Miami enjoys a vibrant culture that is influenced by a diverse population from all around the world. Miami is known as the &quot;Magic City&quot; for seemingly popping up overnight due to its young age and massive growth. Miami is infamous for its drug war in the early 1980s and its outrun aesthetics. It is nicknamed the &quot;Capital of Latin America&quot; because of its high population of Spanish speakers.

Miami has been the setting of numerous films and television shows, including &quot;Bad Boys&quot;, &quot;Miami Vice&quot;, &quot;Cocaine Cowboys&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;Burn Notice&quot;, &quot;Jane the Virgin&quot;, &quot;Scarface&quot;, &quot;The Birdcage&quot;, &quot;Ballers&quot;, &quot;South Beach Tow&quot;, &quot;Ace Ventura: Pet Detective&quot;, &quot;Ride Along 2&quot;, &quot;Love &amp; Hip Hop: Miami&quot;, &quot;Kourtney &amp; Kim Take Miami&quot;, &quot;Family Karma&quot;, &quot;The Golden Girls&quot;, &quot;2 Fast 2 Furious&quot;, &quot;Austin &amp; Ally&quot;, &quot;The Real CSI: Miami&quot;, and &quot;Dexter&quot;. Several video games, including &quot;Hotline Miami&quot;, the Gameloft racing game &quot;Asphalt Overdrive&quot;, &quot;&quot;, and the fictional Vice City in several video games across the &quot;Grand Theft Auto&quot; series, most notably &quot;Grand Theft Auto: Vice City&quot; and the upcoming &quot;Grand Theft Auto VI&quot;, is based on Miami.

===Entertainment and performing arts===
In addition to annual festivals like the Calle Ocho Festival, Miami is home to many entertainment venues, theaters, museums, parks and performing arts centers. The newest addition to the Miami arts scene is the Adrienne Arsht Center for the Performing Arts, home of the Florida Grand Opera and the second-largest performing arts center in the United States after Lincoln Center in New York City. The center attracts many large-scale operas, ballets, concerts, and musicals from around the world. Other performing arts venues in Miami include the Olympia Theater, Wertheim Performing Arts Center, the Fair Expo Center, the Tower Theater, and the Bayfront Park Amphitheater.

Another celebrated event is the Miami International Film Festival, taking place every year for 10 days around the first week of March, during which independent international and American films are screened across Miami. Miami has over a half dozen independent film theaters.

Miami attracts a large number of musicians, singers, actors, dancers, and orchestral players. The city has numerous orchestras, symphonies and performing art conservatories. These include the Florida Grand Opera, FIU School of Music, Frost School of Music, and the New World School of the Arts.

Miami is a major fashion center, home to models and some of the top modeling agencies in the world. Miami hosts many fashion shows and events, including the annual Miami Fashion Week and the Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week Miami, held in the Wynwood Art District.

Miami&#x27;s first boat-in movie theater opened in 2020.

===Museums and visual arts===

Some of the museums in Miami include the Frost Art Museum, Frost Museum of Science, HistoryMiami, Institute of Contemporary Art, Miami Children&#x27;s Museum, Pérez Art Museum, Lowe Art Museum, and the Vizcaya Museum and Gardens, a National Historic Landmark set on a 28-acre early 20th century estate in Coconut Grove.

===Cuisine===

The cuisine of Miami is a reflection of its diverse population, with a heavy influence from Latin American, Caribbean, Soul, and Jewish cuisine. By combining them with mainstream American cuisine, it has spawned a unique South Florida style of cooking known as Floribbean cuisine. It is widely available throughout Miami and South Florida and can be found in restaurant chains such as Pollo Tropical.

Cuban immigrants in the 1960s originated the Cuban sandwich and brought medianoche, Cuban espresso, Bistec de palomilla, and croquetas, all of which have grown in popularity among all Miamians and have become symbols of the city&#x27;s varied cuisine. Today, these are part of the local culture and can be found throughout the city at window cafés, particularly outside of supermarkets and restaurants. Some of these locations, such as the Versailles restaurant in Little Havana, are landmark eateries of Miami. Located on the Atlantic Ocean, and with a long history as a seaport, Miami is also known for its seafood, with many seafood restaurants located along the Miami River and in and around Biscayne Bay. The city is also the headquarters of restaurant chains such as Burger King and Benihana.

===Dialect===

The Miami area has a unique dialect of American English, commonly called the &quot;Miami accent&quot;, that is widely spoken. The accent developed among second- or third-generation Hispanics, including Cuban Americans, whose first language was English. Some non-Hispanic white, black and other races who were born and raised in the Miami area have tended to adopt it as well.

It is based on a fairly standard American accent but with some changes, very similar to dialects in the Mid-Atlantic, especially those in the New York area and Northern New Jersey, including New York Latino English. Unlike Virginia Piedmont, Coastal Southern American, Northeast American dialects and Florida Cracker dialect, &quot;Miami accent&quot; is rhotic. It incorporates a rhythm and pronunciation heavily influenced by Spanish, where rhythm is syllable-timed.

This is a native dialect of English, not learner English or interlanguage. It is possible to differentiate this variety from an interlanguage spoken by second-language speakers, in that the &quot;Miami accent&quot; does &quot;not&quot; generally display the following features: there is no addition of before initial consonant clusters with , speakers do not confuse with , (e.g., &quot;Yale&quot; with &quot;jail&quot;), and /r/ and /rr/ are pronounced as alveolar approximant [] instead of alveolar tap or alveolar trill [r] in Spanish.

==Sports==
 

Miami&#x27;s main five sports teams are Inter Miami of Major League Soccer (MLS), the Miami Marlins of Major League Baseball (MLB), the Florida Panthers of the National Hockey League (NHL), the Miami Heat of the National Basketball Association (NBA) and the Miami Dolphins of the National Football League (NFL). The Miami Open, an annual tennis tournament, was previously held in Key Biscayne before moving to Hard Rock Stadium after the tournament was purchased by Miami Dolphins owner Stephen Ross in 2019.

Miami is home to numerous marinas, jai alai venues, and golf courses. The city streets have hosted professional auto races in the past, most notably the open-wheel Grand Prix of Miami, the sports car Grand Prix of Miami, and Miami Grand Prix of Formula One. In 2015, Miami hosted a one-off Formula E race. The Homestead–Miami Speedway oval hosts NASCAR races.

The Heat and the Marlins play within Miami&#x27;s city limits, at the Kaseya Center in Downtown and LoanDepot Park in Little Havana, respectively. Marlins Park is built on the site of the old Miami Orange Bowl stadium.

The Miami Dolphins play at Hard Rock Stadium in suburban Miami Gardens, while the Florida Panthers play in nearby Sunrise at Amerant Bank Arena. Inter Miami CF plays at Chase Stadium in nearby Fort Lauderdale, temporarily until a stadium is built at Miami Freedom Park. Miami FC is another professional soccer club that plays in the USL Championship second tier of the United States soccer league system. The Club plays its home matches at the FIU Stadium on the campus of Florida International University (FIU) in Miami.

The Orange Bowl, one of the major bowl games in the College Football Playoff of the NCAA, is played at Hard Rock Stadium every winter. The stadium has also hosted the Super Bowl. The Miami metro area has hosted the game ten times, five times at the current Hard Rock Stadium and five at the Miami Orange Bowl, tying New Orleans for the most games.

Miami is also the home of many college sports teams. The two largest are the University of Miami Hurricanes, whose football team plays at Hard Rock Stadium and Florida International University Panthers, whose football team plays at FIU Stadium. The Hurricanes compete in the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC), while the Panthers compete in the Conference USA of the National Collegiate Athletic Association.

Miami is home to Paso Fino horses. Competitions are held at Tropical Park Equestrian Center.

Miami hosted the 2024 Copa América final in July 2024.

Miami will serve as one of eleven U.S. host cities for the 2026 FIFA World Cup.

The following are the major professional sports teams in the Miami metropolitan area:

==Beaches and parks==

The City of Miami has various lands operated by the National Park Service, the Florida Division of Recreation and Parks, and the City of Miami Department of Parks and Recreation.

Miami&#x27;s tropical weather allows for year-round outdoor activities. Miami has numerous marinas, rivers, bays, canals, and the Atlantic Ocean, which make boating, canoeing, sailing, and fishing popular outdoor activities. Biscayne Bay has numerous coral reefs that make snorkeling and scuba diving popular. There are over 80 parks and gardens in the city. The largest and most popular parks are Bayfront Park and Museum Park (located in the heart of Downtown and the location of the Miami-Dade Arena and Bayside Marketplace), Tropical Park, Peacock Park, Virginia Key, and Watson Island.

Other popular cultural destinations in or near Miami include Zoo Miami, Jungle Island, the Miami Seaquarium, Monkey Jungle, Coral Castle, Charles Deering Estate, Fairchild Tropical Botanic Garden, and Key Biscayne.

In its 2020 ParkScore ranking, The Trust for Public Land reported that the park system in the City of Miami was the 64th best park system among the 100 most populous U.S. cities, down slightly from 48th place in the 2017 ranking. The City of Miami was analyzed to have a median park size of 2.6 acres, park land as percent of city area of 6.5%, 87% of residents living within a 10-minute walk of a park, $48.39 spending per capita of park services, and 1.3 playgrounds per 10,000 residents.

==Law and government==

The government of the City of Miami uses the mayor-commissioner type of system. The city commission consists of five commissioners that are elected from single member districts. The city commission constitutes the governing body with powers to pass ordinances, adopt regulations, and exercise all powers conferred upon the city in the city charter. The mayor is elected at large and appoints a city manager. The City of Miami is governed by Mayor Francis Suarez and 5 city commissioners that oversee the five districts in the city.

The commission&#x27;s regular meetings are held at Miami City Hall, which is located at 3500 Pan American Drive on Dinner Key in the neighborhood of Coconut Grove. In the United States House of Representatives, Miami is represented by Republicans Maria Elvira Salazar and Mario Diaz-Balart, along with Democrat Frederica Wilson.

===City Commission===

# Francis Suarez – Mayor of the City of Miami
* Miguel Angel Gabela – Miami Commissioner, District 1
::Allapattah and Grapeland Heights
* Damian Pardo – Miami Commissioner, District 2
::Arts &amp; Entertainment District, Brickell, Coconut Grove, Coral Way, Downtown Miami, Edgewater, Midtown Miami, Park West and the South part Upper Eastside
* Joe Carollo – Miami Commissioner, District 3
::Coral Way, Little Havana and The Roads
* Manolo Reyes – Miami Commissioner, District 4
::Coral Way, Flagami and West Flagler
* Christine King – Miami Commissioner, District 5
::Buena Vista, Design District, Liberty City, Little Haiti, Little River, Lummus Park, Overtown, Spring Garden and Wynwood and northern part of the Upper Eastside 
* Arthur Noriega – City Manager
* Victoria Méndez – City Attorney
* Todd B. Hannon – City Clerk

== Politics ==
For much of the 20th century, Miami and its surrounding area, Miami-Dade County, were solidly Democratic, reflecting the city&#x27;s diverse population and liberal political leanings. However, in recent election cycles, a notable shift has occurred. The 2020 presidential election marked a turning point, with Trump making substantial gains among Hispanic voters, especially within the Cuban-American community. This shift was reflected in Miami-Dade County, where Trump only lost the county by seven points and lost the city by 19 points, a 21 point shift to the right from 2016. Then in the 2022 Florida gubernatorial election, Ron DeSantis won the county for the first time for a Republican candidate since 2002 and only lost the city of Miami by one-and-a-half points. That trend continued in the 2024 presidential election in Florida, with Trump winning the county by eleven points, a rare occurrence for a Republican presidential candidate. This was the first time a Republican candidate had won Miami-Dade County since 1988, signaling a major political transformation in what had traditionally been a Democratic stronghold.

In that same election, Trump came within 1,000 votes of flipping the city of Miami itself. While the city did not fully switch to Republican control, the narrowing margin underscored the growing support for Trump among Miami&#x27;s voters, particularly those of Cuban and other Latin American origins. The increasing alignment of these communities with the Republican Party reflects broader national trends, where a growing number of Hispanic voters have become disillusioned with the Democratic Party&#x27;s policies, particularly on issues like immigration, taxes, and government spending.

The political transformation in Miami and Miami-Dade County is part of a larger trend of changing dynamics among Hispanic voters in the United States. Historically, this demographic group leaned toward the Democratic Party, but recent shifts suggest that Republicans are increasingly appealing to these voters, especially through rhetoric and policies that resonate with their concerns about immigration, economic opportunity, and law and order.

As the political landscape of Miami continues to evolve, its future as a bellwether for the broader Hispanic vote remains uncertain. However, the dramatic swing to the right in recent years suggests that the city, and the surrounding county, may no longer be the Democratic stronghold it once was.

==Education==
===Colleges and universities===
Miami-Dade County has over 200,000 students enrolled in local colleges and universities, placing it seventh in the nation in per capita university enrollment. In 2010, the city&#x27;s four largest colleges and universities, Miami Dade College, Florida International University, University of Miami, and Barry University, graduated 28,000 students.

Miami is also home to both for-profit and nonprofit organizations that offer a range of professional training and other, related educational programs. &quot;Per&quot; Scholas, for example is a nonprofit organization that offers free professional certification training directed towards successfully passing CompTIA A+ and Network+ certification exams as a route to securing jobs and building careers.
Colleges and universities in and around Miami:
* Barry University, Miami Shores
* Broward College, Fort Lauderdale
* Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton
* Florida International University, University Park
* Florida Memorial University, Miami Gardens
* Keiser University, Fort Lauderdale
* Miami Dade College, Miami
* Miami International University of Art &amp; Design
* Nova Southeastern University, Davie
* Palm Beach Atlantic University, West Palm Beach
* Palm Beach State College, Lake Worth Beach
* St. Thomas University, Miami Gardens
* Southeastern College, West Palm Beach
* Talmudic University of Florida, Miami Beach
* University of Fort Lauderdale, Lauderhill
* University of Miami, Coral Gables

===Primary and secondary schools===

Public schools in Miami are governed by Miami-Dade County Public Schools, which is the largest school district in Florida and the fourth-largest in the United States. In September 2008 it had a student enrollment of 385,655 and over 392 schools and centers. The district is the largest minority public school system in the country, with 60% of its students being of Hispanic origin, 28% Black or West Indian American, 10% White (non-Hispanic) and 2% non-white of other minorities.

The Miami city limits is home to several key high schools: Design and Architecture High School, ranked seventh highest on the &quot;Gold Medal&quot; by list &quot;US News and World Report&quot;, MAST Academy, Coral Reef High School, and the New World School of the Arts. M-DCPS is also one of a few public school districts in the United States to offer optional bilingual education in Spanish, French, German, Haitian Creole, and Mandarin Chinese.

Miami is home to several well-known Roman Catholic, Jewish and non-denominational private schools. The Archdiocese of Miami operates the area&#x27;s Catholic private schools, which include Immaculata-Lasalle High School (in the Miami city limits), St. Theresa School (Coral Gables), Monsignor Edward Pace High School (Miami Gardens), and St. Brendan High School (in Westchester), among numerous other Catholic elementary and high schools. Archbishop Curley-Notre Dame High School was in the Miami city limits until its closure in 2016.

Catholic preparatory schools operated by religious orders in the area are Belen Jesuit Preparatory School (Tamiami) and Christopher Columbus High School (Westchester) for boys and Carrollton School of the Sacred Heart (Miami city limits) and Our Lady of Lourdes Academy (Ponce-Davis) for girls.

Non-denominational private schools in Miami are Ransom Everglades, Gulliver Preparatory School, The Cushman School, and Miami Country Day School. Other schools in the area include Samuel Scheck Hillel Community Day School, Dade Christian School, Dawere International High School, Palmer Trinity School, Westminster Christian School, and Riviera Schools.

===Supplementary education===
The Miami Hoshuko, is a part-time Japanese school for Japanese citizens and ethnic Japanese people in the area. Previously it was located on Virginia Key, at the Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science. Currently the school holds classes in Westchester and has offices in Doral.

==Media==

Miami has one of the largest television markets in the nation and the second largest in the state of Florida after Tampa Bay. Miami has several major newspapers, the main and largest newspaper being &quot;The Miami Herald&quot;. &quot;El Nuevo Herald&quot; is the major and largest Spanish-language newspaper. &quot;The Miami Herald&quot; and &quot;El Nuevo Herald&quot; are Miami&#x27;s and South Florida&#x27;s main, major and largest newspapers. The papers left their longtime home in Downtown Miami in 2013. The newspapers are now headquartered at the former home of U.S. Southern Command in Doral.

Other major newspapers include &quot;Miami Today&quot;, headquartered in Brickell, &quot;Miami New Times&quot;, headquartered in Midtown, &quot;Miami SunPost&quot;, &quot;South Florida Business Journal&quot;, and &quot;The Miami Times&quot;. An additional Spanish-language newspaper, &quot;Diario Las Americas&quot; also serves Miami. Student newspapers from the local universities include the University of Miami&#x27;s &quot;The Miami Hurricane&quot;, Florida International University&#x27;s &quot;The Beacon&quot;, Miami-Dade College&#x27;s &quot;The Metropolis&quot;, and Barry University&#x27;s &quot;The Buccaneer&quot;. Many neighborhoods and neighboring areas have their own local newspapers, such as the &quot;Aventura News&quot;, &quot;Coral Gables Tribune&quot;, &quot;Biscayne Bay Tribune&quot;, &quot;Biscayne Times&quot;, and the &quot;Palmetto Bay News&quot;.

A number of magazines circulate throughout the greater Miami area, including &quot;Miami Monthly&quot;, Southeast Florida&#x27;s only city/regional, and &quot;Ocean Drive&quot;, a hot-spot social scene glossy.

Miami is the headquarters and main production city of many of the world&#x27;s largest television networks, record label companies, broadcasting companies and production facilities, such as Telemundo, Univision, Univision Communications, Mega TV, Universal Music Latin Entertainment, RCTV International and Sunbeam Television. In 2009, Univision announced plans to build a new production studio in Miami, dubbed Univision Studios. Univision Studios is headquartered in Miami, and will produce programming for all of Univision Communications&#x27; television networks.

Miami is the twelfth largest radio market and the seventeenth largest television market in the United States. Television stations serving the Miami area include WAMI (UniMás O&amp;O), WBFS (The CW), WSFL (Independent), WFOR (CBS O&amp;O), WHFT (TBN), WLTV (Univision O&amp;O), WPLG (ABC), WPXM (Ion), WSCV (Telemundo), WSVN (Fox), WTVJ (NBC O&amp;O), WPBT (PBS), and WLRN (also PBS).

==Transportation==
In the 2016 American Community Survey, 72.3% of working city of Miami residents commuted by driving alone, 8.7% carpooled, 9% used public transportation, and 3.7% walked. About 1.8% used all other forms of transportation, including taxicab, motorcycle, and bicycle. About 4.5% of working city of Miami residents worked at home. In 2015, 19.9% of city of Miami households were without a car, which decreased to 18.6% in 2016. The national average was 8.7 percent in 2016. Miami averaged 1.24 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8 per household.

===Expressways and roads===
Miami&#x27;s road system is based along the numerical Miami grid where Flagler Street forms the east–west baseline and Miami Avenue forms the north–south meridian. The corner of Flagler Street and Miami Avenue is in the middle of Downtown in front of the Downtown Macy&#x27;s (formerly the Burdine&#x27;s headquarters). The Miami grid is primarily numerical so that, for example, all street addresses north of Flagler Street and west of Miami Avenue have &quot;NW&quot; in their address. Because its point of origin is in Downtown, which is close to the coast, the &quot;NW&quot; and &quot;SW&quot; quadrants are much larger than the &quot;SE&quot; and &quot;NE&quot; quadrants. Many roads, especially major ones, are also named (e.g., Tamiami Trail/SW 8th St), although, with exceptions, the number is in more common usage among locals.

With few exceptions, within this grid north–south roads are designated as Courts, Roads, Avenues or Places (often remembered by their acronym), while east–west roads are streets, Terraces, Drives or occasionally Ways. Major roads in each direction are located at one mile intervals. There are 16 blocks to each mile on north–south avenues, and 10 blocks to each mile on east–west streets. Major north–south avenues generally end in &quot;7&quot; – e.g., 17th, 27th, 37th/Douglas Aves., 57th/Red Rd., 67th/Ludlam, 87th/Galloway, etc., all the way west beyond 177th/Krome Avenue. One prominent exception is 42nd Avenue, LeJeune Road, located at the half-mile point instead.

Major east–west streets to the south of Downtown are multiples of 16, though the beginning point of this system is at SW 8th St, one half-mile south of Flagler (&quot;zeroth&quot;) Street. Thus, major streets are at 8th St., 24th St./Coral Way, 40th St./Bird, 56th/Miller, 72nd/ Sunset, 88th/N. Kendall, 104th (originally S. Kendall), 120th/Montgomery, 136th/Howard, 152nd/Coral Reef, 168th/Richmond, 184th/Eureka, 200th/Quail Roost, 216th/Hainlin Mill, 232nd/Silver Palm, 248th/Coconut Palm, etc., well into the 300s. Within the grid, odd-numbered addresses are generally on the north or east side, and even-numbered addresses are on the south or west side.

All streets and avenues in Miami-Dade County follow the Miami grid, with a few exceptions, most notably in Coral Gables, Hialeah, Coconut Grove and Miami Beach. One neighborhood, The Roads, is named as such because its streets run off the Miami grid at a 45-degree angle, and therefore are all named roads.

Miami-Dade County is served by four Interstate Highways (I-75, I-95, I-195, I-395) and several U.S. Highways including U.S. Route 1, U.S. Route 27, U.S. Route 41, and U.S. Route 441.

Some of the major Florida State Roads (and their common names) serving Miami are:
* SR 112 (Airport Expressway): Interstate 95 to MIA
* Homestead Extension of Florida&#x27;s Turnpike (SR 821): Florida&#x27;s Turnpike mainline (SR 91)/Miami Gardens to U.S. Route 1/Florida City
* SR 826 (Palmetto Expressway): Golden Glades Interchange to U.S. Route 1/Pinecrest
* SR 836 (Dolphin Expressway): Downtown to SW 137th Ave via MIA
* SR 874 (Don Shula Expressway): 826/Bird Road to Homestead Extension of Florida&#x27;s Turnpike/Kendall
* SR 878 (Snapper Creek Expressway): SR 874/Kendall to U.S. Route 1/Pinecrest &amp; South Miami
* SR 924 (Gratigny Parkway) Miami Lakes to Opa-locka

Miami has six major causeways that span over Biscayne Bay connecting the western mainland, with the eastern barrier islands along the Atlantic Ocean. The Rickenbacker Causeway is the southernmost causeway and connects Brickell to Virginia Key and Key Biscayne. The Venetian Causeway and MacArthur Causeway connect Downtown with South Beach. The Julia Tuttle Causeway connects Midtown and Miami Beach. The 79th Street Causeway connects the Upper East Side with North Beach. The northernmost causeway, the Broad Causeway, is the smallest of Miami&#x27;s six causeways and connects North Miami to Bay Harbor Islands and Bal Harbour.

In 2007, Miami was identified as having the rudest drivers in the United States, the second year in a row to have been cited, in a poll commissioned by automobile club AutoVantage. Miami is also consistently ranked as one of the most dangerous cities in the United States for pedestrians.

===Public transportation===

Public transportation in Miami is operated by Miami-Dade Transit and SFRTA, and includes commuter rail (Tri-Rail), heavy-rail rapid transit (Metrorail), an elevated people mover (Metromover), and buses (Metrobus). Miami has Florida&#x27;s highest transit ridership as about 17% of Miamians use transit on a daily basis. The average Miami public transit commute on weekdays is 90 minutes, while 39% of public transit riders commute for more than 2 hours a day. The average wait time at a public transit stop or station is 18 minutes, while 37% of riders wait for more than 20 minutes on average every day. The average single trip distance with public transit is , while 38% travel more than in each direction.

Miami&#x27;s heavy-rail rapid transit system, Metrorail, is an elevated system comprising two lines and 23 stations on a -long line. Metrorail connects the urban western suburbs of Hialeah, Medley, and inner-city Miami with suburban The Roads, Coconut Grove, Coral Gables, South Miami, and urban Kendall via the central business districts of Miami International Airport, the Health District, and Downtown. A free, elevated people mover, Metromover, operates 21 stations on three different lines in greater Downtown Miami, with a station at roughly every two blocks of Downtown and Brickell. Several expansion projects are being funded by a transit development sales tax surcharge throughout Miami-Dade County.

Tri-Rail, a commuter rail system operated by the South Florida Regional Transportation Authority (SFRTA), runs from Miami International Airport northward to West Palm Beach, making eighteen stops throughout Miami-Dade, Broward, and Palm Beach counties.

The Miami Intermodal Center is a massive transportation hub servicing Metrorail, Amtrak, Tri-Rail, Brightline, Metrobus, Greyhound Lines, taxis, rental cars, MIA Mover, private automobiles, bicycles and pedestrians adjacent to Miami International Airport. Miami Intermodal Center was completed in 2010, and is serving about 150,000 commuters and travelers in the Miami area. Phase I of MiamiCentral Station was completed in 2012, and the Tri-Rail part of Phase II was completed in 2015, but the construction of the Amtrak part remains delayed.

Two new light rail systems, Baylink and the Miami Streetcar, have been proposed and are currently in the planning stage. BayLink would connect Downtown with South Beach, and the Miami Streetcar would connect Downtown with Midtown.

Miami is the southern terminus of Amtrak&#x27;s Atlantic Coast services, running two lines, the Silver Meteor and the Silver Star, both terminating in New York City. The Miami Amtrak Station is located in the suburb of Hialeah near the Tri-Rail/Metrorail Station on NW 79 St and NW 38 Ave. Current construction of the Miami Central Station will move all Amtrak operations from its current out-of-the-way location to a centralized location with Metrorail, MIA Mover, Tri-Rail, Miami International Airport, and the Miami Intermodal Center all within the same station closer to Downtown. The station was expected to be completed by 2012, but experienced several delays and was later expected to be completed in late 2014, again pushed back to early 2015.

===Airports===
Miami International Airport serves as the primary international airport of the Greater Miami Area. One of the busiest international airports in the world because of its centric location, Miami International Airport caters to over 45 million passengers a year. The airport is a major hub and the largest international gateway for American Airlines.

Miami International is the second busiest airport by passenger traffic in Florida, the United States&#x27; third-largest international port of entry for foreign air passengers, behind New York&#x27;s John F. Kennedy International Airport and Los Angeles International Airport. The airport&#x27;s extensive international route network includes non-stop flights to over seventy international cities in North and South America, Europe, Africa, Asia, and the Middle East.

Nearby Fort Lauderdale–Hollywood International Airport and Palm Beach International Airport also serve commercial traffic in the Miami area. Miami-Opa Locka Executive Airport in Opa-locka and Miami Executive Airport in an unincorporated area southwest of Miami serve general aviation traffic in the Miami area.

===Cycling and walking===
The city government under former mayor Manny Diaz took an ambitious stance in support of bicycling in Miami for both recreation and commuting. In 2010, Miami was ranked as the 44th-most bike-friendly city in the U.S., according to &quot;Bicycling Magazine&quot;.

A 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Miami the eighth-most walkable of the 50 largest cities in the U.S.

===Public safety===
==International relations==
===Sister cities===

* Agadir, Morocco (since 1995) 
* El Jadida, Morocco (since 1995)
* Barranquilla, Colombia (since 2015)
* Bogotá, Colombia (since 1971)
* Buenos Aires, Argentina (since 1979)
* Kagoshima, Japan (since 1990)
* Kaohsiung, Taiwan (since 1987) 
* Lima, Peru (since 1977)
* Madrid, Spain (since 2014)
* Murcia, Spain (since 1993) 
* Nice, France (since 1986) 
* Palermo, Italy (since 1997)
* Qingdao, China (since 2005)
* Salvador, Brazil (since 2006)
* San Salvador, El Salvador (since 1991)
* Santiago, Chile (since 1986)
* Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic (since 1987)
* Southampton, United Kingdom (since 2019)
===Cooperation agreements===
* Lisbon, Portugal
* Yeruham, Israel

==Notable people==
==Notes==

==References==
==Further reading==
* Elizabeth M. Aranda, Sallie Hughes, and Elena Sabogal, &quot;Making a Life in Multiethnic Miami: Immigration and the Rise of a Global City.&quot; Boulder, Colorado: Renner, 2014.

==External links==

* City of Miami – official site
* Greater Miami Convention and Visitors Bureau</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="0" end="5" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="11" end="18" title="East Coast of the United States" label="coastal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="31" end="41" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="45" end="52" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="61" end="72" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q468557" start="76" end="93" title="Miami-Dade County, Florida" label="Miami-Dade County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567226" start="97" end="110" title="South Florida" label="South Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915506" start="134" end="157" title="Miami metropolitan area" label="Miami metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139046" start="248" end="257" title="Southeastern United States" label="Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q971998" start="264" end="271" title="Atlanta metropolitan area" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="281" end="294" title="Metropolitan statistical area#United States" label="ninth-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="356" end="367" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q48218" start="382" end="407" title="List of municipalities in Florida" label="second-most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="426" end="438" title="Jacksonville, Florida" label="Jacksonville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="454" end="475" title="List of tallest buildings in the United States#Cities with the most skyscrapers" label="third-largest skyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321875" start="498" end="512" title="List of tallest buildings in Miami" label="300 high-rises"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="724" end="746" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q193199" start="776" end="779" title="UBS" label="UBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q271969" start="885" end="901" title="purchasing power" label="purchasing power"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526752" start="914" end="931" title="Majority minority in the United States" label="majority-minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="944" end="963" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic and Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215877" start="1047" end="1061" title="Greater Downtown Miami" label="Downtown Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124275" start="1205" end="1220" title="Health District (Miami)" label="Health District"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="1246" end="1265" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157429" start="1319" end="1344" title="Jackson Memorial Hospital" label="Jackson Memorial Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525526" start="1406" end="1431" title="Miller School of Medicine" label="Miller School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q75646" start="1567" end="1576" title="PortMiami" label="PortMiami"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="1618" end="1624" title="Cruise ship" label="cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1799" end="1812" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="1992" end="2005" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748122" start="2195" end="2206" title="Miami River (Florida)" label="Miami River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513818" start="2221" end="2228" title="Mayaimi" label="Mayaimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q202905" start="2251" end="2266" title="Lake Okeechobee" label="Lake Okeechobee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150333" start="2370" end="2373" title="Area codes 305, 786, and 645" label="305"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501199" start="2564" end="2572" title="Tequesta" label="Tequesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748122" start="2745" end="2756" title="Miami River (Florida)" label="Miami River"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="2807" end="2811" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q553152" start="2865" end="2889" title="Pedro Menéndez de Avilés" label="Pedro Menéndez de Avilés"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="2943" end="2948" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="2960" end="2967" title="mission (station)" label="mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="3019" end="3026" title="British Empire" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077836" start="3114" end="3125" title="Fort Dallas" label="Fort Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187087" start="3194" end="3211" title="Florida Territory" label="Florida Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q474202" start="3257" end="3265" title="Seminole" label="Seminole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976715" start="3329" end="3348" title="Second Seminole War" label="Second Seminole War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306806" start="3445" end="3457" title="Julia Tuttle" label="Julia Tuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="3467" end="3480" title="citrus" label="citrus grower"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="3495" end="3504" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599216" start="3774" end="3786" title="Great Freeze" label="Great Freeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="3930" end="3945" title="Business magnate" label="railroad tycoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q746530" start="3946" end="3959" title="Henry Flagler" label="Henry Flagler"/>
<link wikidata="Q442450" start="3974" end="4000" title="Florida East Coast Railway" label="Florida East Coast Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="4247" end="4254" title="The Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="4705" end="4713" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q106600787" start="4792" end="4807" title="H. Leslie Quigg" label="H. Leslie Quigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="4905" end="4917" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430042" start="5149" end="5179" title="Florida land boom of the 1920s" label="Florida land boom of the 1920s"/>
<link wikidata="Q199174" start="5185" end="5205" title="1926 Miami Hurricane" label="1926 Miami Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="5215" end="5231" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5270" end="5282" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="5335" end="5352" title="U-boat" label="German submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="5724" end="5736" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="5754" end="5758" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264" start="5773" end="5783" title="Cuban Revolution" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575004" start="5999" end="6009" title="1972 Democratic National Convention" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996329" start="6014" end="6045" title="1972 Republican National Convention" label="Republican National Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q644161" start="6053" end="6079" title="1972 United States presidential election" label="1972 Presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="6085" end="6099" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q13592724" start="6129" end="6166" title="1972 Miami Dolphins season" label="undefeated &amp;quot;perfect&amp;quot; season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011590" start="6421" end="6430" title="New South" label="New South"/>
<link wikidata="Q185517" start="6524" end="6533" title="War on drugs" label="drug wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="6552" end="6557" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050309" start="6611" end="6627" title="Hurricane Andrew" label="Hurricane Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="6869" end="6883" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790886" start="6914" end="6928" title="Cuban-American" label="Cuban-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q597281" start="7018" end="7028" title="Everglades" label="Everglades"/>
<link wikidata="Q954659" start="7045" end="7057" title="Biscayne Bay" label="Biscayne Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q202905" start="7090" end="7105" title="Lake Okeechobee" label="Lake Okeechobee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630311" start="7119" end="7130" title="Florida Bay" label="Florida Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107901" start="7282" end="7298" title="Miami Rock Ridge" label="Miami Rock Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205140" start="7464" end="7478" title="barrier island" label="barrier island"/>
<link wikidata="Q201516" start="7511" end="7522" title="Miami Beach, Florida" label="Miami Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q186106" start="7527" end="7538" title="South Beach" label="South Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="7544" end="7555" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q129558" start="7564" end="7577" title="ocean current" label="ocean current"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155378" start="7742" end="7754" title="Miami oolite" label="Miami oolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="7947" end="7961" title="glacial period" label="glacial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="7967" end="7974" title="ice age" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417820" start="8015" end="8032" title="Sangamonian" label="Sangamonian Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="8225" end="8232" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143655" start="8292" end="8304" title="Dry Tortugas" label="Dry Tortugas"/>
<link wikidata="Q148134" start="8450" end="8459" title="bryozoans" label="bryozoans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094246" start="8499" end="8519" title="Wisconsin glaciation" label="Wisconsin glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140140" start="8760" end="8768" title="mainland" label="mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="8791" end="8806" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917225" start="8836" end="8852" title="Biscayne Aquifer" label="Biscayne Aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q484294" start="8925" end="8942" title="Palm Beach County, Florida" label="Palm Beach County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630311" start="8946" end="8957" title="Florida Bay" label="Florida Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q775769" start="9012" end="9025" title="Miami Springs, Florida" label="Miami Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49276" start="9030" end="9037" title="Hialeah, Florida" label="Hialeah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915506" start="9051" end="9074" title="Miami metropolitan area" label="Miami metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835267" start="9285" end="9312" title="Underground parking in South Florida" label="underground parking garages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="9341" end="9353" title="rapid transit" label="mass transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591926" start="9398" end="9406" title="land grading" label="at-grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q597281" start="9457" end="9467" title="Everglades" label="Everglades"/>
<link wikidata="Q193327" start="9540" end="9550" title="American alligator" label="Alligators"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215877" start="9772" end="9786" title="Greater Downtown Miami" label="Downtown Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965976" start="9851" end="9859" title="Brickell" label="Brickell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030402" start="9861" end="9873" title="Virginia Key" label="Virginia Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q9009720" start="9875" end="9888" title="Watson Island" label="Watson Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q75646" start="9894" end="9903" title="PortMiami" label="PortMiami"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511954" start="10140" end="10155" title="Brickell Avenue" label="Brickell Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124275" start="10265" end="10280" title="Health District (Miami)" label="Health District"/>
<link wikidata="Q31855" start="10326" end="10344" title="research institute" label="research institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="10350" end="10363" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157429" start="10388" end="10413" title="Jackson Memorial Hospital" label="Jackson Memorial Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866339" start="10415" end="10442" title="Bascom Palmer Eye Institute" label="Bascom Palmer Eye Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="10452" end="10471" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525526" start="10479" end="10504" title="Miller School of Medicine" label="Miller School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169514" start="10564" end="10573" title="Coral Way" label="Coral Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761162" start="10575" end="10584" title="The Roads" label="The Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018680" start="10590" end="10603" title="Coconut Grove" label="Coconut Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q427559" start="10689" end="10701" title="Coral Gables, Florida" label="Coral Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q584126" start="10948" end="10958" title="Dinner Key" label="Dinner Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139828" start="10971" end="10994" title="Coconut Grove Playhouse" label="Coconut Grove Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139727" start="10996" end="11004" title="CocoWalk" label="CocoWalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16890459" start="11014" end="11045" title="Coconut Grove Convention Center" label="Coconut Grove Convention Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="11066" end="11075" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="11101" end="11109" title="Bohemianism" label="bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q48282" start="11156" end="11171" title="college student" label="college student"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095464" start="11237" end="11251" title="Vizcaya Museum and Gardens" label="Vizcaya Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330591" start="11253" end="11264" title="The Kampong" label="The Kampong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715660" start="11266" end="11298" title="The Barnacle Historic State Park" label="The Barnacle Historic State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q665413" start="11404" end="11417" title="Little Havana" label="Little Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985157" start="11419" end="11431" title="West Flagler" label="West Flagler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749961" start="11437" end="11444" title="Flagami" label="Flagami"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="11571" end="11575" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660549" start="11610" end="11620" title="Allapattah" label="Allapattah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843092" start="11708" end="11715" title="Midtown Miami" label="Midtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985442" start="11771" end="11783" title="West Indian Americans" label="West Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="11787" end="11796" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="11800" end="11818" title="European Americans" label="European Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047558" start="11824" end="11833" title="Edgewater (Miami)" label="Edgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825308" start="11928" end="11973" title="Adrienne Arsht Center for the Performing Arts" label="Adrienne Arsht Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q14629100" start="11975" end="11982" title="Wynwood Art District" label="Wynwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827304" start="12138" end="12153" title="Miami Design District" label="Design District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552093" start="12162" end="12176" title="Upper Eastside" label="Upper Eastside"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827366" start="12228" end="12253" title="Miami Modern architecture" label="Miami Modern architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="12350" end="12359" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745589" start="12393" end="12405" title="Little Haiti" label="Little Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358937" start="12407" end="12415" title="Overtown (Miami)" label="Overtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q9082153" start="12429" end="12442" title="Lyric Theater (Miami)" label="Lyric Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237805" start="12449" end="12461" title="Liberty City (Miami)" label="Liberty City"/>
<link wikidata="Q863882" start="12490" end="12514" title="tropical monsoon climate" label="tropical monsoon climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="12516" end="12545" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q176635" start="12690" end="12706" title="Tropic of Cancer" label="Tropic of Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="12729" end="12740" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q210316" start="12994" end="13004" title="cold front" label="cold front"/>
<link wikidata="Q178828" start="13369" end="13378" title="dew point" label="dew point"/>
<link wikidata="Q81242" start="14108" end="14118" title="sea breeze" label="sea breeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q178828" start="14220" end="14229" title="Dew point" label="Dew point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348973" start="14391" end="14408" title="snow in Florida" label="recorded snowfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548402" start="14471" end="14484" title="Snow flurry" label="snow flurries"/>
<link wikidata="Q105616297" start="14615" end="14652" title="December 1989 United States cold wave" label="December 1989 United States cold wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="14908" end="14924" title="Tropical cyclone" label="Hurricane season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141458" start="15088" end="15098" title="Cape Verde hurricane" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561725" start="15211" end="15215" title="1925 Miami tornado" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592617" start="15231" end="15235" title="1997 Miami tornado" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="15281" end="15291" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="15357" end="15389" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="Department of Agriculture&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="15404" end="15418" title="hardiness zone" label="hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="15530" end="15544" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315844" start="15624" end="15648" title="Resources for the Future" label="Resources for the Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="15657" end="15671" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="16162" end="16169" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567226" start="16473" end="16486" title="South Florida" label="South Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="16515" end="16522" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915506" start="16591" end="16614" title="Miami metropolitan area" label="Miami metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q49276" start="16858" end="16865" title="Hialeah" label="Hialeah"/>
<link wikidata="Q468557" start="16936" end="16946" title="Miami-Dade County" label="Miami-Dade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311513" start="17089" end="17100" title="1900 United States census" label="1900 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q585978" start="17119" end="17130" title="1950 United States census" label="1950 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6117943" start="17204" end="17230" title="Jacksonville Consolidation" label="Jacksonville Consolidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q493605" start="17279" end="17291" title="Duval County, Florida" label="Duval County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730452" start="17737" end="17748" title="1970 United States census" label="1970 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="17815" end="17826" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="18364" end="18375" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="18759" end="18777" title="non-Hispanic White" label="non-Hispanic White"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="18853" end="18857" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043310" start="19008" end="19021" title="Xavier Suarez" label="Xavier Suarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237805" start="19390" end="19402" title="Liberty City, Miami" label="Liberty City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745589" start="19407" end="19419" title="Little Haiti" label="Little Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="19437" end="19451" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="19879" end="19890" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="19919" end="19930" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="20055" end="20066" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195125" start="20336" end="20341" title="Cuban people" label="Cuban"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="20362" end="20378" title="Central American" label="Central American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663832" start="20396" end="20406" title="Nicaraguan people" label="Nicaraguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035264" start="20413" end="20421" title="Honduran people" label="Honduran"/>
<link wikidata="Q12775779" start="20428" end="20438" title="Salvadoran people" label="Salvadoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826647" start="20449" end="20459" title="Guatemalan people" label="Guatemalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="20475" end="20488" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996826" start="20520" end="20530" title="Venezuelan people" label="Venezuelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4359289" start="20537" end="20545" title="Peruvian people" label="Peruvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365041" start="20552" end="20561" title="Argentine people" label="Argentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276073" start="20568" end="20575" title="Chilean people" label="Chilean"/>
<link wikidata="Q43296435" start="20585" end="20595" title="Ecuadorian people" label="Ecuadorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="20607" end="20631" title="Hispanic people" label="other Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="20646" end="20654" title="Spaniard" label="Spaniard"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="20677" end="20690" title="Puerto Rican people" label="Puerto Ricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247924" start="20702" end="20711" title="Dominicans" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q15949440" start="20782" end="20793" title="West Indian" label="West Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985442" start="20797" end="20820" title="Afro-Caribbean American" label="Afro-Caribbean American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4131845" start="20834" end="20841" title="Haitian people" label="Haitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127469" start="20848" end="20856" title="Jamaican people" label="Jamaican"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842404" start="20863" end="20871" title="Bahamian people" label="Bahamian"/>
<link wikidata="Q920396" start="20878" end="20897" title="British West Indian" label="British West Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="20908" end="20934" title="Trinidadian and Tobagonian" label="Trinidadian and Tobagonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050339" start="20941" end="20973" title="Afro-Caribbean" label="Other or Unspecified West Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920978" start="20986" end="21000" title="Black Hispanic" label="Black Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="21017" end="21035" title="Sub-Saharan African" label="Subsaharan African"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643509" start="21404" end="21410" title="Indian Americans" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025444" start="21411" end="21425" title="Indo-Caribbean American" label="Indo-Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100396" start="21455" end="21472" title="Chinese Caribbeans" label="Chinese Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="21494" end="21502" title="Filipino people" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q216151" start="21621" end="21631" title="Vietnamese people" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="21822" end="21841" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="21991" end="22001" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="22022" end="22033" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="22061" end="22066" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="22068" end="22076" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="22078" end="22086" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="22146" end="22153" title="atheism" label="atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355668" start="22249" end="22279" title="Norwegian Church Abroad" label="Norwegian Seamen&amp;#x27;s church"/>
<link wikidata="Q470362" start="22330" end="22366" title="Mette-Marit, Crown Princess of Norway" label="Crown Princess of Norway Mette-Marit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188779" start="22514" end="22523" title="Norwegians" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q206859" start="22599" end="22616" title="Walt Disney World" label="Walt Disney World"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843220" start="22648" end="22661" title="Point-In-Time Count" label="Point-In-Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="22695" end="22703" title="Homelessness" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973477" start="22890" end="22916" title="National Immigration Forum" label="National Immigration Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3681519" start="23301" end="23323" title="international business" label="international business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531726" start="23399" end="23446" title="Globalization and World Cities Research Network" label="Globalization and World Cities Research Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="23563" end="23573" title="Global city" label="world city"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="23586" end="23593" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="23595" end="23601" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="23607" end="23614" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700642" start="24105" end="24116" title="Akerman LLP" label="Akerman LLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q937801" start="24118" end="24127" title="Alienware" label="Alienware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2863562" start="24129" end="24143" title="Arquitectonica" label="Arquitectonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819664" start="24145" end="24167" title="Brightstar Corporation" label="Brightstar Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052823" start="24169" end="24186" title="Celebrity Cruises" label="Celebrity Cruises"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044059" start="24188" end="24208" title="Carnival Corporation &amp;amp; plc" label="Carnival Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715646" start="24210" end="24229" title="Duany Plater-Zyberk" label="Duany Plater-Zyberk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603710" start="24231" end="24248" title="Greenberg Traurig" label="Greenberg Traurig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034682" start="24250" end="24263" title="Inktel Direct" label="Inktel Direct"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981175" start="24265" end="24283" title="Lennar Corporation" label="Lennar Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130309" start="24285" end="24306" title="Norwegian Cruise Line" label="Norwegian Cruise Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q379437" start="24308" end="24323" title="Oceania Cruises" label="Oceania Cruises"/>
<link wikidata="Q17138182" start="24325" end="24336" title="OPKO Health" label="OPKO Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q27150134" start="24338" end="24348" title="Parkjockey" label="Parkjockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276143" start="24350" end="24368" title="RCTV International" label="RCTV International"/>
<link wikidata="Q929872" start="24370" end="24399" title="Royal Caribbean International" label="Royal Caribbean International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531813" start="24401" end="24406" title="Sitel" label="Sitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570632" start="24408" end="24435" title="Southern Wine &amp;amp; Spirits" label="Southern Wine &amp;amp; Spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q136538" start="24437" end="24446" title="Telemundo" label="Telemundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917805" start="24448" end="24460" title="Vector Group" label="Vector Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974766" start="24462" end="24468" title="Watsco" label="Watsco"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035757" start="24473" end="24492" title="World Fuel Services" label="World Fuel Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="24675" end="24682" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q468557" start="24744" end="24761" title="Miami-Dade County, Florida" label="Miami-Dade County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887996" start="24771" end="24779" title="Benihana" label="Benihana"/>
<link wikidata="Q177054" start="24781" end="24792" title="Burger King" label="Burger King"/>
<link wikidata="Q656554" start="24794" end="24814" title="Carnival Cruise Line" label="Carnival Cruise Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982161" start="24816" end="24843" title="Navarro Discount Pharmacies" label="Navarro Discount Pharmacies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169774" start="24845" end="24870" title="Perry Ellis International" label="Perry Ellis International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178198" start="24872" end="24877" title="Ryder" label="Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087869" start="24879" end="24892" title="Sedano&amp;#x27;s" label="Sedano&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106818" start="24894" end="24900" title="UniMás" label="UniMás"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863116" start="24906" end="24923" title="U.S. Century Bank" label="U.S. Century Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q136538" start="25050" end="25059" title="Telemundo" label="Telemundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106818" start="25064" end="25070" title="UniMás" label="UniMás"/>
<link wikidata="Q731824" start="25114" end="25131" title="Univision" label="Univisión Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696374" start="25136" end="25160" title="Telemundo Global Studios" label="Telemundo Global Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q23745" start="25248" end="25258" title="telenovela" label="telenovela"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244698" start="25422" end="25438" title="Sony Music Latin" label="Sony Music Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430042" start="25654" end="25684" title="Florida land boom of the 1920s" label="Florida land boom of the 1920s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215877" start="25904" end="25912" title="Greater Downtown Miami" label="Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965976" start="25914" end="25922" title="Brickell" label="Brickell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047558" start="25927" end="25936" title="Edgewater (Miami)" label="Edgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642225" start="26055" end="26090" title="List of tallest buildings in Florida" label="skyscrapers in the state of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547246" start="26119" end="26133" title="Panorama Tower" label="Panorama Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928006" start="26140" end="26168" title="United States housing bubble" label="housing market crash of 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q127530" start="26311" end="26338" title="Miami International Airport" label="Miami International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q192824" start="26340" end="26344" title="IATA airport code" label="IATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q75646" start="26355" end="26364" title="PortMiami" label="PortMiami"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="26443" end="26456" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="26465" end="26474" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511954" start="26821" end="26836" title="Brickell Avenue" label="Brickell Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965976" start="26840" end="26848" title="Brickell" label="Brickell"/>
<link wikidata="Q468591" start="26919" end="26950" title="Free Trade Area of the Americas" label="Free Trade Area of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329523" start="26991" end="27016" title="National Hurricane Center" label="National Hurricane Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755608" start="27045" end="27075" title="United States Southern Command" label="United States Southern Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="27116" end="27123" title="Central America" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784180" start="27302" end="27307" title="Doral, Florida" label="Doral"/>
<link wikidata="Q49276" start="27312" end="27319" title="Hialeah, Florida" label="Hialeah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643199" start="27356" end="27381" title="List of lowest-income places in the United States" label="fourth highest percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="27484" end="27491" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="27493" end="27502" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="27508" end="27518" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q978483" start="27670" end="27692" title="Wasmannia auropunctata" label="Wasmannia auropunctata"/>
<link wikidata="Q219174" start="27706" end="27732" title="invasive agricultural pest" label="invasive agricultural pest"/>
<link wikidata="Q75646" start="27769" end="27778" title="PortMiami" label="PortMiami"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="28171" end="28185" title="North American" label="North American"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="28212" end="28223" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316930" start="28230" end="28253" title="Port of South Louisiana" label="Port of South Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="28285" end="28298" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q656554" start="28513" end="28533" title="Carnival Cruise Line" label="Carnival Cruise Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052823" start="28535" end="28552" title="Celebrity Cruises" label="Celebrity Cruises"/>
<link wikidata="Q130309" start="28554" end="28575" title="Norwegian Cruise Line" label="Norwegian Cruise Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q379437" start="28577" end="28592" title="Oceania Cruises" label="Oceania Cruises"/>
<link wikidata="Q929872" start="28598" end="28627" title="Royal Caribbean International" label="Royal Caribbean International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231197" start="28642" end="28662" title="Port of Miami Tunnel" label="Port of Miami Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721719" start="28686" end="28704" title="MacArthur Causeway" label="MacArthur Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q468557" start="28862" end="28879" title="Miami-Dade County, Florida" label="Miami-Dade County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827269" start="29358" end="29387" title="Miami Beach Convention Center" label="Miami Beach Convention Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q186106" start="29524" end="29535" title="South Beach" label="South Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241310" start="29537" end="29549" title="Lincoln Road" label="Lincoln Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874837" start="29551" end="29570" title="Bayside Marketplace" label="Bayside Marketplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215877" start="29572" end="29586" title="Greater Downtown Miami" label="Downtown Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965973" start="29592" end="29612" title="Brickell City Centre" label="Brickell City Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307877" start="29618" end="29635" title="Miami Beach Architectural District" label="Art Deco District"/>
<link wikidata="Q201516" start="29639" end="29650" title="Miami Beach, Florida" label="Miami Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="29712" end="29722" title="nightclubs" label="nightclubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q431360" start="29795" end="29805" title="Miami Open (tennis)" label="Miami Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q684443" start="29807" end="29816" title="Art Basel" label="Art Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367597" start="29822" end="29845" title="Winter Music Conference" label="Winter Music Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564298" start="29851" end="29885" title="Food Network South Beach Wine and Food Festival" label="South Beach Wine and Food Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818114" start="29891" end="29923" title="Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week Miami" label="Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456752" start="30232" end="30259" title="Miami drug war" label="drug war in the early 1980s"/>
<link wikidata="Q27959303" start="30480" end="30488" title="Bad Boys (franchise)" label="Bad Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q559321" start="30502" end="30512" title="Miami Vice" label="Miami Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460440" start="30526" end="30541" title="Cocaine Cowboys (2006 film)" label="Cocaine Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q682825" start="30569" end="30580" title="Burn Notice" label="Burn Notice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16913682" start="30594" end="30609" title="Jane the Virgin" label="Jane the Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47075" start="30617" end="30637" title="Scarface (1983 film)" label="&amp;quot;Scarface&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160005" start="30645" end="30657" title="The Birdcage" label="The Birdcage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851619" start="30671" end="30678" title="Ballers" label="Ballers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566283" start="30692" end="30707" title="South Beach Tow" label="South Beach Tow"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30721" end="30747" title="Ace Ventura: Pet Detective" label="Ace Ventura: Pet Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q17903453" start="30761" end="30773" title="Ride Along 2" label="Ride Along 2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30787" end="30812" title="Love &amp;amp; Hip Hop: Miami" label="Love &amp;amp; Hip Hop: Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165265" start="30826" end="30855" title="Kourtney &amp;amp; Kim Take Miami" label="Kourtney &amp;amp; Kim Take Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q96377684" start="30869" end="30881" title="Family Karma" label="Family Karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q912467" start="30895" end="30911" title="The Golden Girls" label="The Golden Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q222867" start="30925" end="30941" title="2 Fast 2 Furious" label="2 Fast 2 Furious"/>
<link wikidata="Q780941" start="30955" end="30972" title="Austin &amp;amp; Ally" label="Austin &amp;amp; Ally"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30986" end="31005" title="The Real CSI: Miami" label="The Real CSI: Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q23577" start="31023" end="31029" title="Dexter (TV series)" label="Dexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389836" start="31074" end="31087" title="Hotline Miami" label="Hotline Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q689093" start="31099" end="31107" title="Gameloft" label="Gameloft"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148319" start="31126" end="31143" title="Asphalt Overdrive" label="Asphalt Overdrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q94671" start="31183" end="31192" title="Vice City" label="Vice City"/>
<link wikidata="Q132730" start="31233" end="31249" title="Grand Theft Auto" label="Grand Theft Auto"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31283" end="31310" title="Grand Theft Auto: Vice City" label="Grand Theft Auto: Vice City"/>
<link wikidata="Q23648408" start="31340" end="31359" title="Grand Theft Auto VI" label="Grand Theft Auto VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q20709143" start="31468" end="31487" title="Calle Ocho Festival" label="Calle Ocho Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825308" start="31638" end="31683" title="Adrienne Arsht Center for the Performing Arts" label="Adrienne Arsht Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903728" start="31697" end="31716" title="Florida Grand Opera" label="Florida Grand Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="31790" end="31804" title="Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts" label="Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088984" start="31973" end="31988" title="Olympia Theater (Miami)" label="Olympia Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016544" start="31990" end="32021" title="Wertheim Performing Arts Center" label="Wertheim Performing Arts Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429789" start="32027" end="32043" title="Fair Expo Center" label="Fair Expo Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829737" start="32049" end="32062" title="Tower Theater (Miami, Florida)" label="Tower Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q812537" start="32072" end="32098" title="Bayfront Park" label="Bayfront Park Amphitheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070654" start="32133" end="32166" title="Miami International Film Festival" label="Miami International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903728" start="32569" end="32588" title="Florida Grand Opera" label="Florida Grand Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065809" start="32590" end="32609" title="Florida International University" label="FIU School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506173" start="32611" end="32632" title="Frost School of Music" label="Frost School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012591" start="32642" end="32670" title="New World School of the Arts" label="New World School of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930791" start="32837" end="32855" title="Miami Fashion Week" label="Miami Fashion Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818114" start="32864" end="32896" title="Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week Miami" label="Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q14629100" start="32910" end="32930" title="Wynwood Art District" label="Wynwood Art District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089259" start="33063" end="33079" title="Frost Art Museum" label="Frost Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307880" start="33081" end="33104" title="Phillip and Patricia Frost Museum of Science" label="Frost Museum of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q9275937" start="33106" end="33118" title="HistoryMiami" label="HistoryMiami"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614493" start="33120" end="33149" title="Institute of Contemporary Art (Miami)" label="Institute of Contemporary Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307878" start="33151" end="33179" title="Miami Children&amp;#x27;s Museum" label="Miami Children&amp;#x27;s Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026874" start="33181" end="33197" title="Pérez Art Museum Miami" label="Pérez Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3837886" start="33199" end="33214" title="Lowe Art Museum" label="Lowe Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095464" start="33224" end="33250" title="Vizcaya Museum and Gardens" label="Vizcaya Museum and Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="33254" end="33280" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018680" start="33327" end="33340" title="Coconut Grove, Florida" label="Coconut Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707196" start="33450" end="33464" title="Latin American cuisine" label="Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729345" start="33466" end="33475" title="Caribbean cuisine" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q555997" start="33477" end="33481" title="Soul food" label="Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q284288" start="33487" end="33501" title="Jewish cuisine" label="Jewish cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40578" start="33537" end="33553" title="American cuisine" label="American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567226" start="33579" end="33592" title="South Florida" label="South Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563945" start="33619" end="33637" title="Floribbean cuisine" label="Floribbean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395356" start="33743" end="33757" title="Pollo Tropical" label="Pollo Tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192125" start="33805" end="33819" title="Cuban sandwich" label="Cuban sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103609" start="33832" end="33842" title="medianoche" label="medianoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243624" start="33844" end="33858" title="Cuban espresso" label="Cuban espresso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918497" start="33860" end="33879" title="Bistec de palomilla" label="Bistec de palomilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q70125" start="33885" end="33894" title="croquette" label="croquetas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922622" start="34200" end="34221" title="Versailles restaurant" label="Versailles restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q665413" start="34225" end="34238" title="Little Havana" label="Little Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="34332" end="34339" title="Port" label="seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748122" start="34426" end="34437" title="Miami River (Florida)" label="Miami River"/>
<link wikidata="Q177054" start="34533" end="34544" title="Burger King" label="Burger King"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887996" start="34549" end="34557" title="Benihana" label="Benihana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="34614" end="34630" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048362" start="34658" end="34670" title="Miami accent" label="Miami accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="34756" end="34765" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790886" start="34777" end="34792" title="Cuban Americans" label="Cuban Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="34833" end="34851" title="Non-Hispanic whites" label="non-Hispanic white"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="34853" end="34858" title="black people" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021105" start="34863" end="34874" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308526" start="34976" end="35000" title="General American" label="standard American accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q632014" start="35056" end="35068" title="Mid-Atlantic (United States)" label="Mid-Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741799" start="35094" end="35107" title="New York City English" label="New York area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009198" start="35112" end="35131" title="New Jersey English" label="Northern New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933177" start="35143" end="35166" title="New York Latino English" label="New York Latino English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191545" start="35175" end="35192" title="Piedmont region of Virginia" label="Virginia Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461716" start="35253" end="35268" title="Florida Cracker" label="Florida Cracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q26677" start="35306" end="35312" title="Rhoticity in English" label="rhotic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35404" end="35418" title="isochrony#syllable timing" label="syllable-timed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201217" start="35481" end="35494" title="interlanguage" label="interlanguage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201217" start="35549" end="35562" title="interlanguage" label="interlanguage"/>
<link wikidata="Q878035" start="35711" end="35719" title="epenthesis" label="addition"/>
<link wikidata="Q121811927" start="35878" end="35900" title="Alveolar approximant" label="alveolar approximant ["/>
<link wikidata="Q874996" start="35913" end="35925" title="alveolar tap" label="alveolar tap"/>
<link wikidata="Q113159186" start="35929" end="35943" title="alveolar trill" label="alveolar trill"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844931" start="36015" end="36026" title="Inter Miami" label="Inter Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="36030" end="36049" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q652879" start="36061" end="36074" title="Miami Marlins" label="Miami Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="36078" end="36099" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="36111" end="36127" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="36135" end="36157" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q169138" start="36169" end="36179" title="Miami Heat" label="Miami Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="36187" end="36218" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="36233" end="36247" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="36255" end="36279" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q431360" start="36291" end="36301" title="Miami Open (tennis)" label="Miami Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650594" start="36355" end="36367" title="Key Biscayne, Florida" label="Key Biscayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q864339" start="36385" end="36402" title="Hard Rock Stadium" label="Hard Rock Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="36441" end="36455" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609857" start="36462" end="36474" title="Stephen M. Ross" label="Stephen Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q721207" start="36511" end="36517" title="marina" label="marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193361" start="36520" end="36528" title="jai alai" label="jai alai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048525" start="36541" end="36552" title="golf course" label="golf course"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035729" start="36649" end="36668" title="Grand Prix of Miami (open wheel racing)" label="Grand Prix of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594965" start="36685" end="36704" title="Grand Prix of Miami (sports car racing)" label="Grand Prix of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q106545547" start="36710" end="36726" title="Miami Grand Prix" label="Miami Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="36730" end="36741" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q19589218" start="36765" end="36789" title="2015 Miami ePrix" label="a one-off Formula E race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626077" start="36795" end="36819" title="Homestead–Miami Speedway" label="Homestead–Miami Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436736" start="36825" end="36830" title="NASCAR Cup Series at Homestead–Miami" label="hosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="36831" end="36837" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q420129" start="36916" end="36929" title="Kaseya Center" label="Kaseya Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215877" start="36933" end="36941" title="Greater Downtown Miami" label="Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368138" start="36946" end="36960" title="LoanDepot Park" label="LoanDepot Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q665413" start="36964" end="36977" title="Little Havana" label="Little Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q619512" start="37038" end="37055" title="Miami Orange Bowl" label="Miami Orange Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="37070" end="37084" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q864339" start="37093" end="37110" title="Hard Rock Stadium" label="Hard Rock Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q721455" start="37123" end="37136" title="Miami Gardens, Florida" label="Miami Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q204623" start="37148" end="37164" title="Florida Panthers" label="Florida Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q506375" start="37180" end="37187" title="Sunrise, Florida" label="Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q795526" start="37191" end="37209" title="Amerant Bank Arena" label="Amerant Bank Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844931" start="37211" end="37225" title="Inter Miami CF" label="Inter Miami CF"/>
<link wikidata="Q65240568" start="37235" end="37248" title="Chase Stadium" label="Chase Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q165972" start="37259" end="37274" title="Fort Lauderdale, Florida" label="Fort Lauderdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018920" start="37316" end="37334" title="Miami Freedom Park" label="Miami Freedom Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19984972" start="37336" end="37344" title="Miami FC" label="Miami FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362411" start="37399" end="37415" title="USL Championship" label="USL Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054125" start="37435" end="37469" title="United States soccer league system" label="United States soccer league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388701" start="37510" end="37521" title="FIU Stadium" label="FIU Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065809" start="37539" end="37571" title="Florida International University" label="Florida International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028075" start="37593" end="37604" title="Orange Bowl" label="Orange Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952928" start="37641" end="37665" title="College Football Playoff" label="College Football Playoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="37673" end="37677" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="37756" end="37766" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q619512" start="37880" end="37897" title="Miami Orange Bowl" label="Miami Orange Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="38015" end="38034" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879378" start="38035" end="38045" title="Miami Hurricanes" label="Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827329" start="38053" end="38066" title="Miami Hurricanes football" label="football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q864339" start="38076" end="38093" title="Hard Rock Stadium" label="Hard Rock Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065809" start="38098" end="38130" title="Florida International University" label="Florida International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110096" start="38131" end="38139" title="FIU Panthers" label="Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425987" start="38147" end="38160" title="FIU Panthers football" label="football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q756355" start="38213" end="38238" title="Atlantic Coast Conference" label="Atlantic Coast Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125149" start="38280" end="38294" title="Conference USA" label="Conference USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="38302" end="38342" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q636775" start="38362" end="38371" title="Paso Fino" label="Paso Fino"/>
<link wikidata="Q16481624" start="38456" end="38473" title="2024 Copa América" label="2024 Copa América"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020214" start="38554" end="38573" title="2026 FIFA World Cup" label="2026 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="38738" end="38759" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="39117" end="39127" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471422" start="39139" end="39149" title="snorkeling" label="snorkeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="39154" end="39166" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q812537" start="39264" end="39277" title="Bayfront Park" label="Bayfront Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903566" start="39282" end="39293" title="Museum Park (Miami)" label="Museum Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215877" start="39319" end="39327" title="Greater Downtown Miami" label="Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q420129" start="39352" end="39368" title="Miami-Dade Arena" label="Miami-Dade Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874837" start="39373" end="39392" title="Bayside Marketplace" label="Bayside Marketplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845809" start="39395" end="39408" title="Tropical Park" label="Tropical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265775" start="39410" end="39422" title="Peacock Park" label="Peacock Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030402" start="39424" end="39436" title="Virginia Key" label="Virginia Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q9009720" start="39442" end="39455" title="Watson Island" label="Watson Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026688" start="39519" end="39528" title="Zoo Miami" label="Zoo Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897205" start="39530" end="39543" title="Jungle Island" label="Jungle Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113018" start="39549" end="39565" title="Miami Seaquarium" label="Miami Seaquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900777" start="39567" end="39580" title="Monkey Jungle" label="Monkey Jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q129809" start="39582" end="39594" title="Coral Castle" label="Coral Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076811" start="39596" end="39618" title="Charles Deering Estate" label="Charles Deering Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923740" start="39620" end="39653" title="Fairchild Tropical Botanic Garden" label="Fairchild Tropical Botanic Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689037" start="39659" end="39671" title="Key Biscayne" label="Key Biscayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770573" start="39705" end="39730" title="The Trust for Public Land" label="The Trust for Public Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="40235" end="40253" title="Mayor-council government" label="mayor-commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q42880197" start="40637" end="40651" title="Francis Suarez" label="Francis Suarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981944" start="40774" end="40789" title="Miami City Hall" label="Miami City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q584126" start="40838" end="40848" title="Dinner Key" label="Dinner Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018680" start="40872" end="40885" title="Coconut Grove, Miami, Florida" label="Coconut Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="40894" end="40932" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="40958" end="40969" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6003715" start="40970" end="40990" title="Maria Elvira Salazar" label="Maria Elvira Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q767270" start="40995" end="41012" title="Mario Diaz-Balart" label="Mario Diaz-Balart"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="41025" end="41033" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q461504" start="41034" end="41050" title="Frederica Wilson" label="Frederica Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42880197" start="41078" end="41092" title="Francis Suarez" label="Francis Suarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660549" start="41179" end="41189" title="Allapattah" label="Allapattah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597014" start="41194" end="41211" title="Grapeland Heights" label="Grapeland Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590930" start="41262" end="41295" title="Arts &amp;amp; Entertainment District" label="Arts &amp;amp; Entertainment District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965976" start="41297" end="41305" title="Brickell" label="Brickell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018680" start="41307" end="41320" title="Coconut Grove" label="Coconut Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169514" start="41322" end="41331" title="Coral Way" label="Coral Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215877" start="41333" end="41347" title="Greater Downtown Miami" label="Downtown Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047558" start="41349" end="41358" title="Edgewater (Miami)" label="Edgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843092" start="41360" end="41373" title="Midtown Miami" label="Midtown Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138138" start="41375" end="41384" title="Park West (Miami)" label="Park West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552093" start="41404" end="41418" title="Upper Eastside" label="Upper Eastside"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180001" start="41421" end="41432" title="Joe Carollo" label="Joe Carollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169514" start="41468" end="41477" title="Coral Way" label="Coral Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q665413" start="41479" end="41492" title="Little Havana" label="Little Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761162" start="41497" end="41506" title="The Roads" label="The Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169514" start="41557" end="41566" title="Coral Way" label="Coral Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749961" start="41568" end="41575" title="Flagami" label="Flagami"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985157" start="41580" end="41592" title="West Flagler" label="West Flagler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985433" start="41645" end="41656" title="Buena Vista (Miami)" label="Buena Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827304" start="41658" end="41673" title="Miami Design District" label="Design District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237805" start="41675" end="41687" title="Liberty City (Miami)" label="Liberty City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745589" start="41689" end="41701" title="Little Haiti" label="Little Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q22058810" start="41703" end="41715" title="Little River (Miami)" label="Little River"/>
<link wikidata="Q371251" start="41717" end="41728" title="Lummus Park Historic District" label="Lummus Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358937" start="41730" end="41738" title="Overtown (Miami)" label="Overtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580504" start="41740" end="41753" title="Spring Garden (Miami)" label="Spring Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040258" start="41758" end="41765" title="Wynwood" label="Wynwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552093" start="41791" end="41805" title="Upper Eastside" label="Upper Eastside"/>
<link wikidata="Q468557" start="41981" end="41998" title="Miami-Dade County, Florida" label="Miami-Dade County"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="42013" end="42023" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65050892" start="42512" end="42547" title="2022 Florida gubernatorial election" label="2022 Florida gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105215" start="42549" end="42561" title="Ron DeSantis" label="Ron DeSantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="42602" end="42612" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266385" start="42720" end="42757" title="2024 United States presidential election in Florida" label="2024 presidential election in Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892743" start="42945" end="42949" title="1988 United States presidential election in Florida" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027788" start="44660" end="44678" title="Miami Dade College" label="Miami Dade College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065809" start="44680" end="44712" title="Florida International University" label="Florida International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="44714" end="44733" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q809106" start="44739" end="44755" title="Barry University" label="Barry University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166793" start="44936" end="44959" title="Per Scholas" label="&amp;quot;Per&amp;quot; Scholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q597534" start="45092" end="45099" title="CompTIA" label="CompTIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q809106" start="45235" end="45251" title="Barry University" label="Barry University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357116" start="45253" end="45265" title="Miami Shores, Florida" label="Miami Shores"/>
<link wikidata="Q556733" start="45268" end="45283" title="Broward College" label="Broward College"/>
<link wikidata="Q165972" start="45285" end="45300" title="Fort Lauderdale, Florida" label="Fort Lauderdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q429863" start="45303" end="45330" title="Florida Atlantic University" label="Florida Atlantic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q29422" start="45332" end="45342" title="Boca Raton, Florida" label="Boca Raton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065809" start="45345" end="45377" title="Florida International University" label="Florida International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331187" start="45379" end="45394" title="University Park, Florida" label="University Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461515" start="45397" end="45424" title="Florida Memorial University" label="Florida Memorial University"/>
<link wikidata="Q721455" start="45426" end="45439" title="Miami Gardens, Florida" label="Miami Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383859" start="45442" end="45459" title="Keiser University" label="Keiser University"/>
<link wikidata="Q165972" start="45461" end="45476" title="Fort Lauderdale, Florida" label="Fort Lauderdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027788" start="45479" end="45497" title="Miami Dade College" label="Miami Dade College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827343" start="45507" end="45557" title="Miami International University of Art &amp;amp; Design" label="Miami International University of Art &amp;amp; Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798499" start="45560" end="45588" title="Nova Southeastern University" label="Nova Southeastern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q985438" start="45590" end="45595" title="Davie, Florida" label="Davie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127976" start="45598" end="45628" title="Palm Beach Atlantic University" label="Palm Beach Atlantic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q163749" start="45630" end="45645" title="West Palm Beach, Florida" label="West Palm Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128010" start="45648" end="45672" title="Palm Beach State College" label="Palm Beach State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q984358" start="45674" end="45690" title="Lake Worth Beach, Florida" label="Lake Worth Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323376" start="45693" end="45714" title="St. Thomas University (Florida)" label="St. Thomas University"/>
<link wikidata="Q721455" start="45716" end="45729" title="Miami Gardens, Florida" label="Miami Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q104855760" start="45732" end="45752" title="Southeastern College" label="Southeastern College"/>
<link wikidata="Q163749" start="45754" end="45769" title="West Palm Beach, Florida" label="West Palm Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052852" start="45772" end="45802" title="Talmudic University" label="Talmudic University of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q201516" start="45804" end="45815" title="Miami Beach, Florida" label="Miami Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263435" start="45818" end="45847" title="University of Fort Lauderdale" label="University of Fort Lauderdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001267" start="45849" end="45859" title="Lauderhill, Florida" label="Lauderhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="45862" end="45881" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q427559" start="45883" end="45895" title="Coral Gables, Florida" label="Coral Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640011" start="45974" end="46006" title="Miami-Dade County Public Schools" label="Miami-Dade County Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="46321" end="46326" title="African American" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985442" start="46330" end="46350" title="West Indian American" label="West Indian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="46356" end="46376" title="White American" label="White (non-Hispanic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264310" start="46475" end="46510" title="Design and Architecture High School" label="Design and Architecture High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="46579" end="46603" title="US News and World Report" label="US News and World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714532" start="46611" end="46623" title="MAST Academy" label="MAST Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169480" start="46625" end="46647" title="Coral Reef High School" label="Coral Reef High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012591" start="46657" end="46685" title="New World School of the Arts" label="New World School of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q233107" start="46778" end="46797" title="bilingual education" label="bilingual education"/>
<link wikidata="Q33491" start="46826" end="46840" title="Haitian Creole" label="Haitian Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="46846" end="46862" title="Standard Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365030" start="46968" end="46988" title="Archdiocese of Miami" label="Archdiocese of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004271" start="47054" end="47084" title="Immaculata-Lasalle High School" label="Immaculata-Lasalle High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591846" start="47113" end="47131" title="St. Theresa School (Coral Gables, Florida)" label="St. Theresa School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902579" start="47148" end="47181" title="Monsignor Edward Pace High School" label="Monsignor Edward Pace High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587358" start="47203" end="47226" title="St. Brendan High School" label="St. Brendan High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785603" start="47304" end="47344" title="Archbishop Curley-Notre Dame High School" label="Archbishop Curley-Notre Dame High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885763" start="47476" end="47507" title="Belen Jesuit Preparatory School" label="Belen Jesuit Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112143" start="47522" end="47554" title="Christopher Columbus High School (Miami-Dade County, Florida)" label="Christopher Columbus High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046664" start="47582" end="47619" title="Carrollton School of the Sacred Heart" label="Carrollton School of the Sacred Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110846" start="47644" end="47671" title="Our Lady of Lourdes Academy" label="Our Lady of Lourdes Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293479" start="47746" end="47763" title="Ransom Everglades School" label="Ransom Everglades"/>
<link wikidata="Q110375304" start="47765" end="47792" title="Gulliver Preparatory School" label="Gulliver Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47794" end="47805" title="The Cushman" label="The Cushman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827301" start="47818" end="47842" title="Miami Country Day School" label="Miami Country Day School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412578" start="47878" end="47919" title="Samuel Scheck Hillel Community Day School" label="Samuel Scheck Hillel Community Day School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208039" start="47921" end="47942" title="Dade Christian School" label="Dade Christian School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47944" end="47976" title="Dawere International High School" label="Dawere International High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128275" start="47978" end="47999" title="Palmer Trinity School" label="Palmer Trinity School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989144" start="48001" end="48029" title="Westminster Christian School (Florida)" label="Westminster Christian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q30644202" start="48035" end="48050" title="Riviera Schools" label="Riviera Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q111033033" start="48087" end="48100" title="Miami Hoshuko" label="Miami Hoshuko"/>
<link wikidata="Q11626839" start="48107" end="48132" title="hoshuko" label="part-time Japanese school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030402" start="48224" end="48236" title="Virginia Key" label="Virginia Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362680" start="48336" end="48347" title="Westchester, Florida" label="Westchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784180" start="48367" end="48372" title="Doral, Florida" label="Doral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828677" start="48501" end="48510" title="Tampa Bay area" label="Tampa Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706651" start="48591" end="48607" title="The Miami Herald" label="The Miami Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324423" start="48621" end="48636" title="El Nuevo Herald" label="El Nuevo Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755608" start="48957" end="48978" title="U.S. Southern Command" label="U.S. Southern Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784180" start="48982" end="48987" title="Doral, Florida" label="Doral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827429" start="49027" end="49038" title="Miami Today" label="Miami Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827370" start="49079" end="49094" title="Miami New Times" label="Miami New Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843092" start="49119" end="49126" title="Midtown Miami" label="Midtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827421" start="49134" end="49147" title="Miami SunPost" label="Miami SunPost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842874" start="49161" end="49191" title="South Florida Business Journal" label="South Florida Business Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25025417" start="49209" end="49224" title="The Miami Times" label="The Miami Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5805311" start="49280" end="49299" title="Diario Las Americas" label="Diario Las Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="49384" end="49403" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751224" start="49417" end="49436" title="The Miami Hurricane" label="The Miami Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065809" start="49444" end="49476" title="Florida International University" label="Florida International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715981" start="49490" end="49500" title="The Beacon (Florida International University)" label="The Beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027788" start="49508" end="49526" title="Miami-Dade College" label="Miami-Dade College"/>
<link wikidata="Q809106" start="49566" end="49582" title="Barry University" label="Barry University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827367" start="49949" end="49962" title="Miami Monthly" label="Miami Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888102" start="50025" end="50036" title="Ocean Drive (magazine)" label="Ocean Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q136538" start="50267" end="50276" title="Telemundo" label="Telemundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q731824" start="50278" end="50287" title="Univision" label="Univision"/>
<link wikidata="Q110798408" start="50289" end="50313" title="Univision Communications" label="Univision Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304246" start="50315" end="50322" title="Mega TV (American TV network)" label="Mega TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894020" start="50324" end="50359" title="Universal Music Latin Entertainment" label="Universal Music Latin Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276143" start="50361" end="50379" title="RCTV International" label="RCTV International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638908" start="50384" end="50402" title="Sunbeam Television" label="Sunbeam Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946577" start="50807" end="50811" title="WAMI-TV" label="WAMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106818" start="50813" end="50819" title="UniMás" label="UniMás"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359017" start="50820" end="50827" title="Owned-and-operated station" label="O&amp;amp;O"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947114" start="50830" end="50834" title="WBFS-TV" label="WBFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="50836" end="50842" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955603" start="50845" end="50849" title="WSFL-TV" label="WSFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919007" start="50851" end="50862" title="Independent station (North America)" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949446" start="50865" end="50869" title="WFOR-TV" label="WFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="50871" end="50874" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950168" start="50885" end="50889" title="WHFT" label="WHFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778016" start="50891" end="50894" title="Trinity Broadcasting Network" label="TBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952515" start="50897" end="50901" title="WLTV" label="WLTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q731824" start="50903" end="50912" title="Univision" label="Univision"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954357" start="50923" end="50927" title="WPLG" label="WPLG"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="50929" end="50932" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954561" start="50935" end="50939" title="WPXM" label="WPXM"/>
<link wikidata="Q210500" start="50941" end="50944" title="i television network" label="Ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955547" start="50947" end="50951" title="WSCV" label="WSCV"/>
<link wikidata="Q136538" start="50953" end="50962" title="Telemundo" label="Telemundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956000" start="50965" end="50969" title="WSVN" label="WSVN"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="50971" end="50974" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260070" start="50977" end="50981" title="WTVJ" label="WTVJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="50983" end="50986" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954180" start="50997" end="51001" title="WPBT" label="WPBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="51003" end="51006" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952454" start="51013" end="51017" title="WLRN-TV" label="WLRN"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="51062" end="51087" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456951" start="51722" end="51736" title="Flagler Street" label="Flagler Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q810231" start="51757" end="51765" title="Baseline (surveying)" label="baseline"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686224" start="51770" end="51782" title="Miami Avenue" label="Miami Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q32099" start="51805" end="51813" title="Meridian (geography)" label="meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q629269" start="51915" end="51926" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998301" start="51941" end="51955" title="Burdine&amp;#x27;s" label="Burdine&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q410801" start="52387" end="52410" title="Tamiami Trail" label="Tamiami Trail/SW 8th St"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348006" start="52786" end="52792" title="City block" label="blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q468557" start="53850" end="53867" title="Miami-Dade County" label="Miami-Dade County"/>
<link wikidata="Q427559" start="53930" end="53942" title="Coral Gables, Florida" label="Coral Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q49276" start="53944" end="53951" title="Hialeah" label="Hialeah"/>
<link wikidata="Q201516" start="53971" end="53982" title="Miami Beach, Florida" label="Miami Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761162" start="54002" end="54011" title="The Roads" label="The Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q468557" start="54131" end="54148" title="Miami-Dade County" label="Miami-Dade County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432532" start="54188" end="54192" title="Interstate 75 (Florida)" label="I-75"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448791" start="54194" end="54198" title="Interstate 95 in Florida" label="I-95"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449629" start="54200" end="54205" title="Interstate 195 (Florida)" label="I-195"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433146" start="54207" end="54212" title="Interstate 395 (Florida)" label="I-395"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433083" start="54250" end="54262" title="U.S. Route 1 (Florida)" label="U.S. Route 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432475" start="54264" end="54277" title="U.S. Route 27 (Florida)" label="U.S. Route 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817168" start="54279" end="54292" title="U.S. Route 41 (Florida)" label="U.S. Route 41"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817174" start="54298" end="54312" title="U.S. Route 441 (Florida)" label="U.S. Route 441"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670641" start="54333" end="54352" title="Florida State Roads" label="Florida State Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432561" start="54399" end="54405" title="State Road 112 (Florida)" label="SR 112"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448791" start="54428" end="54441" title="Interstate 95 in Florida" label="Interstate 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q127530" start="54445" end="54448" title="Miami International Airport" label="MIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433120" start="54451" end="54497" title="Homestead Extension of Florida&amp;#x27;s Turnpike" label="Homestead Extension of Florida&amp;#x27;s Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q200775" start="54508" end="54531" title="Florida&amp;#x27;s Turnpike" label="Florida&amp;#x27;s Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q721455" start="54549" end="54562" title="Miami Gardens, Florida" label="Miami Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433083" start="54566" end="54578" title="U.S. Route 1 (Florida)" label="U.S. Route 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153459" start="54579" end="54591" title="Florida City, Florida" label="Florida City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433140" start="54594" end="54600" title="State Road 826 (Florida)" label="SR 826"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579488" start="54624" end="54649" title="Golden Glades Interchange" label="Golden Glades Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286127" start="54666" end="54675" title="Pinecrest, Florida" label="Pinecrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433146" start="54678" end="54684" title="State Road 836 (Florida)" label="SR 836"/>
<link wikidata="Q127530" start="54736" end="54739" title="Miami International Airport" label="MIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433193" start="54742" end="54748" title="State Road 874 (Florida)" label="SR 874"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361035" start="54837" end="54844" title="Kendall, Florida" label="Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433196" start="54847" end="54853" title="State Road 878 (Florida)" label="SR 878"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361035" start="54889" end="54896" title="Kendall, Florida" label="Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154827" start="54929" end="54940" title="South Miami, Florida" label="South Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433229" start="54943" end="54949" title="State Road 924 (Florida)" label="SR 924"/>
<link wikidata="Q995006" start="54969" end="54980" title="Miami Lakes, Florida" label="Miami Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q785565" start="54984" end="54993" title="Opa-locka, Florida" label="Opa-locka"/>
<link wikidata="Q892168" start="55015" end="55023" title="causeway" label="causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331906" start="55149" end="55170" title="Rickenbacker Causeway" label="Rickenbacker Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030402" start="55225" end="55237" title="Virginia Key" label="Virginia Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650594" start="55242" end="55254" title="Key Biscayne, Florida" label="Key Biscayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919729" start="55260" end="55277" title="Venetian Causeway" label="Venetian Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721719" start="55282" end="55300" title="MacArthur Causeway" label="MacArthur Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215877" start="55309" end="55317" title="Greater Downtown Miami" label="Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q186106" start="55323" end="55334" title="South Beach" label="South Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449629" start="55340" end="55361" title="Julia Tuttle Causeway" label="Julia Tuttle Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843092" start="55371" end="55378" title="Midtown Miami" label="Midtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q201516" start="55383" end="55394" title="Miami Beach" label="Miami Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433237" start="55400" end="55420" title="Florida State Road 934" label="79th Street Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552093" start="55434" end="55449" title="Upper Eastside, Miami, Florida" label="Upper East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054114" start="55455" end="55466" title="North Beach (Miami Beach)" label="North Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433226" start="55499" end="55513" title="Broad Causeway" label="Broad Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q980428" start="55574" end="55585" title="North Miami, Florida" label="North Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q812078" start="55589" end="55607" title="Bay Harbor Islands" label="Bay Harbor Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q804577" start="55612" end="55623" title="Bal Harbour, Florida" label="Bal Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="55945" end="55966" title="Public transportation" label="Public transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317384" start="55991" end="56009" title="Miami-Dade Transit" label="Miami-Dade Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567246" start="56014" end="56019" title="South Florida Regional Transportation Authority" label="SFRTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="56034" end="56047" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452212" start="56049" end="56057" title="Tri-Rail" label="Tri-Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="56071" end="56084" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926608" start="56086" end="56095" title="Metrorail (Miami-Dade County)" label="Metrorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q639030" start="56110" end="56122" title="people mover" label="people mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q906858" start="56124" end="56134" title="Metromover" label="Metromover"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56148" end="56156" title="Miami-Dade Transit#Metrobus" label="Metrobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926608" start="56701" end="56710" title="Metrorail (Miami-Dade County)" label="Metrorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q49276" start="56836" end="56843" title="Hialeah, Florida" label="Hialeah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884547" start="56845" end="56851" title="Medley, Florida" label="Medley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761162" start="56888" end="56897" title="The Roads" label="The Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018680" start="56899" end="56912" title="Coconut Grove" label="Coconut Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q427559" start="56914" end="56926" title="Coral Gables, Florida" label="Coral Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154827" start="56928" end="56939" title="South Miami" label="South Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361035" start="56951" end="56958" title="Kendall, Florida" label="Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q127530" start="56997" end="57024" title="Miami International Airport" label="Miami International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124275" start="57030" end="57045" title="Health District (Miami)" label="Health District"/>
<link wikidata="Q639030" start="57078" end="57090" title="people mover" label="people mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q906858" start="57092" end="57102" title="Metromover" label="Metromover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452212" start="57366" end="57374" title="Tri-Rail" label="Tri-Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567246" start="57415" end="57462" title="South Florida Regional Transportation Authority" label="South Florida Regional Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q127530" start="57482" end="57509" title="Miami International Airport" label="Miami International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q163749" start="57523" end="57538" title="West Palm Beach, Florida" label="West Palm Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q468557" start="57573" end="57583" title="Miami-Dade County" label="Miami-Dade"/>
<link wikidata="Q494624" start="57585" end="57592" title="Broward County" label="Broward"/>
<link wikidata="Q484294" start="57598" end="57608" title="Palm Beach County" label="Palm Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095577" start="57624" end="57647" title="Miami Intermodal Center" label="Miami Intermodal Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926608" start="57690" end="57699" title="Metrorail (Miami-Dade County)" label="Metrorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="57701" end="57707" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452212" start="57709" end="57717" title="Tri-Rail" label="Tri-Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q27012668" start="57719" end="57729" title="Brightline" label="Brightline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57731" end="57739" title="Miami-Dade Transit#Metrobus" label="Metrobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="57741" end="57756" title="Greyhound Lines" label="Greyhound Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="57758" end="57763" title="Taxicab" label="taxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q291240" start="57765" end="57776" title="rental cars" label="rental cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715935" start="57778" end="57787" title="MIA Mover" label="MIA Mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079319" start="58006" end="58018" title="MiamiCentral" label="MiamiCentral"/>
<link wikidata="Q186106" start="58322" end="58333" title="South Beach" label="South Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843092" start="58387" end="58394" title="Midtown Miami" label="Midtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="58431" end="58437" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q389948" start="58493" end="58506" title="Silver Meteor" label="Silver Meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q665435" start="58515" end="58526" title="Silver Star (Amtrak train)" label="Silver Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q49276" start="58616" end="58623" title="Hialeah" label="Hialeah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411105" start="58633" end="58659" title="Tri-Rail and Metrorail transfer station" label="Tri-Rail/Metrorail Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926608" start="58841" end="58850" title="Miami Metrorail" label="Metrorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715935" start="58852" end="58861" title="MIA Mover" label="MIA Mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452212" start="58863" end="58871" title="Tri-Rail" label="Tri-Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q127530" start="58873" end="58900" title="Miami International Airport" label="Miami International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095577" start="58910" end="58933" title="Miami Intermodal Center" label="Miami Intermodal Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q127530" start="59165" end="59192" title="Miami International Airport" label="Miami International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="59494" end="59511" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="59714" end="59751" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="John F. Kennedy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8731" start="59756" end="59789" title="Los Angeles International Airport" label="Los Angeles International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="59924" end="59937" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="59939" end="59945" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="59947" end="59953" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="59955" end="59959" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="59969" end="59980" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q635361" start="59990" end="60037" title="Fort Lauderdale–Hollywood International Airport" label="Fort Lauderdale–Hollywood International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432310" start="60042" end="60074" title="Palm Beach International Airport" label="Palm Beach International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q846321" start="60124" end="60157" title="Miami-Opa Locka Executive Airport" label="Miami-Opa Locka Executive Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q785565" start="60161" end="60170" title="Opa-locka, Florida" label="Opa-locka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388881" start="60175" end="60198" title="Miami Executive Airport" label="Miami Executive Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q346208" start="60360" end="60370" title="Manny Diaz (Florida politician)" label="Manny Diaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q53121" start="60410" end="60419" title="bicycling" label="bicycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903815" start="60558" end="60576" title="Bicycling Magazine" label="Bicycling Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962040" start="60601" end="60611" title="Walk Score" label="Walk Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q170525" start="60759" end="60765" title="Agadir" label="Agadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q219583" start="60791" end="60800" title="El Jadida" label="El Jadida"/>
<link wikidata="Q62823" start="60825" end="60837" title="Barranquilla" label="Barranquilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="60863" end="60869" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="60895" end="60907" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q15674" start="60934" end="60943" title="Kagoshima" label="Kagoshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q181557" start="60966" end="60975" title="Kaohsiung" label="Kaohsiung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="61000" end="61004" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="61026" end="61032" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12225" start="61055" end="61061" title="Murcia" label="Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="61085" end="61089" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="61114" end="61121" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170322" start="61144" end="61151" title="Qingdao" label="Qingdao"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="61174" end="61182" title="Salvador, Bahia" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110" start="61206" end="61218" title="San Salvador" label="San Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="61247" end="61255" title="Santiago" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="61278" end="61291" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="61327" end="61338" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="61399" end="61405" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687708" start="61418" end="61425" title="Yeruham" label="Yeruham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53847" wikidata="Q54872" url="?curid=53847" title="Resource Description Framework">
<text>The Resource Description Framework (RDF) is a method to describe and exchange graph data. It was originally designed as a data model for metadata by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). It provides a variety of syntax notations and formats, of which the most widely used is Turtle (Terse RDF Triple Language).

RDF is a directed graph composed of triple statements. An RDF graph statement is represented by: (1) a node for the subject, (2) an arc from subject to object, representing a predicate, and (3) a node for the object. Each of these parts can be identified by a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI). An object can also be a literal value. This simple, flexible data model has a lot of expressive power to represent complex situations, relationships, and other things of interest, while also being appropriately abstract.

RDF was adopted as a W3C recommendation in 1999. The RDF 1.0 specification was published in 2004, and the RDF 1.1 specification in 2014. SPARQL is a standard query language for RDF graphs. RDF Schema (RDFS), Web Ontology Language (OWL) and SHACL (Shapes Constraint Language) are ontology languages that are used to describe RDF data.

== Overview ==
The RDF data model is similar to classical conceptual modeling approaches (such as entity–relationship or class diagrams). It is based on the idea of making statements about resources (in particular web resources) in expressions of the form subject–predicate–object, known as &quot;triples&quot;. The subject denotes the resource; the predicate denotes traits or aspects of the resource, and expresses a relationship between the subject and the object.

For example, one way to represent the notion &quot;The sky has the color blue&quot; in RDF is as the triple: a subject denoting &quot;the sky&quot;, a predicate denoting &quot;has the color&quot;, and an object denoting &quot;blue&quot;. Therefore, RDF uses subject instead of object (or entity) in contrast to the typical approach of an entity–attribute–value model in object-oriented design: entity (sky), attribute (color), and value (blue).

RDF is an abstract model with several serialization formats (being essentially specialized file formats). In addition the particular encoding for resources or triples can vary from format to format.

This mechanism for describing resources is a major component in the W3C&#x27;s Semantic Web activity: an evolutionary stage of the World Wide Web in which automated software can store, exchange, and use machine-readable information distributed throughout the Web, in turn enabling users to deal with the information with greater efficiency and certainty. RDF&#x27;s simple data model and ability to model disparate, abstract concepts has also led to its increasing use in knowledge management applications unrelated to Semantic Web activity.

A collection of RDF statements intrinsically represents a labeled, directed multigraph. This makes an RDF data model better suited to certain kinds of knowledge representation than other relational or ontological models.

As RDFS, OWL and SHACL demonstrate, one can build additional ontology languages upon RDF.

== History ==
The initial RDF design, intended to &quot;build a vendor-neutral and operating system- independent system of metadata&quot;, derived from the W3C&#x27;s Platform for Internet Content Selection (PICS), an early web content labelling system, but the project was also shaped by ideas from Dublin Core, and from the Meta Content Framework (MCF), which had been developed during 1995 to 1997 by Ramanathan V. Guha at Apple and Tim Bray at Netscape.

A first public draft of RDF appeared in October 1997, issued by a W3C working group that included representatives from IBM, Microsoft, Netscape, Nokia, Reuters, SoftQuad, and the University of Michigan.

In 1999, the W3C published the first recommended RDF specification, the &quot;Model and Syntax Specification&quot; (&quot;RDF M&amp;S&quot;). This described RDF&#x27;s data model and an XML serialization.

Two persistent misunderstandings about RDF developed at this time: firstly, due to the MCF influence and the RDF &quot;Resource Description&quot; initialism, the idea that RDF was specifically for use in representing metadata; secondly that RDF was an XML format rather than a data model, and only the RDF/XML serialisation being XML-based. RDF saw little take-up in this period, but there was significant work done in Bristol, around ILRT at Bristol University and HP Labs, and in Boston at MIT. RSS 1.0 and FOAF became exemplar applications for RDF in this period.

The recommendation of 1999 was replaced in 2004 by a set of six specifications: &quot;The RDF Primer&quot;, &quot;RDF Concepts and Abstract&quot;, &quot;RDF/XML Syntax Specification (revised)&quot;, &quot;RDF Semantics&quot;, &quot;RDF Vocabulary Description Language 1.0&quot;, and &quot;The RDF Test Cases&quot;.

This series was superseded in 2014 by the following six &quot;RDF 1.1&quot; documents: &quot;RDF 1.1 Primer&quot;, &quot;RDF 1.1 Concepts and Abstract Syntax&quot;, &quot;RDF 1.1 XML Syntax&quot;, &quot;RDF 1.1 Semantics&quot;, &quot;RDF Schema 1.1&quot;, and &quot;RDF 1.1 Test Cases&quot;.

==RDF topics==

===Vocabulary===
The vocabulary defined by the RDF specification is as follows:

====Classes====

===== rdf =====
; : the class of XML literal values
; : the class of properties
; : the class of RDF statements
; , , : containers of alternatives, unordered containers, and ordered containers (codice_1 is a super-class of the three)
; : the class of RDF Lists
; : an instance of codice_2 representing the empty list

===== rdfs =====

; : the class resource, everything
; : the class of literal values, e.g. strings and integers
; : the class of classes
; : the class of RDF datatypes
; : the class of RDF containers
; : the class of container membership properties, codice_3, codice_4, ..., all of which are sub-properties of codice_5

====Properties====

=====rdf=====

; : an instance of codice_6 used to state that a resource is an instance of a class
; : the first item in the subject RDF list
; : the rest of the subject RDF list after codice_7
; : idiomatic property used for structured values
; : the subject of the RDF statement
; : the predicate of the RDF statement
; : the object of the RDF statement

codice_8, codice_9, codice_10, codice_11 are used for reification (see below).

=====rdfs=====

; : the subject is a subclass of a class
; : the subject is a subproperty of a property
; : a domain of the subject property
; : a range of the subject property
; : a human-readable name for the subject
; : a description of the subject resource
; : a member of the subject resource
; : further information about the subject resource
; : the definition of the subject resource

This vocabulary is used as a foundation for RDF Schema, where it is extended.

=== Serialization formats ===


Several common serialization formats are in use, including:
* Turtle, a compact, human-friendly format.
* TriG, an extension of Turtle to datasets.
* N-Triples, a very simple, easy-to-parse, line-based format that is not as compact as Turtle.
* N-Quads, a superset of N-Triples, for serializing multiple RDF graphs.
* JSON-LD, a JSON-based serialization.
* N3 or Notation3, a non-standard serialization that is very similar to Turtle, but has some additional features, such as the ability to define inference rules.
* RDF/XML, an XML-based syntax that was the first standard format for serializing RDF.
* RDF/JSON, an alternative syntax for expressing RDF triples using a simple JSON notation.

RDF/XML is sometimes misleadingly called simply RDF because it was introduced among the other W3C specifications defining RDF and it was historically the first W3C standard RDF serialization format. However, it is important to distinguish the RDF/XML format from the abstract RDF model itself. Although the RDF/XML format is still in use, other RDF serializations are now preferred by many RDF users, both because they are more human-friendly, and because some RDF graphs are not representable in RDF/XML due to restrictions on the syntax of XML QNames.

With a little effort, virtually any arbitrary XML may also be interpreted as RDF using GRDDL (pronounced &#x27;griddle&#x27;), Gleaning Resource Descriptions from Dialects of Languages.

RDF triples may be stored in a type of database called a triplestore.

=== Resource identification ===
The subject of an RDF statement is either a uniform resource identifier (URI) or a blank node, both of which denote resources. Resources indicated by blank nodes are called anonymous resources. They are not directly identifiable from the RDF statement. The predicate is a URI which also indicates a resource, representing a relationship. The object is a URI, blank node or a Unicode string literal. 
As of RDF 1.1 resources are identified by Internationalized Resource Identifiers (IRIs); IRI are a generalization of URI.

In Semantic Web applications, and in relatively popular applications of RDF like RSS and FOAF (Friend of a Friend), resources tend to be represented by URIs that intentionally denote, and can be used to access, actual data on the World Wide Web. But RDF, in general, is not limited to the description of Internet-based resources. In fact, the URI that names a resource does not have to be dereferenceable at all. For example, a URI that begins with &quot;http:&quot; and is used as the subject of an RDF statement does not necessarily have to represent a resource that is accessible via HTTP, nor does it need to represent a tangible, network-accessible resource — such a URI could represent absolutely anything. However, there is broad agreement that a bare URI (without a # symbol) which returns a 300-level coded response when used in an HTTP GET request should be treated as denoting the internet resource that it succeeds in accessing.

Therefore, producers and consumers of RDF statements must agree on the semantics of resource identifiers. Such agreement is not inherent to RDF itself, although there are some controlled vocabularies in common use, such as Dublin Core Metadata, which is partially mapped to a URI space for use in RDF. The intent of publishing RDF-based ontologies on the Web is often to establish, or circumscribe, the intended meanings of the resource identifiers used to express data in RDF. For example, the URI:

codice_12

is intended by its owners to refer to the class of all Merlot red wines by vintner (i.e., instances of the above URI each represent the class of all wine produced by a single vintner), a definition which is expressed by the OWL ontology — itself an RDF document — in which it occurs. Without careful analysis of the definition, one might erroneously conclude that an instance of the above URI was something physical, instead of a type of wine.

Note that this is not a &#x27;bare&#x27; resource identifier, but is rather a URI reference, containing the &#x27;#&#x27; character and ending with a fragment identifier.

=== Statement reification and context ===

The body of knowledge modeled by a collection of statements may be subjected to reification, in which each &quot;statement&quot; (that is each triple &quot;subject-predicate-object&quot; altogether) is assigned a URI and treated as a resource about which additional statements can be made, as in &quot;&quot;Jane says that&quot; John is the author of document X&quot;. Reification is sometimes important in order to deduce a level of confidence or degree of usefulness for each statement.

In a reified RDF database, each original statement, being a resource, itself, most likely has at least three additional statements made about it: one to assert that its subject is some resource, one to assert that its predicate is some resource, and one to assert that its object is some resource or literal. More statements about the original statement may also exist, depending on the application&#x27;s needs.

Borrowing from concepts available in logic (and as illustrated in graphical notations such as conceptual graphs and topic maps), some RDF model implementations acknowledge that it is sometimes useful to group statements according to different criteria, called &quot;situations&quot;, &quot;contexts&quot;, or &quot;scopes&quot;, as discussed in articles by RDF specification co-editor Graham Klyne. For example, a statement can be associated with a context, named by a URI, in order to assert an &quot;is true in&quot; relationship. As another example, it is sometimes convenient to group statements by their source, which can be identified by a URI, such as the URI of a particular RDF/XML document. Then, when updates are made to the source, corresponding statements can be changed in the model, as well.

Implementation of scopes does not necessarily require fully reified statements. Some implementations allow a single scope identifier to be associated with a statement that has not been assigned a URI, itself. Likewise &quot;named graphs&quot; in which a set of triples is named by a URI can represent context without the need to reify the triples.

=== Query and inference languages ===

The predominant query language for RDF graphs is SPARQL. SPARQL is an SQL-like language, and a recommendation of the W3C as of January 15, 2008.

The following is an example of a SPARQL query to show country capitals in Africa, using a fictional ontology:

PREFIX ex: &lt;http://example.com/exampleOntology#&gt;
SELECT ?capital ?country
WHERE {
 ?x ex:cityname ?capital ;
 ex:isCapitalOf ?y .
 ?y ex:countryname ?country ;
 ex:isInContinent ex:Africa .


Other non-standard ways to query RDF graphs include:
* RDQL, precursor to SPARQL, SQL-like
* Versa, compact syntax (non–SQL-like), solely implemented in 4Suite (Python).
* RQL, one of the first declarative languages for uniformly querying RDF schemas and resource descriptions, implemented in RDFSuite.
* SeRQL, part of Sesame
* XUL has a template element in which to declare rules for matching data in RDF. XUL uses RDF extensively for data binding.

SHACL Advanced Features specification (W3C Working Group Note), the most recent version of which is maintained by the SHACL Community Group defines support for SHACL Rules, used for data transformations, inferences and mappings of RDF based on SHACL shapes.

=== Validation and description ===
The predominant language for describing and validating RDF graphs is SHACL (Shapes Constraint Language). SHACL specification is divided in two parts: SHACL Core and SHACL-SPARQL. SHACL Core consists of a list of built-in constraints such as cardinality, range of values and many others. SHACL-SPARQL describes SPARQL-based constraints and an extension mechanism to declare new constraint components.

Other non-standard ways to describe and validate RDF graphs include:
* SPARQL Inferencing Notation (SPIN) was based on SPARQL queries. It has been effectively deprecated in favor of SHACL.
* ShEx (Shape Expressions) is a concise language for RDF validation and description.

== Examples ==

=== Example 1: Description of a person named Eric Miller ===

The following example is taken from the W3C website describing a resource with statements &quot;there is a Person identified by http://www.w3.org/People/EM/contact#me, whose name is Eric Miller, whose email address is e.miller123(at)example (changed for security purposes), and whose title is Dr.&quot; 

The resource &quot;http://www.w3.org/People/EM/contact#me&quot; is the subject.

The objects are:
* &quot;Eric Miller&quot; (with a predicate &quot;whose name is&quot;),
* mailto:e.miller123(at)example (with a predicate &quot;whose email address is&quot;), and
* &quot;Dr.&quot; (with a predicate &quot;whose title is&quot;).

The subject is a URI.

The predicates also have URIs. For example, the URI for each predicate:
* &quot;whose name is&quot; is http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/pim/contact#fullName,
* &quot;whose email address is&quot; is http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/pim/contact#mailbox,
* &quot;whose title is&quot; is http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/pim/contact#personalTitle.

In addition, the subject has a type (with URI http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#type), which is person (with URI http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/pim/contact#Person).

Therefore, the following &quot;subject, predicate, object&quot; RDF triples can be expressed:
* http://www.w3.org/People/EM/contact#me, http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/pim/contact#fullName, &quot;Eric Miller&quot;
* http://www.w3.org/People/EM/contact#me, http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/pim/contact#mailbox, mailto:e.miller123(at)example
* http://www.w3.org/People/EM/contact#me, http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/pim/contact#personalTitle, &quot;Dr.&quot;
* http://www.w3.org/People/EM/contact#me, http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#type, http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/pim/contact#Person

In standard N-Triples format, this RDF can be written as:

&lt;http://www.w3.org/People/EM/contact#me&gt; &lt;http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/pim/contact#fullName&gt; &quot;Eric Miller&quot; .
&lt;http://www.w3.org/People/EM/contact#me&gt; &lt;http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/pim/contact#mailbox&gt; &lt;mailto:e.miller123(at)example&gt; .
&lt;http://www.w3.org/People/EM/contact#me&gt; &lt;http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/pim/contact#personalTitle&gt; &quot;Dr.&quot; .
&lt;http://www.w3.org/People/EM/contact#me&gt; &lt;http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#type&gt; &lt;http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/pim/contact#Person&gt; .
Equivalently, it can be written in standard Turtle (syntax) format as:
@prefix eric: &lt;http://www.w3.org/People/EM/contact#&gt; .
@prefix contact: &lt;http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/pim/contact#&gt; .
@prefix rdf: &lt;http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#&gt; .

eric:me contact:fullName &quot;Eric Miller&quot; .
eric:me contact:mailbox &lt;mailto:e.miller123(at)example&gt; .
eric:me contact:personalTitle &quot;Dr.&quot; .
eric:me rdf:type contact:Person .
Or, it can be written in RDF/XML format as:

&lt;?xml version=&quot;1.0&quot; encoding=&quot;utf-8&quot;?&gt;
&lt;rdf:RDF xmlns:contact=&quot;http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/pim/contact#&quot; xmlns:eric=&quot;http://www.w3.org/People/EM/contact#&quot; xmlns:rdf=&quot;http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#&quot;&gt;
 &lt;rdf:Description rdf:about=&quot;http://www.w3.org/People/EM/contact#me&quot;&gt;
 &lt;contact:fullName&gt;Eric Miller&lt;/contact:fullName&gt;
 &lt;/rdf:Description&gt;
 &lt;rdf:Description rdf:about=&quot;http://www.w3.org/People/EM/contact#me&quot;&gt;
 &lt;contact:mailbox rdf:resource=&quot;mailto:e.miller123(at)example&quot;/&gt;
 &lt;/rdf:Description&gt;
 &lt;rdf:Description rdf:about=&quot;http://www.w3.org/People/EM/contact#me&quot;&gt;
 &lt;contact:personalTitle&gt;Dr.&lt;/contact:personalTitle&gt;
 &lt;/rdf:Description&gt;
 &lt;rdf:Description rdf:about=&quot;http://www.w3.org/People/EM/contact#me&quot;&gt;
 &lt;rdf:type rdf:resource=&quot;http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/pim/contact#Person&quot;/&gt;
 &lt;/rdf:Description&gt;
&lt;/rdf:RDF&gt;
=== Example 2: The postal abbreviation for New York ===

Certain concepts in RDF are taken from logic and linguistics, where subject-predicate and subject-predicate-object structures have meanings similar to, yet distinct from, the uses of those terms in RDF. This example demonstrates:

In the English language statement &quot; &#x27;New York has the postal abbreviation NY&#x27; &quot;,&quot; &#x27;New York&#x27; &quot; would be the subject, &quot; &#x27;has the postal abbreviation&#x27; &quot; the predicate and &quot; &#x27;NY&#x27; &quot; the object.

Encoded as an RDF triple, the subject and predicate would have to be resources named by URIs. The object could be a resource or literal element. For example, in the N-Triples form of RDF, the statement might look like:
&lt;urn:x-states:New%20York&gt; &lt;http://purl.org/dc/terms/alternative&gt; &quot;NY&quot; .
In this example, &quot;urn:x-states:New%20York&quot; is the URI for a resource that denotes the US state New York, &quot;http://purl.org/dc/terms/alternative&quot; is the URI for a predicate (whose human-readable definition can be found here), and &quot;NY&quot; is a literal string. Note that the URIs chosen here are not standard, and do not need to be, as long as their meaning is known to whatever is reading them.

=== Example 3: A Wikipedia article about Tony Benn ===
In a like manner, given that &quot;https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tony_Benn&quot; identifies a particular resource (regardless of whether that URI could be traversed as a hyperlink, or whether the resource is &quot;actually&quot; the Wikipedia article about Tony Benn), to say that the title of this resource is &quot;Tony Benn&quot; and its publisher is &quot;Wikipedia&quot; would be two assertions that could be expressed as valid RDF statements. In the N-Triples form of RDF, these statements might look like the following:
&lt;https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tony_Benn&gt; &lt;http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/title&gt; &quot;Tony Benn&quot; .
&lt;https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tony_Benn&gt; &lt;http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/publisher&gt; &quot;Wikipedia&quot; .
To an English-speaking person, the same information could be represented simply as:
The title of this resource, which is published by Wikipedia, is &#x27;Tony Benn&#x27;
However, RDF puts the information in a formal way that a machine can understand. The purpose of RDF is to provide an encoding and interpretation mechanism so that resources can be described in a way that particular software can understand it; in other words, so that software can access and use information that it otherwise could not use.

Both versions of the statements above are wordy because one requirement for an RDF resource (as a subject or a predicate) is that it be unique. The subject resource must be unique in an attempt to pinpoint the exact resource being described. The predicate needs to be unique in order to reduce the chance that the idea of Title or Publisher will be ambiguous to software working with the description. If the software recognizes &quot;http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/title&quot; (a specific definition for the concept of a title established by the Dublin Core Metadata Initiative), it will also know that this title is different from a land title or an honorary title or just the letters t-i-t-l-e put together.

The following example, written in Turtle, shows how such simple claims can be elaborated on, by combining multiple RDF vocabularies. Here, we note that the primary topic of the Wikipedia page is a &quot;Person&quot; whose name is &quot;Tony Benn&quot;:
@prefix rdf: &lt;http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#&gt; .
@prefix foaf: &lt;http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/&gt; .
@prefix dc: &lt;http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/&gt; .

&lt;https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tony_Benn&gt;
 dc:publisher &quot;Wikipedia&quot; ;
 dc:title &quot;Tony Benn&quot; ;
 foaf:primaryTopic [
 a foaf:Person ;
 foaf:name &quot;Tony Benn&quot;


== Applications ==
* DBpedia – Extracts facts from Wikipedia articles and publishes them as RDF data.
* YAGO – Similar to DBpedia extracts facts from Wikipedia articles and publishes them as RDF data.
* Wikidata – Collaboratively edited knowledge base hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation.
* Creative Commons – Uses RDF to embed license information in web pages and mp3 files.
* FOAF (Friend of a Friend) – designed to describe people, their interests and interconnections.
* Haystack client – Semantic web browser from MIT CS &amp; AI lab.
* IDEAS Group – developing a formal 4D ontology for Enterprise Architecture using RDF as the encoding.
* Microsoft shipped a product, Connected Services Framework, which provides RDF-based Profile Management capabilities.
* MusicBrainz – Publishes information about Music Albums.
* NEPOMUK, an open-source software specification for a Social Semantic desktop uses RDF as a storage format for collected metadata. NEPOMUK is mostly known because of its integration into the KDE SC 4 desktop environment.
* Cochrane is a global publisher of clinical study meta-analyses in evidence based healthcare. They use an ontology driven data architecture to semantically annotate their published reviews with RDF based structured data.
* RDF Site Summary – one of several &quot;RSS&quot; languages for publishing information about updates made to a web page; it is often used for disseminating news article summaries and sharing weblog content.
* Simple Knowledge Organization System (SKOS) – a KR representation intended to support vocabulary/thesaurus applications
* SIOC (Semantically-Interlinked Online Communities) – designed to describe online communities and to create connections between Internet-based discussions from message boards, weblogs and mailing lists.
* Smart-M3 – provides an infrastructure for using RDF and specifically uses the ontology agnostic nature of RDF to enable heterogeneous mashing-up of information
* LV2 - a libre plugin format using Turtle to describe API/ABI capabilities and properties

Some uses of RDF include research into social networking. It will also help people in business fields understand better their relationships with members of industries that could be of use for product placement. It will also help scientists understand how people are connected to one another.

RDF is being used to gain a better understanding of road traffic patterns. This is because the information regarding traffic patterns is on different websites, and RDF is used to integrate information from different sources on the web. Before, the common methodology was using keyword searching, but this method is problematic because it does not consider synonyms. This is why ontologies are useful in this situation. But one of the issues that comes up when trying to efficiently study traffic is that to fully understand traffic, concepts related to people, streets, and roads must be well understood. Since these are human concepts, they require the addition of fuzzy logic. This is because values that are useful when describing roads, like slipperiness, are not precise concepts and cannot be measured. This would imply that the best solution would incorporate both fuzzy logic and ontology.

== See also ==
;Notations for RDF
* TRiG
* TRiX
* RDF/XML
* RDFa
* JSON-LD
* Notation3
;Similar concepts
* Entity–attribute–value model
* Graph theory – an RDF model is a labeled, directed multi-graph.
* Tag (metadata)
* SciCrunch
* Semantic network
; Other (unsorted):
* Semantic technology
* Business Intelligence 2.0 (BI 2.0)
* Data portability
* EU Open Data Portal
* RDF Schema
* Folksonomy
* LSID - Life Science Identifier
* Swoogle
* Universal Networking Language (UNL)
* VoID

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===


== Further reading ==
* W3C&#x27;s RDF at W3C: specifications, guides, and resources
* RDF Semantics: specification of semantics, and complete systems of inference rules for both RDF and RDFS

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q54872" start="4" end="34" title="Resource Description Framework" label="Resource Description Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q54872" start="36" end="39" title="Resource Description Framework" label="RDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="78" end="83" title="Graph theory" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="137" end="145" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q114409" start="282" end="307" title="Terse RDF Triple Language" label="Terse RDF Triple Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137726" start="320" end="334" title="directed graph" label="directed graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q61694" start="571" end="598" title="Uniform Resource Identifier" label="Uniform Resource Identifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421724" start="691" end="707" title="expressive power (computer science)" label="expressive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q54871" start="965" end="971" title="SPARQL" label="SPARQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751819" start="1017" end="1027" title="RDF Schema" label="RDF Schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q826165" start="1036" end="1057" title="Web Ontology Language" label="Web Ontology Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q29377821" start="1068" end="1073" title="SHACL" label="SHACL"/>
<link wikidata="Q624546" start="1261" end="1280" title="entity–relationship model" label="entity–relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q664166" start="1284" end="1297" title="class diagram" label="class diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q613299" start="1335" end="1344" title="statement (programming)" label="statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q771906" start="1352" end="1360" title="resource (computer science)" label="resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539534" start="1460" end="1467" title="Semantic triple" label="triples"/>
<link wikidata="Q164573" start="1743" end="1750" title="Subject (grammar)" label="subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q179080" start="1783" end="1792" title="Predicate (grammar)" label="predicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q175026" start="1836" end="1842" title="Object (grammar)" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380560" start="1970" end="1998" title="entity–attribute–value model" label="entity–attribute–value model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237775" start="2002" end="2024" title="object-oriented design" label="object-oriented design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127410" start="2116" end="2137" title="Serialization" label="serialization formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q235557" start="2169" end="2180" title="file format" label="file format"/>
<link wikidata="Q609588" start="2329" end="2338" title="software componentry" label="component"/>
<link wikidata="Q54837" start="2357" end="2369" title="Semantic Web" label="Semantic Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="2409" end="2423" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048236" start="2481" end="2509" title="Machine-readable data" label="machine-readable information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520777" start="2622" end="2631" title="certainty" label="certainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q192060" start="2750" end="2770" title="knowledge management" label="knowledge management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597093" start="2879" end="2886" title="Graph labeling" label="labeled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137726" start="2888" end="2896" title="Directed graph" label="directed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642629" start="2897" end="2907" title="multigraph" label="multigraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172480" start="2927" end="2937" title="data model" label="data model"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478658" start="2972" end="2996" title="knowledge representation" label="knowledge representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q755662" start="3008" end="3018" title="relational model" label="relational"/>
<link wikidata="Q324254" start="3022" end="3033" title="Ontology (computer science)" label="ontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751819" start="3046" end="3050" title="RDFS" label="RDFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q826165" start="3052" end="3055" title="Web Ontology Language" label="OWL"/>
<link wikidata="Q29377821" start="3060" end="3065" title="SHACL" label="SHACL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095059" start="3104" end="3121" title="ontology language" label="ontology language"/>
<link wikidata="Q478149" start="3301" end="3340" title="Platform for Internet Content Selection" label="Platform for Internet Content Selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q624610" start="3434" end="3445" title="Dublin Core" label="Dublin Core"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855412" start="3460" end="3482" title="Meta Content Framework" label="Meta Content Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929838" start="3538" end="3556" title="Ramanathan V. Guha" label="Ramanathan V. Guha"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="3560" end="3565" title="Apple Computer" label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502402" start="3570" end="3578" title="Tim Bray" label="Tim Bray"/>
<link wikidata="Q210057" start="3582" end="3590" title="Netscape Communications Corporation" label="Netscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="3712" end="3715" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="3717" end="3726" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q210057" start="3728" end="3736" title="Netscape" label="Netscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="3738" end="3743" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="3745" end="3752" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q17093182" start="3754" end="3762" title="SoftQuad Software" label="SoftQuad"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="3772" end="3794" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="3983" end="3986" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="4422" end="4429" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q459506" start="4446" end="4464" title="Bristol University" label="Bristol University"/>
<link wikidata="Q266936" start="4469" end="4476" title="HP Labs" label="HP Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="4495" end="4498" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q45432" start="4500" end="4507" title="RSS 1.0" label="RSS 1.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389366" start="4512" end="4516" title="FOAF (ontology)" label="FOAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736519" start="5703" end="5709" title="string literal" label="string"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="5715" end="5722" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310068" start="6363" end="6374" title="reification (knowledge representation)" label="reification"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6380" end="6385" title="#Statement reification and context" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751819" start="6826" end="6836" title="RDF Schema" label="RDF Schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127410" start="6908" end="6929" title="Serialization" label="serialization formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q114409" start="6955" end="6961" title="Turtle (syntax)" label="Turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839811" start="6999" end="7003" title="TriG (syntax)" label="TriG"/>
<link wikidata="Q44044" start="7043" end="7052" title="N-Triples" label="N-Triples"/>
<link wikidata="Q44044" start="7138" end="7145" title="N-Quads" label="N-Quads"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108942" start="7211" end="7218" title="JSON-LD" label="JSON-LD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063" start="7222" end="7226" title="JSON" label="JSON"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424987" start="7256" end="7265" title="Notation3" label="Notation3"/>
<link wikidata="Q48940" start="7411" end="7418" title="RDF/XML" label="RDF/XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265505" start="8134" end="8139" title="QName" label="QName"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="8189" end="8192" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742807" start="8230" end="8235" title="GRDDL" label="GRDDL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539533" start="8387" end="8398" title="triplestore" label="triplestore"/>
<link wikidata="Q61694" start="8477" end="8504" title="uniform resource identifier" label="uniform resource identifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427875" start="8516" end="8526" title="blank node" label="blank node"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427877" start="8549" end="8557" title="web resource" label="resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427875" start="8583" end="8593" title="blank node" label="blank node"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="8808" end="8815" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736519" start="8816" end="8830" title="string literal" label="string literal"/>
<link wikidata="Q424583" start="8875" end="8912" title="Internationalized Resource Identifier" label="Internationalized Resource Identifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q45432" start="9037" end="9040" title="RSS (file format)" label="RSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389366" start="9045" end="9049" title="FOAF (software)" label="FOAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="9543" end="9547" title="HTTP" label="HTTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q213338" start="10465" end="10471" title="Merlot" label="Merlot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10933" end="10946" title="Uniform Resource Identifier#URI references" label="URI reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440450" start="11005" end="11024" title="fragment identifier" label="fragment identifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310068" start="11150" end="11161" title="Reification (knowledge representation)" label="reification"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="12011" end="12016" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420493" start="12068" end="12085" title="conceptual graphs" label="conceptual graphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064031" start="12090" end="12099" title="topic map" label="topic map"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12359" end="12371" title="Graham Klyne" label="Graham Klyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q54871" start="13219" end="13225" title="SPARQL" label="SPARQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q47607" start="13240" end="13243" title="SQL" label="SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="13265" end="13279" title="W3C recommendation" label="recommendation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="13287" end="13290" title="W3C" label="W3C"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138701" start="13680" end="13684" title="RDQL" label="RDQL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13778" end="13784" title="4Suite" label="4Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="13786" end="13792" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13930" end="13935" title="SeRQL" label="SeRQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455975" start="13945" end="13951" title="Sesame (framework)" label="Sesame"/>
<link wikidata="Q726218" start="13954" end="13957" title="XUL" label="XUL"/>
<link wikidata="Q29377821" start="14440" end="14445" title="SHACL" label="SHACL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14843" end="14870" title="SPARQL Inferencing Notation" label="SPARQL Inferencing Notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29377880" start="14963" end="14967" title="ShEx" label="ShEx"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="19172" end="19177" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="19182" end="19193" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="19371" end="19387" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="20053" end="20061" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="20656" end="20665" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="20680" end="20689" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449104" start="21477" end="21485" title="Semantics encoding" label="encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q771906" start="21523" end="21532" title="Resource (computer science)" label="resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="21575" end="21583" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q216353" start="22023" end="22028" title="Title" label="Title"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="22032" end="22041" title="Publisher" label="Publisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q101072" start="22191" end="22201" title="definition" label="definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q151885" start="22210" end="22217" title="concept" label="concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q465" start="23054" end="23061" title="DBpedia" label="DBpedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045810" start="23137" end="23141" title="YAGO (database)" label="YAGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013" start="23236" end="23244" title="Wikidata" label="Wikidata"/>
<link wikidata="Q43449" start="23323" end="23339" title="Creative Commons" label="Creative Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389366" start="23410" end="23435" title="FOAF (software)" label="FOAF (Friend of a Friend)"/>
<link wikidata="Q215627" start="23459" end="23465" title="person" label="people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687237" start="23507" end="23522" title="Haystack (PIM)" label="Haystack client"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092253" start="23574" end="23585" title="IDEAS Group" label="IDEAS Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095057" start="23608" end="23619" title="Ontology components" label="4D ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048431" start="23624" end="23647" title="Enterprise Architecture" label="Enterprise Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q14005" start="23796" end="23807" title="MusicBrainz" label="MusicBrainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q686733" start="23854" end="23861" title="NEPOMUK (framework)" label="NEPOMUK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346625" start="24044" end="24052" title="KDE Software Compilation 4" label="KDE SC 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105202" start="24076" end="24084" title="Cochrane (organisation)" label="Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q45432" start="24338" end="24341" title="RSS (file format)" label="RSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="24489" end="24495" title="weblog" label="weblog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288360" start="24507" end="24543" title="Simple Knowledge Organization System" label="Simple Knowledge Organization System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445314" start="24629" end="24679" title="Semantically-Interlinked Online Communities" label="SIOC (Semantically-Interlinked Online Communities)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543822" start="24833" end="24841" title="Smart-M3" label="Smart-M3"/>
<link wikidata="Q221935" start="24995" end="24998" title="LV2" label="LV2"/>
<link wikidata="Q224821" start="26044" end="26055" title="fuzzy logic" label="fuzzy logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839811" start="26313" end="26317" title="TriG (syntax)" label="TRiG"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839826" start="26320" end="26324" title="TriX (syntax)" label="TRiX"/>
<link wikidata="Q48940" start="26327" end="26334" title="RDF/XML" label="RDF/XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q507673" start="26337" end="26341" title="RDFa" label="RDFa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108942" start="26344" end="26351" title="JSON-LD" label="JSON-LD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424987" start="26354" end="26363" title="Notation3" label="Notation3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380560" start="26384" end="26412" title="Entity–attribute–value model" label="Entity–attribute–value model"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="26415" end="26427" title="Graph theory" label="Graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q658349" start="26481" end="26495" title="Tag (metadata)" label="Tag (metadata)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23876293" start="26498" end="26507" title="SciCrunch" label="SciCrunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045785" start="26510" end="26526" title="Semantic network" label="Semantic network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449091" start="26549" end="26568" title="Semantic technology" label="Semantic technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893610" start="26571" end="26596" title="Business Intelligence 2.0" label="Business Intelligence 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325217" start="26608" end="26624" title="Data portability" label="Data portability"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412398" start="26627" end="26646" title="EU Open Data Portal" label="EU Open Data Portal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751819" start="26649" end="26659" title="RDF Schema" label="RDF Schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q494291" start="26662" end="26672" title="Folksonomy" label="Folksonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6459954" start="26675" end="26679" title="LSID" label="LSID"/>
<link wikidata="Q752498" start="26708" end="26715" title="Swoogle" label="Swoogle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063748" start="26718" end="26747" title="Universal Networking Language" label="Universal Networking Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939443" start="26756" end="26760" title="VoID" label="VoID"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53848" wikidata="Q975" url="?curid=53848" title="San Antonio">
<text>San Antonio ( ; Spanish for &quot;Saint Anthony&quot;) is a city in the U.S. state of Texas and the most populous city in Greater San Antonio, the third-largest metropolitan area in Texas and the 24th-largest metropolitan area in the United States at 2.6 million people in the 2020 United States census. It is the most populous city in and the county seat of Bexar County. San Antonio is the seventh-most populous city in the United States, and the second-most populous in the Southern United States and Texas, after Houston.

Founded as a Spanish mission and colonial outpost in 1718, the city in 1731 became the first chartered civil settlement in what is now present-day Texas. The area was then part of the Spanish Empire. From 1821 to 1836, it was part of the Mexican Republic. It is the oldest municipality in Texas, having celebrated its 300th anniversary on May 1, 2018.

Straddling the regional divide between South and Central Texas, San Antonio anchors the southwestern corner of an urban megaregion colloquially known as the Texas Triangle. Downtown Austin and downtown San Antonio are approximately apart, and both fall along the I-35 corridor. This combined metropolitan region of San Antonio–Austin has approximately 5 million people.

San Antonio was named by a 1691 Spanish expedition for the Portuguese priest Saint Anthony of Padua, whose feast day is June 13. The city contains five 18th-century Spanish frontier missions, including the Alamo and San Antonio Missions National Historical Park. Together these were designated as UNESCO World Heritage sites in 2015. Other notable attractions include the River Walk, the Tower of the Americas, SeaWorld San Antonio, the Alamo Bowl, and Marriage Island. Commercial entertainment includes Six Flags Fiesta Texas and Morgan&#x27;s Wonderland amusement parks. According to the San Antonio Convention and Visitors Bureau, the city is visited by about 32 million tourists a year. It is home to the five-time National Basketball Association (NBA) champion San Antonio Spurs. It hosts the annual San Antonio Stock Show &amp; Rodeo, one of the largest such events in the U.S.

The U.S. Armed Forces have numerous facilities in and around San Antonio; Fort Sam Houston, which has Brooke Army Medical Center within it, is the only one within the city limits. Lackland Air Force Base, Randolph Air Force Base, Kelly Air Force Base, Camp Bullis, and Camp Stanley are outside the city limits. San Antonio is home to four &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 companies and the South Texas Medical Center, the only medical research and care provider in the South Texas region.

San Antonio is also one of the largest majority-Hispanic cities in the United States, with 64% of its population being Hispanic.

==History==
At the time of European encounter, the Payaya people lived near the San Antonio River Valley in the San Pedro Springs area. They called the vicinity &quot;Yanaguana&quot;, meaning &quot;refreshing waters&quot;. In 1691, a group of Spanish explorers and missionaries came upon the river and Payaya settlement on June 13, the feast day of St. Anthony of Padua. They named the place and river &quot;San Antonio&quot; in his honor.
It was years before any Spanish settlement took place. Father Antonio de Olivares visited the site in 1709, and he was determined to found a mission and civilian settlement there. The viceroy gave formal approval for a combined mission and presidio in late 1716, as he wanted to forestall any French expansion into the area from their colony of &quot;La Louisiane&quot; to the east, as well as prevent illegal trading with the Payaya. He directed Martín de Alarcón, the governor of Coahuila y Tejas, to establish the mission complex. Differences between Alarcón and Olivares resulted in delays, and construction did not start until 1718. Olivares built, with the help of the Payaya and the Pastia people, the Misión de San Antonio de Valero (The Alamo), the Presidio San Antonio de Bexar, the bridge that connected both, and the Acequia Madre de Valero.

The families who clustered around the presidio and mission were the start of Villa de Béjar, destined to become the most important town in Spanish Texas. On May 1, the governor transferred ownership of the Mission San Antonio de Valero (later famous as The Alamo) to Fray Antonio de Olivares. On May 5, 1718, he commissioned the Presidio San Antonio de Béxar (&quot;Béjar&quot; in modern Spanish orthography) on the west side of the San Antonio River, one-fourth league from the mission.

On February 14, 1719, the Marquis of San Miguel de Aguayo proposed to the king of Spain that 400 families be transported from the Canary Islands, Galicia, or Havana to populate the province of Texas. His plan was approved, and notice was given the Canary Islanders (&quot;isleños&quot;) to furnish 200 families; the Council of the Indies suggested that 400 families should be sent from the Canaries to Texas by way of Havana and Veracruz. By June 1730, 25 families had reached Cuba, and 10 families had been sent to Veracruz before orders from Spain came to stop the re-settlement.

Under the leadership of Juan Leal Goraz, the group marched overland from Veracruz to the Presidio San Antonio de Béxar, where they arrived on March 9, 1731. Due to marriages along the way, the party now included 15 families, a total of 56 persons. They joined the military community established in 1718. The immigrants formed the nucleus of the villa of San Fernando de Béxar, the first regularly organized civil government in Texas. Several older families of San Antonio trace their descent from the Canary Island colonists. María Rosa Padrón was the first baby born of Canary Islander descent in San Antonio.
During the Spanish–Mexican settlement of Southwestern lands, which took place over the following century, Juan Leal Goraz Jr. was a prominent figure. He claimed nearly 100,000 sq miles (153,766 acres) as Spanish territory and held some control for nearly three decades; this area stretched across six present-day states. San Antonio was designated as Leal Goraz&#x27;s capital. It represented Mexican expansion into the area. With his robust military forces, he led exploration and establishing Spanish colonial bases as far as San Francisco, California. Widespread bankruptcy forced Leal Goraz Jr.&#x27;s army back into the current boundaries of Mexico; they fell into internal conflict and turmoil with neighboring entities.

San Antonio grew to become the largest Spanish settlement in Texas; it was designated as the capital of the Spanish, later Mexican, province of Tejas. From San Antonio, the Camino Real (today Nacogdoches Road), was built to the small frontier town of Nacogdoches. Mexico allowed European American settlers from the United States into the territory; they mostly occupied land in the eastern part. In 1835, when Antonio López de Santa Anna unilaterally abolished the Mexican Constitution of 1824, violence ensued in many states of Mexico. which led to many short-lived independent republics. This, in addition to Mexico&#x27;s abolition of slavery, and cultural differences between the Texians and the Mexicans, led to the Texas Revolution.

In a series of battles, the Texian Army succeeded in forcing Mexican soldiers out of the settlement areas east of San Antonio, which were dominated by Americans. Under the leadership of Ben Milam, in the Battle of Bexar, December 1835, Texian forces captured San Antonio from forces commanded by General Martin Perfecto de Cos, Santa Anna&#x27;s brother-in-law. In the spring of 1836, Santa Anna marched on San Antonio. A volunteer force under the command of James C. Neill occupied and fortified the deserted Alamo mission.

Upon his departure, the joint command of William Barrett Travis and James Bowie were left in charge of defending the old mission. The Battle of the Alamo took place from February 23 to March 6, 1836. The outnumbered Texian force was ultimately defeated, with all of the Alamo defenders killed. These men were seen as &quot;martyrs&quot; for the cause of Texas freedom and &quot;Remember the Alamo&quot; became a rallying cry in the Texian Army&#x27;s eventual success at defeating Santa Anna&#x27;s army.

Juan Seguín, who organized the company of Tejano patriots, who fought for Texas independence, fought at the Battle of Concepción, the Siege of Bexar, and the Battle of San Jacinto, and served as mayor of San Antonio. He was forced out of office due to threats on his life by sectarian newcomers and political opponents in 1842, becoming the last Tejano mayor for nearly 150 years.
In 1845, the United States finally decided to annex Texas and include it as a state in the Union. This led to the Mexican–American War. Though the U.S. ultimately won, the war was devastating to San Antonio. By its end, the population of the city had been reduced by almost two-thirds, to 800 inhabitants. Bolstered by migrants and immigrants, by 1860 at the start of the American Civil War, San Antonio had grown to a city of 15,000 people.

In the 1850s, Frederick Law Olmsted, the landscape architect who designed Central Park in New York City, traveled throughout the Southern and Southwest U.S., and published accounts of his observations. In his 1859 book about Texas, Olmsted described San Antonio as having a &quot;jumble of races, costumes, languages, and buildings&quot;, which gave it a quality that only New Orleans could rival in what he described as &quot;odd and antiquated foreignness.&quot; Following the Civil War, San Antonio prospered as a center of the cattle industry. During this period, it remained a frontier city, with a mixture of cultures that was different from other U.S. cities.

German immigrants founded smaller surrounding towns such as New Braunfels, Castroville, Boerne, Comfort, Fredericksburg, and Bulverde, all towns far out from San Antonio. However, the Germans were then drawn to San Antonio for work, and many buildings and streets still bear German names such as Wurzbach, Huebner, and Jones Maltsberger, and Wiederstein. The German impact on San Antonio was great, in the early 1900s it is estimated that at least 1/3 of San Antonio was ethnically German. Many descendants of German immigrants in San Antonio spoke Texas German up to the fifth or sixth generations. Texas German is a dialect of German that evolved when the German language was separated from Germany. Texas German is best described as an anglicized-German dialect with a Texas twang. Many older generations in New Braunfels and Fredericksburg still speak Texas German to this day.

In 1877, following the Reconstruction Era, the Galveston, Harrisburg, &amp; San Antonio Railroad became the first railroad to reach San Antonio, connecting it to major markets and port cities. Texas was the first state to have major cities develop by railroads rather than waterways. In Texas, the railroads supported a markedly different pattern of development of major interior cities, such as San Antonio, Dallas and Fort Worth, compared to the historical development of coastal port cities in the established eastern states.

At the beginning of the 20th century, the streets of the city&#x27;s downtown were widened to accommodate street cars and modern traffic. At that time, many of the older historic buildings were demolished in the process of this modernization.

Since the late twentieth century, San Antonio has had steady population growth. The city&#x27;s population has nearly doubled in 35 years, from just over 650,000 in the 1970 census to an estimated 1.2 million in 2005, through both population growth and land annexation (the latter has considerably enlarged the physical area of the city). In 1990, the United States Census Bureau reported San Antonio&#x27;s population as 55.6% Hispanic or Latino, 7.0% Black or African American, and 36.2% non-Hispanic white.

The San Antonio Missions National Historical Park and The Alamo became UNESCO World Heritage sites in 2015 and the city was designated a UNESCO &quot;City of Creativity for Gastronomy&quot; in 2017, one of only 26 gastronomy creative cities in the world.

With the increase in professional jobs, San Antonio has become a destination for many college-educated persons, most recently including African Americans in a reverse Great Migration from northern and western areas.
Over 31,000 migrants who requested asylum have been released by the Border Patrol into the city in 2019 during the National Emergency Concerning the Southern Border of the United States.

==Geography==

San Antonio is approximately to the southwest of its neighboring city, Austin, the state capital, about from the Mexico-United States border, about west of Houston, and about south of the Dallas–Fort Worth area. The city has a total area of ; of San Antonio&#x27;s total area is land and of it is water. The city&#x27;s gently rolling terrain is dotted with oak trees, forested land, mesquite, and cacti. The Texas Hill Country reaches into the far northern portions of the city. San Antonio sits on the Balcones Escarpment. Its altitude is approximately above sea level.

The city&#x27;s primary source of drinking water is the Edwards Aquifer. Impounded in 1962 and 1969, respectively, Victor Braunig Lake and Calaveras Lake were among the first reservoirs in the United States built to use recycled treated wastewater for power plant cooling, reducing the amount of groundwater needed for electrical generation.

===Neighborhoods===
==== Downtown ====
Downtown San Antonio, the city and metro area&#x27;s urban core, encompasses many of the city&#x27;s famous structures, attractions, and businesses. The central business district is generally understood to cover the northern half of the &quot;Downtown Loop&quot;—the area bordered by Cesar Chavez to the south. Due to the size of the city and its horizontal development, downtown accounts for less than one half of one percent of San Antonio&#x27;s geographic area. The Strip (north of Downtown) houses a concentration of clubs and bars catering to the LGBT community.

==== North Central ====
North Central is home to several enclaves and upscale neighborhoods including Castle Hills, Shavano Park, Hollywood Park, Elm Creek, Inwood, Stone Oak, and Rogers Ranch. The area is also the location of upper-middle-class neighborhoods (Deerfield, Churchill Estates, Hunter&#x27;s Creek, Oak Meadow, and Summerfield).

==== Northwest Side ====
Northwest Side is the location of the main campus of the University of Texas at San Antonio, the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, and the Northwest Campus of the University of the Incarnate Word, which includes the Rosenberg School of Optometry. The Medical Center District is also located in Northwest Side. Companies with headquarters in the area include Valero and NuStar Energy.

====South Side====
The South Side area of San Antonio is characterized by its predominantly Latino and Hispanic neighborhoods, who on average, account for above 81 percent of the population. Large growth came to South Side when Toyota constructed a manufacturing plant. Palo Alto College and Texas A&amp;M University–San Antonio are located in the area.

====East Side====

The East Side of San Antonio is home to the San Antonio Stock Show &amp; Rodeo, the Frost Bank Center, and the Freeman Coliseum. This area has the largest concentration of Black and African American residents.

==== West Side ====
The West Side is predominantly Hispanic/Latin American and working class, with pockets of wealth in the northwest and far west. African Americans are also located in parts of San Antonio&#x27;s West Side. The West Side has undergone gentrification as of 2019. It includes the diverse neighborhoods of Avenida Guadalupe, Collins Garden, Las Palmas, Prospect Hill, Rainbow Hills (Marbach), San Juan Gardens, Loma Park, Loma Vista, Memorial Heights, and Westwood. It is also home to the historic Our Lady of the Lake University and St. Mary&#x27;s University.

=== Flora and fauna ===
Natural vegetation in the San Antonio area (where undisturbed by development) includes oak-cedar woodland, oak grassland savanna, chaparral brush, and riparian (stream) woodland. San Antonio is at the westernmost limit for both Cabbage palmetto (&quot;Sabal palmetto&quot;) and Spanish moss.

The native Eastern Subterranean Termite (&quot;Reticulitermes flavipes&quot;) is a common structural pest here. The Formosan Termite (&quot;Coptotermes formosanus&quot;) is an invasive pest originally from the Far East. Researchers at Texas A&amp;M University consider it to be economically devastating.

===Climate===

San Antonio has a transitional humid subtropical climate (Köppen: &quot;Cfa&quot;) that borders a hot semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;BSh&quot;) towards the west of the city featuring very hot, long, and humid summers and mild to cool winters. The area is subject to descending northern cold fronts in the winter with cool to cold nights, and is warm and rainy in the spring and fall. San Antonio falls in USDA hardiness zones 8b (15 °F to 20 °F) and 9a (20 °F to 25 °F).

San Antonio receives about a dozen subfreezing nights each year, typically seeing snow, sleet, or freezing rain about once every two or three winters, but accumulation and snow itself are very rare. Winters may pass without any frozen precipitation at all, and up to a decade has passed between snowfalls. According to the National Weather Service, there have been 32 instances of snowfall (a trace or more) in the city in the past 122 years, about once every four years. Prior to 2021 snow was most recently seen on December 7, 2017, when of snow coated the city. On January 13, 1985, San Antonio received a record snowfall of . During the February 13–17, 2021, North American winter storm, San Antonio was blanketed with 4–6 inches (10–15 cm) of snow. The cold air which accompanied this storm caused massive rolling blackouts throughout the city until the 18th. The February 15–20, 2021, North American winter storm dropped another 1–2 inches (2.5–5 cm) on the city on the 16th.

San Antonio and New Braunfels, to the northeast, are some of the most flood-prone regions in North America. The October 1998 Central Texas floods were among the costliest floods in United States history, resulting in $750 million in damage and 32 deaths. In 2002, from June 30 to July 7, of rain fell in the San Antonio area, resulting in widespread flooding and 12 fatalities.

Tornadoes within the city limits have been reported as recently as February 2017, although they are uncommon. An F2 tornado lands within of the city on average once every five years. San Antonio has experienced two F4 tornadoes, one in 1953 and another in 1973. The 1953 tornado resulted in two deaths and 15 injuries. Based on historical data, San Antonio is the safest major city in Texas when it comes to tornadoes.

In San Antonio, July and August tie for the average warmest months, with an average high of . The highest temperature ever recorded was on September 5, 2000. The average coolest month is January. The lowest recorded temperature ever was on January 31, 1949. May, June, and October have quite a bit of precipitation. Since recordkeeping began in 1871, the average annual precipitation has been , with a maximum of and a minimum of in one year.


==Demographics==


The U.S. Census Bureau&#x27;s 2020 census determined San Antonio had a population of 1,434,625 residents in 2020. In 2019, the American Community Survey estimated San Antonio had a racial makeup of 88.4% White, 6.6% Black and African American, 0.2% American Indian and Alaska Native, 2.8% Asian, 0.1% Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander, 0.2% some other race and 1.7% two or more races. Ethnically, 64.5% were Hispanic or Latin American of any race. In 2020, its racial and ethnic makeup was 23.4% non-Hispanic white, 63.9% Hispanic or Latin American of any race, 6.5% Black and African American, 3.2% Asian, and 2.3% multiracial or some other race.

According to the 2010 U.S. census, 1,327,407 people resided in San Antonio city proper, an increase of 16.0% since 2000. The racial composition of the city based on the 2010 U.S. census is as follows: 72.6% White (non-Hispanic whites: 26.6%), 6.9% Black or African American, 0.9% Native American, 2.4% Asian, 0.1% Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, 3.4% two or more races, and 13.7% other races. In addition, 63.2% of the city&#x27;s population was of Hispanic or Latino origin, of any race. According to the 2000 U.S. census, the city proper had a population of 1,144,646, ranking it the ninth-most populated city in the country. San Antonio has a relatively lower cost of living compared to most Texas and U.S. major cities and a strong job market. However, due to San Antonio&#x27;s low density and relatively small suburban population, the metropolitan area ranked just 30th in the United States, with a population of 1,592,383 in 2000. San Antonio has a large Hispanic population with a significant African American population.

The 2011 U.S. census estimate for the eight-county metropolitan area placed its population at 2,194,927. The 2017 estimate for Greater San Antonio was 2,473,974, making it the third-most populous metro area in Texas (after the Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex and Greater Houston) and the 24th-most populous metro area in the U.S.

About 405,474 households, and 280,993 families resided in San Antonio. The population density as of 2010 was . There were 433,122 housing units at an average density of . The age of the city&#x27;s population was distributed as 28.5% under the age of 18, 10.8% from 18 to 24, 30.8% from 25 to 44, 19.4% from 45 to 64, and 10.4% who are 65 years of age or older. The median age was 32 years. In San Antonio, 48% of the population were males, and 52% of the population were females. For every 100 females, there were 93.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.7 males.

At the 2019 American Community Survey, there were 512,273 households and 319,673 families. The average household size was 2.98 and the average family size was 3.83. Of the local population, 201,960 were married-couple households and 172,741 were female households with no spouse or partner present. An estimated 85,462 households were single-person. Roughly 218,249 residents in San Antonio were foreign-born residents. For every 100 females, San Antonio had 97.1 males.

At the 2010 U.S. census, San Antonio&#x27;s median income for a household was $36,214, and the median income for a family was $53,100. Males have a median income of $30,061 versus $24,444 for females. The per capita income for the city is $17,487. About 17.3% of the population and 14.0% of families are below the poverty line. Of the total population, 24.3% of those under the age of 18 and 13.5% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line. In 2019, households had a median income of $53,571 and a mean income of $72,587. An estimated 16.8% of the population lived at or below the poverty line. The city of San Antonio and its metropolis was rated the poorest in 2019.

A Gallup study in 2015 determined 4% of the city and Greater San Antonio identified as lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender. In 2016, San Antonio scored a 90 out of 100 in its treatment of the LGBT community.

=== Religion ===

The population of Greater San Antonio is predominantly Christian. Owing in part to San Antonio&#x27;s Spanish and Mexican heritage, Roman Catholicism is the largest religious group in the region. In addition, American missionary work and immigration into Texas have also resulted in a substantial Protestant population.

The Catholic population forms the largest Christian group in the city and Greater San Antonio. San Antonian Catholics are served primarily by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Antonio. The Latin Church&#x27;s Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Antonio was established on August 27, 1784, under the then Diocese of Galveston. It was elevated to archdiocese status in 1926.

According to Sperling&#x27;s BestPlaces in 2020, the second largest Christian group were Baptists. The largest Baptist Christian denominations within San Antonio and its metro area were the Baptist General Convention of Texas, the Southern Baptist Convention, and the Cooperative Baptist Fellowship. Methodists formed the second largest Protestant group and the third largest Christian group for the area. The United Methodist Church was the most prominent Methodist denomination. From 2017 to 2020, Pentecostalism outgrew Lutheranism and tied with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints as the fourth largest Christian group. A major predominantly African American-led church is Denver Heights, affiliated with the Church of God in Christ.

After Lutherans, Presbyterians were the next largest Christian denomination, followed by Episcopalian or Anglicans, and Christians of other traditions including the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodoxy. The Eastern Orthodox communities are divided between the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America, the Antiochian Orthodox Archdiocese of North America, the Orthodox Church in America, and the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia. Episcopalians and Anglicans primarily are served by the Episcopal Church in the United States and the Anglican Church in North America. Churches affiliated with the Episcopal Church form the Episcopal Diocese of West Texas. Overall, the Protestant demographic was predominantly Evangelical as of 2020.

Islam is the second largest religion in the Greater San Antonio area. Eastern religions such as Buddhism, Sikhism, and Hinduism also have a significant presence in San Antonio. An estimated 0.3% of the area&#x27;s population identified with Judaism according to Sperling&#x27;s BestPlaces and at least 10,000 Jews live in the city. The San Antonio Jewish community began not long after the independence of the Republic of Texas. The oldest synagogue in South Texas (Temple Beth-El) is located in the city limits and located near San Antonio College.

=== Crime ===

Crime in San Antonio began to rise in the early 1980s, similar to many urban areas in the US. In 1983 San Antonio had the tenth highest homicide rate in Texas with 18.5 homicides per 100,000 residents. The number of juveniles arrested in San Antonio for violent crimes tripled between 1987 and 1994, according to the Texas Law Enforcement Management and Administration Statistics Program. The number of youths arrested for unlawfully carrying firearms doubled over the same period.

In 1993, San Antonio earned the nickname the &quot;Drive-By City&quot; after the San Antonio Police Department recorded over 1,200 drive-by shootings, or an average of about 3.5 per day, which overshadowed the number in other Texas cities. A majority of the violence occurred on the east and west sides of the city, especially in areas with high poverty rates. Gang violence led to the deaths of their members and sometimes innocent bystanders, and housing projects such as the Alazán-Apache Courts served as hubs for various groups, which sometimes included rival gangs. By the end of 1993 the city hit a peak in homicides with 230 killings, the highest since 1991 when 211 were killed.

In 2016, the number of murders hit 151, the highest toll in 20 years. A majority of the San Antonio homicide victims were Hispanic and African American men between ages 18 and 29. According to a study, 40% of the killings were either drug-related or domestic incidents. In 2020, San Antonio ranked the fourth U.S. city with the biggest increase in homicides. From January to June 2020, there were 71 homicides according to the San Antonio Police Department. In 2019, there were 53 reported homicides in contrast. A total of 105 homicides occurred in 2019 in the city. According to &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, homicide rates were relatively low compared to previous decades.

==Economy==

San Antonio has a diversified economy with a gross domestic product (GDP) of approximately $121 billion in 2018. San Antonio&#x27;s economy focuses primarily on military, health care, government–civil service, professional and business services, oil and gas, and tourism. Since the beginning of the 21st century, the city has become a significant location for American-based call centers and has added a sizable manufacturing sector centered around automobiles. The city also has a growing technology sector. Located about northwest of Downtown is the South Texas Medical Center, a conglomerate of various hospitals, clinics, and research (see Southwest Research Institute and Texas Biomedical Research Institute) and higher educational institutions.

Over twenty million tourists visit the city and its attractions every year, contributing substantially to its economy, primarily due to The Alamo and the River Walk. The Henry B. Gonzalez Convention Center alone hosts over 300 events annually with more than 750,000 convention delegates from around the world. Tourism provided over 130,000 jobs, and it had an economic impact of $13.6 billion in the local economy according to information gathered in 2017. The city of San Antonio received $195 million in the same year from the hospitality industry, with revenues from hotel occupancy tax, sales taxes and others.

San Antonio is the headquarters of two Fortune 500 companies: Valero Energy and USAA. iHeartMedia had been on the list but fell off, and NuStar Energy was also on the list until it was purchased by Sunoco LP in 2024. H-E-B, the 5th-largest private company in the U.S., is also headquartered in San Antonio.

Other companies headquartered in the city include Bill Miller Bar-B-Q Enterprises, Carenet Health, Security Service Federal Credit Union, Visionworks of America, Frost Bank, Harte-Hanks, Kinetic Concepts, SWBC, NewTek, Rackspace, Pabst Brewing Company, Taco Cabana, Broadway Bank, Zachry Holdings/Zachry Construction Company, Randolph-Brooks Federal Credit Union, SAS, Globalscape, and Whataburger. The North American Development Bank, a development finance institution jointly held by the governments of the U.S. and Mexico, is headquartered in San Antonio as well. Other notable companies that maintain sizable presences in the city include Hulu, OCI, Capital Group, CGI, Marathon Petroleum, Silver Spring Networks, Toyota, Argo Group, EOG Resources, Microsoft, Cogeco Peer1, Wells Fargo, Citi Bank, and Boeing. In December 2020, Amazon announced plans to for three new facilities in San Antonio.

San Antonio has lost several major company headquarters, the largest being the 2008 move of AT&amp;T Inc. to Dallas &quot;to better serve customers and expand business in the future.&quot; In 2019, Andeavor (Formerly Tesoro) was acquired by Marathon Petroleum; this merger eliminated the company and the headquarters was moved to Findlay, Ohio. After a Los Angeles buyout specialist purchased Builders Square, the company&#x27;s operations were moved out of San Antonio.

The city is home to one of the largest concentrations of military bases in the U.S., and has been nicknamed &quot;Military City, USA&quot;. The city is home to several active military installations: Lackland Air Force Base, Brooke Army Medical Center, Randolph Air Force Base, and Fort Sam Houston.

San Antonio and Mexico share strong economic ties and engage in important exchanges to the benefit of their business communities. To better strengthen these business and cultural ties, the City of San Antonio opened Casa San Antonio to act as the city&#x27;s trade and cultural office in Mexico.

The Formosan termite (&quot;Coptotermes formosanus&quot;) causes economic devastation in the region due to the structural damage it causes. It is an invasive pest originally from the Far East. First found in the state in 1957, it has since spread into the greater San Antonio area, creating a problem for the region&#x27;s pecan orchards.

==Arts and culture==

San Antonio is a popular tourist destination. The Alamo Mission in San Antonio (&quot;The Alamo&quot;), located in Downtown, is Texas&#x27; top tourist attraction. Because of the mission, San Antonio is often called &quot;Alamo City&quot;.

The River Walk, which meanders through the Downtown area, is the city&#x27;s second-most-visited attraction, giving it the additional nickname of &quot;River City&quot;. Extended by an additional between 2009 and 2013, the landscaped walking and bike path line the San Antonio River from the &quot;Museum Reach&quot; beginning in Brackenridge Park through downtown, &quot;Downtown Reach&quot;, past the Blue Star&#x27;s &quot;Eagleland&quot; to the &quot;Mission Reach&quot; ending near Loop 410 South past Mission Espada.

Lined with numerous shops, bars, and restaurants, as well as the Arneson River Theater, this attraction is transformed into a festival of lights during the Christmas and New Year holiday period (except for the Mission Reach), and is suffused with the local sounds of folklorico and flamenco music during the summer, particularly during celebrations such as the Fiesta Noche del Rio.

The Downtown area also features San Fernando Cathedral, The Majestic Theatre, Hemisfair (home of the Tower of the Americas, and UTSA&#x27;s Institute of Texan Cultures), La Villita, Market Square, the Spanish Governor&#x27;s Palace, and the historic Menger Hotel. The Fairmount Hotel, built in 1906 and San Antonio&#x27;s second oldest hotel, is in the &quot;Guinness World Records&quot; as one of the heaviest buildings ever moved intact. It was placed in its new location, three blocks south of the Alamo, over four days in 1985, and cost $650,000 to move.

SeaWorld, west of Downtown in the city&#x27;s Westover Hills district, is one of the largest marine life parks in the world. The San Antonio Zoo is in Brackenridge Park. The British company Merlin Entertainments developed an aquarium attraction and indoor counterpart to SeaWorld. It is inside the Shops at Rivercenter in Downtown San Antonio and is one of Merlin&#x27;s Sea Life Aquariums. The San Antonio Aquarium features a number of interactive exhibits.

San Antonio is also home to several commercial amusement parks, including Six Flags Fiesta Texas and Morgan&#x27;s Wonderland, a theme park for children with special needs. Kiddie Park, featuring old-fashioned amusement rides for children, was established in 1925 and is the oldest children&#x27;s amusement park in the U.S.

San Antonio is home to the first museum of modern art in Texas, the McNay Art Museum. Other art institutions and museums include ArtPace, Blue Star Contemporary Art Center, the Briscoe Western Art Museum, Ruby City, Buckhorn Saloon &amp; Museum (where visitors can experience something of cowboy culture year round), San Antonio Museum of Art, formerly the Lonestar Brewery, Say Sí (mentoring San Antonio artistic youth), the Southwest School of Art, Texas Rangers Museum, Texas Transportation Museum, the Witte Museum and the DoSeum. An outdoor display at North Star Mall features -tall cowboy boots.

The city&#x27;s five missions, the four in the San Antonio Missions National Historical Park plus The Alamo, were named UNESCO World Heritage sites on July 5, 2015. The San Antonio Missions became the 23rd U.S. site on the World Heritage list, which includes the Grand Canyon and the Statue of Liberty; it is the first site in Texas. The new Mission Reach of the River Walk was completed in 2013, and created over of biking, hiking, and paddling trails that connect the Missions to Downtown and the Broadway Corridor.

San Antonio&#x27;s Howard W. Peak Greenway Trail System is a big draw. It covers more than and has more than 50 trailheads.

Other places of interest include the San Antonio Botanical Garden, Brackenridge Park, the Japanese Tea Gardens, and the Woodlawn Theater.

In 2015 work was authorized to begin on the restoration of the former Hot Wells hotel, spa, and bathhouses on the San Antonio River on the city&#x27;s south side.

===Annual events===
Yearly events, such as Fiesta San Antonio (the city&#x27;s signature event), Luminaria (a contemporary arts festival) and Fiesta Noche del Rio, add a variety of entertainment options to the area, as well as strengthening the economy. Fiesta San Antonio alone carries an annual economic impact of $340 million. The city also plays host to the San Antonio Film Festival every summer in August.

==Sports==


===Professional sports===

The city&#x27;s only top-level professional sports team is the San Antonio Spurs of the National Basketball Association. Previously the Spurs played at the Alamodome (which was speculatively built in an attempt to lure a professional football team to the region), and before that the HemisFair Arena. They moved into the SBC Center in 2002 (since renamed the Frost Bank Center), built with public funds.

San Antonio is home to the Double-A San Antonio Missions, who play at Nelson Wolff Stadium and are the Minor League Baseball affiliate of the San Diego Padres.

San Antonio had a professional soccer franchise when the San Antonio Thunder played two seasons in the original NASL during the 1975–1976 seasons. Professional soccer returned with the birth of the San Antonio Scorpions of the modern NASL in 2012. The Scorpions won the 2014 Soccer Bowl, the first soccer championship in city history. On December 22, 2015, it was announced that Toyota Field and S.T.A.R. Soccer Complex were sold to the City of San Antonio and Bexar County, a deal which was accompanied by an agreement for Spurs Sports and Entertainment to operate the facilities and field a team would play in the United Soccer League Championship. San Antonio FC began play in the soccer-specific stadium, Toyota Field, in 2016, and won the 2022 league championship. As a result, the San Antonio Scorpions franchise of the NASL was shut down.

*San Antonio has two rugby union teams, the Alamo City Rugby Football Club, and San Antonio Rugby Football Club. The San Antonio metropolitan area&#x27;s smaller population has so far contributed to its lack of an NFL, MLB, NHL, or MLS team. City officials are said to be attempting to lure the National Football League permanently to San Antonio. Former NFL Commissioner Paul Tagliabue stated San Antonio was successful in temporarily hosting the New Orleans Saints following Hurricane Katrina, and that the city would be on the short list for any future NFL expansions. The city has also hosted the Dallas Cowboys and Houston Oilers preseason camps in the past, and the Cowboys practiced in San Antonio through 2011. Cowboys owner Jerry Jones acknowledged his support for the city to become home to an NFL franchise.

The city has played host to a number of major and minor league football teams, primarily at Alamo Stadium and the Alamodome. The San Antonio Gunslingers of the United States Football League and the San Antonio Riders of the World League of American Football played for two seasons each in the 1980s and 1990s, respectively; while the San Antonio Wings of the World Football League and the San Antonio Texans of the Canadian Football League each played a single season. In 2018, the Alliance of American Football announced that the San Antonio Commanders would play in the city beginning in 2019. The Commanders opened play at the Alamodome in February 2019. San Antonio was also home to the minor-league Toros of the Texas Football League (later the Continental Football League, then Trans-American Football League) from 1966 to 1971; and the minor-league Charros of the American Football Association from 1978 to 1981. Since 2020, the San Antonio Brahmas of the UFL&#x27;s XFL conference have played at the Alamodome.

The Valero Texas Open is a professional golf tournament on the PGA Tour held at San Antonio since 1922. It has been played at TPC San Antonio since 2010. Previous venues include the Brackenridge Park Golf Course, La Cantera Golf Club and Pecan Valley Golf Club; the latter also hosted the 1968 PGA Championship. The Alamo Ladies Classic was an LPGA Tour event held from 1960 to 1973.

The first Rising Phoenix World Championships was held at Grand Hyatt, San Antonio in 2015.

The city used to be home to the San Antonio Stars Women&#x27;s National Basketball Association until the franchise was relocated in October 2017 to Las Vegas to become the Las Vegas Aces.

The city used to be home to the San Antonio Rampage ice hockey team until the franchise was sold in February 2020 to the Vegas Golden Knights.

===College sports===

The University of Texas at San Antonio fields San Antonio&#x27;s NCAA Division I athletic teams, known as the UTSA Roadrunners. The teams play in the American Athletic Conference. The university added football in 2011, hiring former University of Miami coach Larry Coker as its initial head coach. Roadrunner football began play in 2011, with a record of 4–6. UTSA set attendance records for both highest attendance at an inaugural game (56,743) and highest average attendance for a first year program (35,521). The Roadrunners moved to the Western Athletic Conference in 2012, to Conference USA in 2013, and to the American Athletic Conference in 2023.

The University of the Incarnate Word (UIW) also fields a full slate of NCAA Division I athletic teams, known as the Incarnate Word Cardinals. UIW&#x27;s football team competes in the Football Championship Subdivision (FCS) in the Southland Conference. Since 2018, UIW&#x27;s football team has won three Southland Conference championships and has made three appearances in the FCS playoffs.

Trinity University fields all the typical collegiate sports, but at the NCAA Division III level. Trinity competes in the Southern Collegiate Athletic Conference (SCAC). The Trinity baseball team won the 2016 Division III College World Series, one of six national team and 21 national individual championships won by the school&#x27;s athletic program in the Division III era. Prior to moving to Division III, Trinity was a national power in tennis, winning five USTA women&#x27;s championships and one NCAA men&#x27;s title between 1968 and 1976. Chuck McKinley won the men&#x27;s championship at Wimbledon and was a member of the winning Davis Cup team as a student at Trinity in 1963.

San Antonio hosts the NCAA football Alamo Bowl each December. The city is also home of the U.S. Army All-American Bowl, played annually in the Alamodome and televised live on NBC. The Bowl is an East versus West showdown featuring the nation&#x27;s top 90 high school football senior players. The game has featured NFL stars Reggie Bush, Vince Young, Adrian Peterson, and many other college and NFL stars.

The University of Texas at San Antonio fields the only collegiate men&#x27;s rugby team in the city. UTSA competes in Division III Texas Rugby Union.

==Government==


The city of San Antonio is operated under the council-manager system of government. The city is divided into 10 council districts designed to be of equal population. Each district elects one person to the city council, with the mayor elected on a citywide basis. All members of the San Antonio City Council, including the mayor, are elected to two-year terms and are limited to four terms (except for those who were in office in November 2008 and are limited to a total of two terms). Houston and Laredo have similar term limits to San Antonio. All positions are elected on nonpartisan ballots, as required by Texas law. Council members are paid $45,722 and the mayor earns $61,725 a year. The current mayor is Ron Nirenberg, who was elected in 2017 with 54.59% of the vote. Nirenberg was narrowly reelected in 2019 against conservative challenger Greg Brockhouse.

The council hires a city manager to handle day-to-day operations. The council effectively functions as the city&#x27;s legislative body with the city manager acting as its chief executive, responsible for the management of day-to-day operations and execution of council legislation. The current city manager is Erik Walsh.

The city operates its own electric and gas utility, CPS Energy. The San Antonio Police Department (SAPD) is the city&#x27;s municipal body of law enforcement. The San Antonio Fire Department (SAFD) provides the city with fire protection and EMS service.

The city stretches into several national congressional districts and is represented in Congress by:
* Senate
** Ted Cruz (R)
** John Cornyn (R)
* House of Representatives
** Texas District 20: Joaquin Castro (D)
** Texas District 21: Charles E. &quot;Chip&quot; Roy (R)
** Texas District 23: Tony Gonzales (R)
** Texas District 28: Henry Cuellar (D)
** Texas District 35: Greg Casar (D)
* State Governor
** Greg Abbott (R)

===State and federal representation===
The Texas Department of Criminal Justice (TDCJ) operates the Parole Division Region IV headquarters in the San Antonio Metro Parole Complex. San Antonio district parole offices I and III are in the parole complex, while office II is in another location.

The Texas Department of Transportation operates the San Antonio District Office in San Antonio.

The United States Postal Service operates San Antonio&#x27;s main post office. Other post offices are located throughout San Antonio.

=== Politics ===

===Growth policy===

Unlike most large cities in the U.S., San Antonio is not completely surrounded by independent suburban cities, and under Texas state law it exercises extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) over much of the surrounding unincorporated land, including planning major thoroughfares and enforcing rules for platting and subdivision. It pursues an aggressive annexation policy and opposes the creation of other municipalities within its ETJ. Nearly three-fourths of its land area has been annexed since 1960.

In the 2000s the city annexed several long narrow corridors along major thoroughfares in outlying areas to facilitate eventual annexation of growth developing along the routes. The city planned to annex nearly 40 additional square miles by 2009.

In May 2010, the City of San Antonio agreed to release thousands of acres of land in its extraterritorial jurisdiction along Interstate 10 to Schertz. The agreement releases a total of of San Antonio&#x27;s ETJ lands north of I-10 to Schertz. The ETJ lands are in an area bordered by FM 1518 to the west, Lower Seguin Road to the north, Cibolo Creek to the east and I-10 to the south.

Involuntary annexation is a controversial issue in those parts of unincorporated Bexar County affected by it. Residents attracted to the outlying areas by lower taxes and affordable real estate values often see annexation as a mechanism to increase property tax rates (which are primarily driven by school district taxes, not city taxes) without a corresponding improvement in services such as police and fire protection, while the city regards its annexation policy as essential to its overall prosperity.

Since the city has annexed areas over time, San Antonio surrounds several independent enclave cities, including Alamo Heights, Balcones Heights, Castle Hills, Hill Country Village, Hollywood Park, Kirby, Leon Valley, Olmos Park, Shavano Park, and Terrell Hills.

==Education==
===Higher education===

San Antonio hosts over 100,000 students in its 31 higher-education institutions. Publicly supported schools include UT Health San Antonio, the University of Texas at San Antonio, Texas A&amp;M University–San Antonio, Troy University-San Antonio Student Support Center, and the Alamo Community College District. The University of Texas at San Antonio is San Antonio&#x27;s largest university.
Private universities include Trinity University, St. Mary&#x27;s University, Our Lady of the Lake University, University of the Incarnate Word, Webster University, Baptist University of the Américas, Hallmark University, Oblate School of Theology, ECPI University, and the Southwest School of Art, which enrolled its first BFA class in 2014. The San Antonio Public Library serves all of these institutions along with the 19 independent school districts within the Bexar County and Greater San Antonio metropolitan area. San Antonio is also home to a campus of The Culinary Institute of America.

The National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), one of Latin America&#x27;s most prestigious universities, has a campus in San Antonio.

===Primary and secondary education===
The city of San Antonio is also served by the following separate independent school districts (ISDs) which each encompass elementary, middle, and high schools:

* Alamo Heights
* East Central
* Edgewood
* Fort Sam Houston
* Harlandale
* Judson
* North East
* Northside
* San Antonio
* South San Antonio
* Southside
* Southwest
* Somerset
* Comal
Additionally the following school districts do not cover the San Antonio city limits but have locations which use San Antonio postal addresses:
* Lackland

The city is home to more than 30 private schools and charter schools. The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Antonio operates parochial Catholic schools in San Antonio. San Antonio&#x27;s private and charter schools include: Keystone School, St. Gerard Catholic High School, Central Catholic Marianist High School, Incarnate Word High School, Saint Mary&#x27;s Hall, The Atonement Academy, Antonian College Preparatory High School, San Antonio Academy, Holy Cross High School, Providence High School, The Carver Academy, Keystone School, TMI – The Episcopal School of Texas, St. Anthony Catholic High School, Lutheran High School of San Antonio, and Harmony Science Academy (School of Science and Technology).

===Military===
San Antonio is home to U.S. Air Force Basic Military Training (AFBMT). The Air Force only has one location for enlisted basic training: the 737th Training Group, at Lackland Air Force Base. All new Air Force recruits go through the same basic training at Lackland. Each year, over 35,000 new recruits go through AFBMT. In addition, METC (the Military Education and Training Campus), which provides the medical training for the U.S. military at Fort Sam Houston, hosts 30 programs and over 24,000 annual graduates. It is the largest medical education center in the world.

==Media==
===Print===
San Antonio has one major newspaper, the &quot;San Antonio Express-News&quot;, which has served the area since 1865. The &quot;Express-News&quot; circulates as the largest newspaper service in South Texas. The Hearst Corporation, which owned a second newspaper, the &quot;San Antonio Light&quot;, purchased the &quot;Express-News&quot; from News Corp. in 1992 and shut down the &quot;Light&quot; after failing to find a buyer.

Hearst, using the &quot;Express-News&quot; brand, also produces &quot;Conexión&quot;, a weekly magazine written by an entirely Hispanic and Latin American staff with a Latino spin on weekly events. The San Antonio &quot;Current&quot; is the free &quot;alternative&quot; paper published weekly with local political issues, art and music news, restaurant listings and reviews, and listings of events and nightlife around town. The &quot;San Antonio Business Journal&quot; covers general business news. &quot;La Prensa&quot;, a bilingual publication, also has a long history in San Antonio. They closed their doors in June 2018. &quot;Edible San Antonio,&quot; San Antonio&#x27;s bimonthly food magazine, is published every eight weeks. The 64-page full-color magazine, distributed free across the city, is printed in soy ink on recycled paper and covers the city&#x27;s food scene with an emphasis on local food and sustainability. The &quot;San Antonio River Walk Current&quot; covers general San Antonio news. The &quot;San Antonio Observer&quot; is the only African American newspaper in San Antonio since 1995 and the largest in South Texas.

The &quot;San Antonio Report&quot;, renamed in 2020 from the Rivard Report, is the city&#x27;s only digital-only news publication. Founded in 2011 by former Express-News editor Robert Rivard, it began as a blog but has since become a non-profit news source covering civic issues.

===Radio===
About 50 radio stations can be heard in the San Antonio area; 30 of them are in the city proper. San Antonio is home to iHeartMedia, the largest operator of radio stations in the U.S. Its flagship, WOAI AM-1200, is known for its local news operation, considered among the best in the country. It is a 50,000-watt clear channel station that reaches most of North America at night. The first radio station to broadcast in South Texas was KTSA AM-550 in 1922.

The region&#x27;s National Public Radio member is Texas Public Radio, a group of three stations; KSTX 89.1 FM is NPR news/talk, KPAC 88.3 is a 24-hour classical music station, and KTXI 90.1 is a mix of NPR news/talk and classical music broadcast for the West Central Texas Hill Country. KSTX also broadcasts &quot;Riverwalk Jazz&quot;, featuring Jim Cullum Jazz Band at The Landing, a fixture on the River Walk since 1963.

KRTU 91.7 is a non-commercial radio station based at Trinity University. Unlike most other college radio stations in the U.S., the station plays jazz 17 hours a day and college rock/indie rock at night. College alternative station KSYM, 90.1 FM, is owned by the Alamo Community College District and operated by San Antonio College students; like KRTU, it plays the Third Coast music network during the day and alternative music at night.

Most Latin American stations in the area play regional Mexican, Tejano or contemporary pop. On January 12, 2006, Univision-owned KMYO-FM &quot;La Kalle 95.1&quot; changed its format from Hispanic-Rhythmic Contemporary Hits to Spanish Oldies, then named &quot;Recuerdo 95.1&quot;. On November 10, 2006, Univision flipped KLTO Tejano 97.7&#x27;s format to reggaeton in an attempt to reintroduce the format to San Antonio. Then 97.7 was flipped again to feature a rock format. The station no longer broadcasts anything in English. While still owned by Univision, it broadcast music by artists such as Linkin Park, before being sold to the Educational Media Foundation and flipping once again to Air1.

95.1 was then flipped back to the &quot;La Kalle&quot; format again after being flipped to feature a &quot;95X&quot; format. KLTO was acquired and is operated as a simulcast of KVBH-FM Vibe 107.5. San Antonio radio is diversified, due to an influx of non-Tejano Latinos, mostly from the East Coast, who serve in the city&#x27;s various military bases, as well as immigrants from Mexico. Therefore, just like in the rest of the country, radio station conglomerates have been changing formats in San Antonio to reflect shifting demographics.

===Television===
Despite the relatively large size of both the city proper and the metropolitan area, San Antonio has always been a medium-sized market. It presently ranks 33rd in the United States, according to marketing research firm ACNielsen. This is mainly because the nearby suburban and rural areas are not much larger than the city itself.

San Antonio-based television stations include KCWX channel 2 (MyNetworkTV), WOAI-TV channel 4 (NBC, with CW on DT2), KENS channel 5 (CBS), KLRN channel 9 (PBS), KSAT-TV channel 12 (ABC), KNIC-DT channel 17 (UniMás), KABB channel 29 (FOX), KMYS channel 35 (Dabl), KWEX-DT channel 41 (Univision) and KVDA channel 60 (Telemundo). The market is also home to three religious stations, three independent stations and one Internet-based station (210 TV). , the San Antonio market has 65% cable TV penetration.

==Transportation==
===Air===

San Antonio International Airport (SAT) is located in Uptown San Antonio, about north of Downtown. San Antonio International Airport is the 6th busiest airport based on passenger boardings in Texas and 44th in the United States as of 2015. It has two terminals and is served by 20 airlines, 15 passenger and 5 cargo ones, serving many destinations throughout the United States and Mexico. Stinson Municipal Airport is a reliever airport located south of Downtown San Antonio. The airport has two runways serving primarily general aviation and is also home to the Texas Air Museum.

===Mass transit===
A bus system is provided by the city&#x27;s metropolitan transit authority, VIA Metropolitan Transit. VIA began operating a bus rapid transit line known as VIA Primo in December 2012, which connects Downtown San Antonio to the South Texas Medical Center, the main campus of the University of Texas at San Antonio, and the independent enclave city of Leon Valley. Additionally, VIA also offers VIAtrans Paratransit Service, a wheelchair accessible ride-share service for people with disabilities.

In August 2010, VIA Metropolitan Transit unveiled buses that are powered by diesel-electric hybrid technology. The 30 hybrid buses were put into service on VIA&#x27;s express routes to serve daily commuters across the city. This set of buses follows the introduction of new vehicles powered by compressed natural gas, which were unveiled in May 2010. In the fall of 2010, VIA took delivery of three new buses that are powered by electricity from on-board batteries. These buses serve the Downtown core area, and are the first revenue vehicles VIA operates which have zero emissions.

VIA offers 90 regular bus routes and two Downtown streetcar routes. This includes express service from Downtown to park and ride locations in the south, west, northwest, north central and northeast sides of the city, with service to major locations such as UTSA, Six Flags Fiesta Texas and SeaWorld. VIA also offers a special service to city events including Spurs games and city parades from its park and ride locations.

===Rail===
San Antonio is served by two Amtrak routes: the daily Chicago to San Antonio &quot;Texas Eagle&quot; and the thrice-weekly New Orleans to Los Angeles &quot;Sunset Limited.&quot; On the days that the &quot;Sunset Limited&quot; operates, a section of the &quot;Texas Eagle&quot; continues west with it, offering Chicago to Los Angeles through service. The old Sunset Station is now an entertainment venue owned by VIA and neighbored by the current station and the Alamodome.

San Antonio became the largest American city without an intra-city rail system when Phoenix, the former largest city without such a system, procured one in 2008. A proposed passenger rail line, Lone Star Rail, would have linked San Antonio to Austin, but was cancelled in 2016 after 19 years of planning.

===Road===

San Antonio is served by these major freeways:
* I-10: McDermott Freeway (Northwest) runs west toward El Paso, Phoenix and Los Angeles. Jose Lopez Freeway (East) runs east toward Seguin, Houston, New Orleans and Jacksonville.
* I-35: Pan Am Expressway (Northeast/Southwest)—runs south toward its southern terminus Laredo and runs north toward Austin, Dallas–Fort Worth, Oklahoma City, Wichita, Kansas City, Des Moines, Minneapolis-St. Paul, and finally to its northern terminus in Duluth.
* I-37: Lucian Adams Freeway (Southeast)—runs from San Antonio through its junction with US 281 south (Edinburg and McAllen) near Three Rivers and into Corpus Christi through its junction with I-69E/US Highway 77 south (Kingsville, Harlingen and Brownsville) to its southern terminus at Corpus Christi Bay.
* I-410: Connally Loop—simply called Loop 410 (four-ten) by locals is a inner beltway around the city.
* US 90: Cleto Rodriguez Freeway (West) through Uvalde and Del Rio to its western terminus at I-10 in Van Horn. Prior to I-10 East and US 90 West expressway being built US 90 traveled through the west side via West Commerce Street (westbound) and Buena Vista Street (eastbound) and Historic Old Highway 90 (known as Enrique M. Barrera Parkway from 2015 to 2022). On the east side it traveled along East Commerce Street to its current alignment which runs concurrent with I-10 East to Seguin.
* US 281: McAllister Freeway (North) to Johnson City and Wichita Falls. Southbound, it runs concurrent with I-37, then I-410 for , then heads south to Pleasanton. Prior to I-37 and McAllister Fwy. being built US 281 traveled through the north side via San Pedro Avenue and the south side via Roosevelt Avenue.
* SH 151: Stotzer Freeway runs from US 90 west through Westover Hills which includes SeaWorld to its western terminus at State Loop 1604.
* Loop 1604: Charles W. Anderson Loop—simply called 1604 (sixteen-oh-four) by locals—is a outer beltway around San Antonio.
Other highways include:
* US 87: Southbound to Victoria along Roland Avenue then Rigsby Avenue. It runs concurrent with I-10 for where it goes to San Angelo northbound.
* US 181: Starts south of I-410/I-37/US 281 interchange and heads toward Corpus Christi via Beeville. Prior to I-37 being built, US 181 traveled along Presa Street from Downtown to its current alignment.
* SH 16: From Zapata, it runs concurrent with I-410 for along southwest San Antonio, over to Bandera Road to Bandera
* State Highway 130: Starting at its southern terminus at I-35 South, it travels along East South Loop 410 until I-10/US-90, where it runs concurrently with the interstate until outside of Seguin, turning into a state toll road.
* SH Spur 421: Also known more commonly as &quot;Culebra Road&quot; and &quot;Bandera Road&quot; inside Loop 410.
* SH Spur 422: Known as the Poteet Jourdanton Freeway. It was originally planned to have a high speed direct connection to I-35.
* Loop 345: Fredericksburg Road by locals; is the business loop for I-10 West/US-87 North.
* Loop 368: Broadway and Austin Highway by locals; is the business loop for I-35 North.
* State PA 1502 (Wurzbach Parkway): Limited-access, high speed road parallel to north IH-410. It has connections to I-35 (via O&#x27;Connor Road) and I-10 (via Wurzbach Road) across the north side of town.
* Loop 353: Nogalitos Street and New Laredo Highway is the business loop for I-35 South.
* Loop 13: Is the city&#x27;s inner loop on the south side serving Lackland AFB, Port San Antonio, South Park Mall and Brooks CityBase traveling along Military Drive on the south side and WW White Road on the east side to its junction with I-35/I-410. The northern arc of the loop is now I-410.
Along with FM 471, FM 1957, and SH 211

Also, the city has multiple streets with the same (or similar) names. As examples:
* &quot;Military Drive&quot;, &quot;Military Highway.&quot;, and &quot;Military Drive West&quot;—Military Drive loops around the western and southern parts of the city. Military Highway, also called &quot;NW Military Drive&quot; by the locals, serves the northwestern part of the city. Military Drive West serves the far western portion of the city. None intersect each other.
* &quot;Wurzbach Road&quot;, &quot;Wurzbach Parkway&quot;, and &quot;Harry Wurzbach Road&quot;—Wurzbach Road serves the northwestern part of the city. Wurzbach Parkway, an expressway, is an east–west road serving the northwestern and northeastern parts of the city (and can be considered an extension of Wurzbach Road). Harry Wurzbach Road runs past Fort Sam Houston and Terrell Hills on the city&#x27;s northeast side, and it does not intersect Wurzbach Road or Wurzbach Parkway.
* &quot;Hausman Road&quot; and &quot;South Hausman Road&quot; are two roads serving Helotes and the far northwest side of the city. Hausman is a major road, and a route used by locals of Helotes and NW San Antonio as an alternative to Loop 1604 connecting to I-10. South Hausman is a suburban road that does not connect with Hausman (despite its name).

A large portion of trade between Mexico and the United States passes through the San Antonio area&#x27;s interstate highway system.

Of the five largest cities in Texas, San Antonio (within city limits) is the largest city in the state without toll roads. (Houston, Dallas, Austin, and Fort Worth have toll roads.)

San Antonio enjoys less traffic congestion than other large Texas cities. In a 2022 study by TomTom, San Antonio is only the 41st-most congested city in the U.S. and the fifth-most congested city in Texas. By comparison, Houston, McAllen, Austin, and Dallas-Fort Worth rank higher than San Antonio for traffic congestion.

===Bicycle paths===
San Antonio has about of bike lanes, routes or off-road paths. Off-road trails travel along the San Antonio River, linear greenways, or city parks. Although largely disconnected, the progress to create a bicycle-friendly environment was recognized when San Antonio was designated a bronze-level &quot;Bicycle Friendly Community&quot; in 2015 by the League of American Bicyclists.

===Bicycle sharing===
A bike sharing service was approved by the city council on June 17, 2010. The initial program consisted of 140 bikes at 14 locations supported by a &quot;central hub&quot;. It is expected to serve both residents and visitors. San Antonio Bike Share, a non-profit, was formed to oversee the operation, locally operated and maintained by Bike World. B-Cycle, the same system used in Denver, supplies the bike share system. It began operation in March 2011.

===Walkability===
, Walk Score ranks San Antonio as the least walkable American city a population greater than one million and calls it car-dependent. This is due in large part to its rapid growth after World War II, the prevalence of single-family zoning and thousands of miles of missing or broken sidewalks.

The Howard W. Peak Greenway is an of hiking and biking trails that roughly forms a ring around the city. It is accessible by more than 65 trailheads and connects to dozens of parks. With construction beginning in 2007, the trails consist of the Leon Creek Greenway, the Salado Creek Greenway, the Westside Creeks, and the Medina River Greenway.

==International relations==
===Sister cities===

San Antonio is twinned with:
* – Monterrey, Nuevo León, Mexico (1953)
* – Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico (1974)
* – Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Canary Islands, Spain (1975)
* – Gwangju, South Korea (1981)
* – Kaohsiung, Taiwan (1981)
* – Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain (1983)
* – Kumamoto, Japan (1987)
* – Chennai, India (2008)
* – Wuxi, China (2012)
* – Windhoek, Namibia (2016)
* – Darmstadt, Hesse, Germany (2017)
* – Moguer, Spain (2018). Hometown of San Antonio founder Father Antonio de Olivares.

===Friendship cities===
* – Suzhou, China (2010 friendship city)
* – Tel Aviv-Yafo, Israel (2011 friendship city)
* – Baguio, Philippines (2022 friendship city)
* – Amman, Jordan (2024 friendship city)

==Notable people==
==See also==

* National Register of Historic Places listings in Bexar County, Texas
* San Antonio Area Foundation
* San Anto Cultural Arts

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==

* City of San Antonio
* Visit San Antonio
* &quot;San Antonio Missions: Spanish Influence in Texas,&quot; a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places (TwHP) lesson plan
* City of San Antonio Mayor/City Council</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="0" end="11" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q167477" start="34" end="47" title="Anthony of Padua" label="Saint Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="72" end="82" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="86" end="91" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600744" start="122" end="141" title="Greater San Antonio" label="Greater San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431788" start="147" end="187" title="List of Texas metropolitan areas" label="third-largest metropolitan area in Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768043" start="196" end="208" title="List of Metropolitan Statistical Areas" label="24th-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="277" end="302" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="344" end="355" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16861" start="359" end="371" title="Bexar County" label="Bexar County"/>
<link wikidata="Q131079" start="392" end="413" title="List of United States cities by population" label="seventh-most populous"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="477" end="499" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q106973361" start="500" end="509" title="List of municipalities in Texas" label="and Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="517" end="524" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="540" end="547" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="711" end="725" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="765" end="781" title="Mexico" label="Mexican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393494" start="919" end="924" title="South Texas" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109433" start="929" end="942" title="Central Texas" label="Central Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q471822" start="1000" end="1010" title="megaregion" label="megaregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028703" start="1037" end="1051" title="Texas Triangle" label="Texas Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303358" start="1053" end="1068" title="Downtown Austin" label="Downtown Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303571" start="1073" end="1093" title="downtown San Antonio" label="downtown San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445457" start="1143" end="1147" title="Interstate 35 in Texas" label="I-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q124032060" start="1195" end="1213" title="San Antonio–Austin metroplex" label="San Antonio–Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q167477" start="1328" end="1350" title="Anthony of Padua" label="Saint Anthony of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="1358" end="1367" title="calendar of saints" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636724" start="1457" end="1462" title="Alamo Mission" label="Alamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629903" start="1467" end="1512" title="San Antonio Missions National Historical Park" label="San Antonio Missions National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1548" end="1554" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1555" end="1575" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4311109" start="1623" end="1633" title="San Antonio River Walk" label="River Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300520" start="1639" end="1660" title="Tower of the Americas" label="Tower of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q567864" start="1662" end="1682" title="SeaWorld San Antonio" label="SeaWorld San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830456" start="1688" end="1698" title="Alamo Bowl" label="Alamo Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772844" start="1704" end="1719" title="Marriage Island" label="Marriage Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521644" start="1755" end="1777" title="Six Flags Fiesta Texas" label="Six Flags Fiesta Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911528" start="1782" end="1806" title="Morgan&amp;#x27;s Wonderland" label="Morgan&amp;#x27;s Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="1970" end="2001" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q159729" start="2017" end="2034" title="San Antonio Spurs" label="San Antonio Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946804" start="2056" end="2090" title="San Antonio Stock Show &amp;amp; Rodeo" label="San Antonio Stock Show &amp;amp; Rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="2140" end="2157" title="United States Armed Forces" label="U.S. Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438706" start="2210" end="2226" title="Fort Sam Houston" label="Fort Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q126196177" start="2238" end="2264" title="Brooke Army Medical Center" label="Brooke Army Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416857" start="2316" end="2339" title="Lackland Air Force Base" label="Lackland Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q980034" start="2341" end="2364" title="Randolph Air Force Base" label="Randolph Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860401" start="2366" end="2386" title="Kelly Field Annex" label="Kelly Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027030" start="2388" end="2399" title="Camp Bullis" label="Camp Bullis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150755" start="2405" end="2417" title="Camp Stanley (Texas)" label="Camp Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="2475" end="2498" title="Fortune 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965584" start="2517" end="2543" title="South Texas Medical Center" label="South Texas Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393494" start="2596" end="2607" title="South Texas" label="South Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600888" start="2648" end="2680" title="List of U.S. cities with large Hispanic populations" label="largest majority-Hispanic cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="2736" end="2744" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156689" start="2798" end="2811" title="Payaya people" label="Payaya people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751381" start="2827" end="2851" title="San Antonio River" label="San Antonio River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415134" start="2859" end="2876" title="San Pedro Springs" label="San Pedro Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048232" start="2914" end="2923" title="Yanaguana (San Antonio)" label="Yanaguana"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="3012" end="3024" title="missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q167477" start="3096" end="3116" title="Anthony of Padua" label="St. Anthony of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777067" start="3242" end="3268" title="Antonio de Olivares" label="Father Antonio de Olivares"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="3532" end="3556" title="Louisiana (New France)" label="&amp;quot;La Louisiane&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777854" start="3634" end="3651" title="Martín de Alarcón" label="Martín de Alarcón"/>
<link wikidata="Q949898" start="3669" end="3685" title="Coahuila y Tejas" label="Coahuila y Tejas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156689" start="3862" end="3868" title="Payaya Indians" label="Payaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q104860658" start="3877" end="3890" title="Pastia people" label="Pastia people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636724" start="3896" end="3939" title="Alamo Mission in San Antonio" label="Misión de San Antonio de Valero (The Alamo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241535" start="3945" end="3974" title="Presidio San Antonio de Bexar" label="Presidio San Antonio de Bexar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673103" start="4016" end="4039" title="Acequia Madre de Valero (San Antonio)" label="Acequia Madre de Valero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505587" start="4181" end="4194" title="Spanish Texas" label="Spanish Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878730" start="4568" end="4588" title="San Miguel de Aguayo, Texas" label="San Miguel de Aguayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="4661" end="4675" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908" start="4677" end="4684" title="Galicia (Spain)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="4689" end="4695" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031141" start="4779" end="4795" title="Canary Islanders" label="Canary Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674276" start="4803" end="4810" title="isleños" label="isleños"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127285" start="4847" end="4868" title="Council of the Indies" label="Council of the Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q173270" start="4960" end="4968" title="Veracruz (city)" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503155" start="5008" end="5012" title="Cuba (island)" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242492" start="5138" end="5153" title="Juan Leal Goraz" label="Juan Leal Goraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="6253" end="6278" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315810" start="6576" end="6602" title="Mexican Texas" label="Mexican, province of Tejas"/>
<link wikidata="Q819217" start="6626" end="6637" title="Old San Antonio Road" label="Camino Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q970482" start="6704" end="6715" title="Nacogdoches" label="Nacogdoches"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="6732" end="6749" title="European Americans" label="European American"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="6863" end="6890" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Antonio López de Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q771159" start="6918" end="6946" title="1824 Constitution of Mexico" label="Mexican Constitution of 1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q28912963" start="6972" end="6988" title="states of Mexico" label="states of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="7174" end="7190" title="Texas Revolution" label="Texas Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708336" start="7221" end="7232" title="Texian Army" label="Texian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889027" start="7379" end="7388" title="Benjamin Milam" label="Ben Milam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7397" end="7412" title="Siege of Béxar#Battle" label="Battle of Bexar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049712" start="7429" end="7435" title="Texian" label="Texian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186940" start="7497" end="7519" title="Martin Perfecto de Cos" label="Martin Perfecto de Cos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321308" start="7652" end="7666" title="James C. Neill" label="James C. Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q711818" start="7760" end="7782" title="William B. Travis" label="William Barrett Travis"/>
<link wikidata="Q433657" start="7787" end="7798" title="James Bowie" label="James Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q235344" start="7853" end="7872" title="Battle of the Alamo" label="Battle of the Alamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011803" start="8225" end="8236" title="Juan Seguín" label="Juan Seguín"/>
<link wikidata="Q45321045" start="8267" end="8273" title="Tejano" label="Tejano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315700" start="8333" end="8353" title="Battle of Concepción" label="Battle of Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722368" start="8359" end="8373" title="Siege of Bexar" label="Siege of Bexar"/>
<link wikidata="Q841278" start="8383" end="8404" title="Battle of San Jacinto" label="Battle of San Jacinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="8720" end="8740" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="8978" end="8996" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q364187" start="9063" end="9084" title="Frederick Law Olmsted" label="Frederick Law Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="9123" end="9135" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="9191" end="9200" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="9422" end="9433" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q574612" start="9777" end="9790" title="New Braunfels, Texas" label="New Braunfels"/>
<link wikidata="Q982579" start="9792" end="9803" title="Castroville, Texas" label="Castroville"/>
<link wikidata="Q890296" start="9805" end="9811" title="Boerne, Texas" label="Boerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q642634" start="9813" end="9820" title="Comfort, Texas" label="Comfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q973923" start="9822" end="9836" title="Fredericksburg, Texas" label="Fredericksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q981181" start="9842" end="9850" title="Bulverde, Texas" label="Bulverde"/>
<link wikidata="Q126154" start="10266" end="10278" title="Texas German" label="Texas German"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="10623" end="10641" title="Reconstruction Era" label="Reconstruction Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927632" start="10647" end="10696" title="Galveston, Harrisburg, &amp;amp; San Antonio Railroad" label="Galveston, Harrisburg, &amp;amp; San Antonio Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="10714" end="10722" title="railroad" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="11009" end="11015" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="11020" end="11030" title="Fort Worth" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q386191" start="11435" end="11452" title="population growth" label="population growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="11726" end="11753" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="11956" end="11962" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q171141" start="12099" end="12109" title="gastronomy" label="gastronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007852" start="12300" end="12323" title="New Great Migration" label="reverse Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q61745906" start="12472" end="12542" title="National Emergency Concerning the Southern Border of the United States" label="National Emergency Concerning the Southern Border of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="12631" end="12637" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q120669766" start="12643" end="12656" title="Lists of capitals" label="state capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="12673" end="12700" title="Mexico-United States border" label="Mexico-United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="12716" end="12723" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="12748" end="12765" title="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex" label="Dallas–Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576201" start="12969" end="12987" title="Texas Hill Country" label="Texas Hill Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624307" start="13064" end="13083" title="Balcones Escarpment" label="Balcones Escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="13115" end="13130" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346087" start="13189" end="13204" title="Edwards Aquifer" label="Edwards Aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336702" start="13248" end="13267" title="Victor Braunig Lake" label="Victor Braunig Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018632" start="13272" end="13286" title="Calaveras Lake (Texas)" label="Calaveras Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="13308" end="13318" title="reservoir (water)" label="reservoirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="13385" end="13396" title="power plant" label="power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="13452" end="13462" title="electricity" label="electrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="14068" end="14072" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="14142" end="14150" title="Enclave and exclave" label="enclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q665285" start="14187" end="14199" title="Castle Hills, Texas" label="Castle Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q982788" start="14215" end="14229" title="Hollywood Park, Texas" label="Hollywood Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6061488" start="14242" end="14248" title="Inwood, San Antonio" label="Inwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619001" start="14250" end="14259" title="Stone Oak, San Antonio" label="Stone Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q183170" start="14510" end="14544" title="University of Texas at San Antonio" label="University of Texas at San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005868" start="14550" end="14606" title="University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio" label="University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813761" start="14640" end="14672" title="University of the Incarnate Word" label="University of the Incarnate Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283291" start="14835" end="14841" title="Valero Energy" label="Valero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067712" start="14846" end="14859" title="NuStar Energy" label="NuStar Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="14954" end="14973" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Latino and Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="15090" end="15096" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830832" start="15111" end="15130" title="Toyota Motor Manufacturing Texas" label="manufacturing plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128504" start="15132" end="15149" title="Palo Alto College" label="Palo Alto College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707479" start="15154" end="15190" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–San Antonio" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946804" start="15280" end="15314" title="San Antonio Stock Show &amp;amp; Rodeo" label="San Antonio Stock Show &amp;amp; Rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q298573" start="15320" end="15337" title="Frost Bank Center" label="Frost Bank Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087349" start="15347" end="15363" title="Freeman Coliseum" label="Freeman Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="15408" end="15434" title="African Americans" label="Black and African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111021" start="15960" end="15991" title="Our Lady of the Lake University" label="Our Lady of the Lake University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590446" start="15996" end="16022" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s University, Texas" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088471" start="16301" end="16315" title="Sabal palmetto" label="Sabal palmetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q311524" start="16327" end="16339" title="Spanish moss" label="Spanish moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499375" start="16389" end="16412" title="Reticulitermes flavipes" label="Reticulitermes flavipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q219174" start="16432" end="16447" title="structural pest" label="structural pest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754623" start="16482" end="16504" title="Coptotermes formosanus" label="Coptotermes formosanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="16518" end="16531" title="invasive pest" label="invasive pest"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="16552" end="16560" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="16577" end="16601" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="16693" end="16718" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="16720" end="16726" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="16760" end="16781" title="hot semi-arid climate" label="hot semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="16783" end="16812" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="17092" end="17096" title="USDA" label="USDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="17097" end="17112" title="hardiness zones" label="hardiness zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="17482" end="17506" title="National Weather Service" label="National Weather Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q105528997" start="17800" end="17849" title="February 13–17, 2021, North American winter storm" label="February 13–17, 2021, North American winter storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q105592508" start="17962" end="17987" title="2021 Texas power crisis" label="massive rolling blackouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q105616626" start="18028" end="18077" title="February 15–20, 2021, North American winter storm" label="February 15–20, 2021, North American winter storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q574612" start="18158" end="18171" title="New Braunfels" label="New Braunfels"/>
<link wikidata="Q190820" start="18254" end="18287" title="October 1998 Central Texas floods" label="October 1998 Central Texas floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372271" start="18750" end="18761" title="Tornado outbreak sequence of April 28 – May 2, 1953" label="one in 1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="19409" end="19427" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="19532" end="19557" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="20080" end="20096" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="20270" end="20275" title="White American" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="20277" end="20296" title="Non-Hispanic Whites" label="non-Hispanic whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="20320" end="20336" title="African Americans" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="20343" end="20358" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="20365" end="20370" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="20377" end="20392" title="Native Hawaiians" label="Native Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="20396" end="20412" title="Pacific Islander Americans" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935055" start="20419" end="20436" title="Multiracial Americans" label="two or more races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="20448" end="20459" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="20517" end="20535" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="20574" end="20590" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="21326" end="21353" title="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex" label="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="21358" end="21373" title="Greater Houston" label="Greater Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="21501" end="21519" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="22693" end="22710" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="22802" end="22814" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="23175" end="23181" title="Gallup (company)" label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="23260" end="23298" title="LGBT" label="lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="23458" end="23467" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17628499" start="23505" end="23533" title="Religion in Latin America" label="Spanish and Mexican heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="23535" end="23552" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="23700" end="23710" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q974950" start="23870" end="23911" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Antonio" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="23917" end="23929" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q538791" start="24030" end="24050" title="Diocese of Galveston" label="Diocese of Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895316" start="24113" end="24139" title="Sperling&amp;#x27;s BestPlaces" label="Sperling&amp;#x27;s BestPlaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="24189" end="24197" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135342" start="24290" end="24325" title="Baptist General Convention of Texas" label="Baptist General Convention of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="24331" end="24358" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167880" start="24368" end="24398" title="Cooperative Baptist Fellowship" label="Cooperative Baptist Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="24400" end="24410" title="Methodism" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="24510" end="24533" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="24600" end="24614" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="24623" end="24634" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="24653" end="24696" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922295" start="24758" end="24785" title="Black Church (African American)" label="African American-led church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259733" start="24789" end="24803" title="Denver Heights COGIC" label="Denver Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q391499" start="24825" end="24848" title="Church of God in Christ" label="Church of God in Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="24868" end="24881" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="24940" end="24965" title="Anglicanism" label="Episcopalian or Anglicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="25037" end="25055" title="Oriental Orthodox Churches" label="Oriental Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="25061" end="25077" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670245" start="25114" end="25151" title="Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America" label="Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860128" start="25157" end="25205" title="Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America" label="Antiochian Orthodox Archdiocese of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q694002" start="25211" end="25237" title="Orthodox Church in America" label="Orthodox Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q912932" start="25247" end="25285" title="Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia" label="Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="25343" end="25380" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269815" start="25389" end="25421" title="Anglican Church in North America" label="Anglican Church in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383446" start="25478" end="25509" title="Episcopal Diocese of West Texas" label="Episcopal Diocese of West Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="25565" end="25576" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="25590" end="25595" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250393" start="25660" end="25677" title="Eastern religions" label="Eastern religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="25686" end="25694" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="25696" end="25703" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="25709" end="25717" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="25831" end="25838" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="26000" end="26017" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393494" start="26043" end="26054" title="South Texas" label="South Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587221" start="26056" end="26070" title="Temple Beth-El (San Antonio)" label="Temple Beth-El"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413315" start="26119" end="26138" title="San Antonio College" label="San Antonio College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6580201" start="26720" end="26749" title="San Antonio Police Department" label="San Antonio Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q41439984" start="27117" end="27137" title="Alazán-Apache Courts" label="Alazán-Apache Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="27915" end="27938" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="28186" end="28194" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="28196" end="28207" title="health care" label="health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="28220" end="28233" title="civil service" label="civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="28271" end="28282" title="oil and gas" label="oil and gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="28288" end="28295" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q476796" start="28400" end="28412" title="call centers" label="call centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="28437" end="28450" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303571" start="28561" end="28569" title="Downtown San Antonio" label="Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965584" start="28577" end="28603" title="South Texas Medical Center" label="South Texas Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509357" start="28669" end="28697" title="Southwest Research Institute" label="Southwest Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985377" start="28702" end="28737" title="Texas Biomedical Research Institute" label="Texas Biomedical Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4311109" start="28931" end="28941" title="San Antonio River Walk" label="River Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5717615" start="28947" end="28982" title="Henry B. Gonzalez Convention Center" label="Henry B. Gonzalez Convention Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="29432" end="29443" title="Fortune 500" label="Fortune 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283291" start="29455" end="29468" title="Valero Energy" label="Valero Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865722" start="29473" end="29477" title="USAA" label="USAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q477993" start="29479" end="29490" title="iHeartMedia" label="iHeartMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067712" start="29530" end="29543" title="NuStar Energy L.P." label="NuStar Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423218" start="29591" end="29600" title="Sunoco" label="Sunoco LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q830621" start="29610" end="29615" title="H-E-B" label="H-E-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910194" start="29751" end="29782" title="Bill Miller Bar-B-Q Enterprises" label="Bill Miller Bar-B-Q Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039031" start="29784" end="29798" title="Carenet Health" label="Carenet Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444993" start="29800" end="29837" title="Security Service Federal Credit Union" label="Security Service Federal Credit Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422607" start="29839" end="29861" title="Visionworks of America" label="Visionworks of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506152" start="29863" end="29873" title="Frost Bank" label="Frost Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674337" start="29875" end="29886" title="Harte-Hanks" label="Harte-Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741988" start="29888" end="29904" title="Kinetic Concepts" label="Kinetic Concepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395161" start="29906" end="29910" title="SWBC" label="SWBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875172" start="29912" end="29918" title="NewTek" label="NewTek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990586" start="29920" end="29929" title="Rackspace" label="Rackspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360013" start="29931" end="29952" title="Pabst Brewing Company" label="Pabst Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070488" start="29954" end="29965" title="Taco Cabana" label="Taco Cabana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972412" start="29967" end="29980" title="Broadway Bank (Texas)" label="Broadway Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627898" start="29982" end="30025" title="H.B. Zachry" label="Zachry Holdings/Zachry Construction Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108408" start="30027" end="30063" title="Randolph-Brooks Federal Credit Union" label="Randolph-Brooks Federal Credit Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388815" start="30065" end="30068" title="SAS (shoemakers)" label="SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570058" start="30070" end="30081" title="Globalscape" label="Globalscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q376627" start="30087" end="30098" title="Whataburger" label="Whataburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053762" start="30104" end="30135" title="North American Development Bank" label="North American Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630304" start="30344" end="30348" title="Hulu" label="Hulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q497825" start="30350" end="30353" title="OCI (company)" label="OCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q505275" start="30355" end="30368" title="Capital Group Companies" label="Capital Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798370" start="30370" end="30373" title="CGI Inc." label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q458363" start="30375" end="30393" title="Marathon Petroleum" label="Marathon Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516338" start="30395" end="30417" title="Silver Spring Networks" label="Silver Spring Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="30419" end="30425" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049669" start="30427" end="30437" title="Argo Group" label="Argo Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275577" start="30439" end="30452" title="EOG Resources" label="EOG Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="30454" end="30463" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130069" start="30465" end="30477" title="Cogeco Peer 1" label="Cogeco Peer1"/>
<link wikidata="Q744149" start="30479" end="30490" title="Wells Fargo" label="Wells Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q857063" start="30492" end="30501" title="Citibank" label="Citi Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="30507" end="30513" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="30533" end="30539" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="30693" end="30706" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q2037080" start="30799" end="30807" title="Andeavor" label="Andeavor"/>
<link wikidata="Q458363" start="30842" end="30860" title="Marathon Petroleum" label="Marathon Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q590191" start="30931" end="30944" title="Findlay, Ohio" label="Findlay, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="30954" end="30965" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986431" start="30994" end="31009" title="Builders Square" label="Builders Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416857" start="31272" end="31295" title="Lackland Air Force Base" label="Lackland Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q126196177" start="31297" end="31323" title="Brooke Army Medical Center" label="Brooke Army Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q980034" start="31325" end="31348" title="Randolph Air Force Base" label="Randolph Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438706" start="31354" end="31370" title="Fort Sam Houston" label="Fort Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754623" start="31674" end="31690" title="Formosan termite" label="Formosan termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q219174" start="31781" end="31798" title="structural pest" label="structural damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="31819" end="31832" title="invasive pest" label="invasive pest"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="31853" end="31861" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636724" start="32082" end="32110" title="Alamo Mission in San Antonio" label="Alamo Mission in San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4311109" start="32277" end="32287" title="San Antonio River Walk" label="River Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393728" start="32780" end="32794" title="Mission Espada" label="Mission Espada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794720" start="32862" end="32883" title="Arneson River Theater" label="Arneson River Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848308" start="33064" end="33074" title="Baile Folklorico" label="folklorico"/>
<link wikidata="Q9764" start="33079" end="33087" title="flamenco" label="flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447329" start="33158" end="33178" title="Fiesta Noche del Rio" label="Fiesta Noche del Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347159" start="33213" end="33235" title="Cathedral of San Fernando (San Antonio)" label="San Fernando Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737719" start="33237" end="33257" title="The Majestic Theatre, San Antonio" label="The Majestic Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467552" start="33259" end="33268" title="HemisFair &amp;#x27;68" label="Hemisfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300520" start="33282" end="33303" title="Tower of the Americas" label="Tower of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380788" start="33321" end="33348" title="Institute of Texan Cultures" label="Institute of Texan Cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465837" start="33351" end="33361" title="La Villita" label="La Villita"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770731" start="33363" end="33376" title="Market Square (San Antonio)" label="Market Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564718" start="33382" end="33412" title="Spanish Governor&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="Spanish Governor&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816982" start="33431" end="33443" title="Menger Hotel" label="Menger Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430647" start="33449" end="33464" title="Fairmount Hotel (San Antonio, Texas)" label="Fairmount Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="33540" end="33562" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q567864" start="33741" end="33749" title="SeaWorld San Antonio" label="SeaWorld"/>
<link wikidata="Q8214801" start="33870" end="33885" title="San Antonio Zoo" label="San Antonio Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q573278" start="33931" end="33952" title="Merlin Entertainments" label="Merlin Entertainments"/>
<link wikidata="Q664334" start="34112" end="34130" title="Sea Life Centres" label="Sea Life Aquariums"/>
<link wikidata="Q56062894" start="34136" end="34156" title="San Antonio Aquarium" label="San Antonio Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911528" start="34302" end="34326" title="Morgan&amp;#x27;s Wonderland" label="Morgan&amp;#x27;s Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="34570" end="34580" title="modern art" label="modern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="34584" end="34589" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q286389" start="34595" end="34611" title="McNay Art Museum" label="McNay Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801400" start="34656" end="34663" title="ArtPace" label="ArtPace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929912" start="34665" end="34698" title="Blue Star Contemporary Art Center" label="Blue Star Contemporary Art Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983163" start="34743" end="34771" title="Buckhorn Saloon &amp;amp; Museum (San Antonio)" label="Buckhorn Saloon &amp;amp; Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647706" start="34844" end="34869" title="San Antonio Museum of Art" label="San Antonio Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708193" start="35000" end="35027" title="Texas Transportation Museum" label="Texas Transportation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711412" start="35033" end="35045" title="Witte Museum" label="Witte Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711178" start="35084" end="35099" title="North Star Mall" label="North Star Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629903" start="35177" end="35222" title="San Antonio Missions National Historical Park" label="San Antonio Missions National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413313" start="35811" end="35839" title="San Antonio Botanical Garden" label="San Antonio Botanical Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953673" start="35841" end="35858" title="Brackenridge Park" label="Brackenridge Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413336" start="35864" end="35884" title="San Antonio Japanese Tea Gardens" label="Japanese Tea Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033038" start="35894" end="35910" title="Woodlawn Theatre" label="Woodlawn Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079298" start="35983" end="35992" title="Hot Wells (San Antonio, Texas)" label="Hot Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341387" start="36000" end="36003" title="spa" label="spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q785952" start="36009" end="36019" title="Public bathing" label="bathhouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447330" start="36120" end="36138" title="Fiesta San Antonio" label="Fiesta San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413324" start="36439" end="36464" title="San Antonio Film Festival" label="San Antonio Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q159729" start="36593" end="36610" title="San Antonio Spurs" label="San Antonio Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="36618" end="36649" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618347" start="36686" end="36695" title="Alamodome" label="Alamodome"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="36764" end="36772" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145169" start="36814" end="36829" title="HemisFair Arena" label="HemisFair Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q298573" start="36889" end="36906" title="Frost Bank Center" label="Frost Bank Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880336" start="36962" end="36970" title="Double-A (baseball)" label="Double-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413341" start="36971" end="36991" title="San Antonio Missions" label="San Antonio Missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990777" start="37005" end="37025" title="Nelson W. Wolff Municipal Stadium" label="Nelson Wolff Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="37038" end="37059" title="Minor League Baseball" label="Minor League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q721134" start="37077" end="37093" title="San Diego Padres" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526066" start="37153" end="37172" title="San Antonio Thunder" label="San Antonio Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095556" start="37199" end="37212" title="North American Soccer League (1968–84)" label="original NASL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442028" start="37294" end="37315" title="San Antonio Scorpions" label="San Antonio Scorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197790" start="37323" end="37334" title="North American Soccer League (2011–2017)" label="modern NASL"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881771" start="37366" end="37382" title="Soccer Bowl 2014" label="2014 Soccer Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581589" start="37620" end="37650" title="Spurs Sports and Entertainment" label="Spurs Sports and Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362411" start="37712" end="37745" title="United Soccer League Championship" label="United Soccer League Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q22025437" start="37747" end="37761" title="San Antonio FC" label="San Antonio FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830784" start="37805" end="37817" title="Toyota Field" label="Toyota Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442028" start="37883" end="37904" title="San Antonio Scorpions" label="San Antonio Scorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197790" start="37922" end="37926" title="North American Soccer League (2011–2017)" label="NASL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="37964" end="37975" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705951" start="37987" end="38017" title="Alamo City Rugby Football Club" label="Alamo City Rugby Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="38157" end="38160" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="38162" end="38165" title="MLB" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="38167" end="38170" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="38175" end="38178" title="MLS" label="MLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="38238" end="38262" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q935259" start="38315" end="38329" title="Paul Tagliabue" label="Paul Tagliabue"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="38391" end="38409" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="38420" end="38437" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="38544" end="38558" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439096" start="38563" end="38577" title="Houston Oilers" label="Houston Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280022" start="38676" end="38687" title="Jerry Jones" label="Jerry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705979" start="38855" end="38868" title="Alamo Stadium" label="Alamo Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q110707284" start="38892" end="38915" title="San Antonio Gunslingers (indoor football)" label="San Antonio Gunslingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639877" start="38923" end="38952" title="United States Football League" label="United States Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895892" start="38961" end="38979" title="San Antonio Riders" label="San Antonio Riders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38987" end="39020" title="NFL Europe#World League of American Football" label="World League of American Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413372" start="39097" end="39114" title="San Antonio Wings" label="San Antonio Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315037" start="39122" end="39143" title="World Football League" label="World Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413366" start="39152" end="39170" title="San Antonio Texans" label="San Antonio Texans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="39178" end="39202" title="Canadian Football League" label="Canadian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q55074848" start="39245" end="39274" title="Alliance of American Football" label="Alliance of American Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q55315788" start="39294" end="39316" title="San Antonio Commanders" label="San Antonio Commanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q28446536" start="39480" end="39501" title="Texas Football League" label="Texas Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165277" start="39513" end="39540" title="Continental Football League" label="Continental Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743799" start="39634" end="39663" title="American Football Association (1978-1983)" label="American Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q114658254" start="39699" end="39718" title="San Antonio Brahmas" label="San Antonio Brahmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q124057379" start="39726" end="39729" title="United Football League (2024)" label="UFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q680171" start="39787" end="39804" title="Valero Texas Open" label="Valero Texas Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="39846" end="39854" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7671118" start="39909" end="39924" title="TPC San Antonio" label="TPC San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953672" start="39965" end="39994" title="Brackenridge Park Golf Course" label="Brackenridge Park Golf Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q6461520" start="39996" end="40016" title="La Cantera Golf Club" label="La Cantera Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711228" start="40021" end="40043" title="Pecan Valley Golf Club" label="Pecan Valley Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710311" start="40072" end="40093" title="1968 PGA Championship" label="1968 PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705961" start="40099" end="40119" title="Alamo Ladies Classic" label="Alamo Ladies Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27650" start="40127" end="40136" title="LPGA Tour" label="LPGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q29096460" start="40178" end="40212" title="2015 Rising Phoenix World Championships" label="Rising Phoenix World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425063" start="40225" end="40236" title="Grand Hyatt" label="Grand Hyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472697" start="40292" end="40309" title="San Antonio Stars" label="San Antonio Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="40310" end="40354" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association" label="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="40408" end="40417" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42333021" start="40432" end="40446" title="Las Vegas Aces" label="Las Vegas Aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q27580" start="40481" end="40500" title="San Antonio Rampage" label="San Antonio Rampage"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="40501" end="40511" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q24725640" start="40570" end="40590" title="Vegas Golden Knights" label="Vegas Golden Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q183170" start="40619" end="40653" title="University of Texas at San Antonio" label="University of Texas at San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="40680" end="40695" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434103" start="40725" end="40741" title="UTSA Roadrunners" label="UTSA Roadrunners"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312525" start="40765" end="40793" title="American Athletic Conference" label="American Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="40848" end="40867" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490104" start="40874" end="40885" title="Larry Coker" label="Larry Coker"/>
<link wikidata="Q984286" start="41156" end="41183" title="Western Athletic Conference" label="Western Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125149" start="41196" end="41210" title="Conference USA" label="Conference USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312525" start="41231" end="41259" title="American Athletic Conference" label="American Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813761" start="41274" end="41306" title="University of the Incarnate Word" label="University of the Incarnate Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="41341" end="41356" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150848" start="41386" end="41410" title="Incarnate Word Cardinals" label="Incarnate Word Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q86660967" start="41453" end="41486" title="NCAA Division I Football Championship Subdivision" label="Football Championship Subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304770" start="41500" end="41520" title="Southland Conference" label="Southland Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="41733" end="41750" title="NCAA Division III" label="NCAA Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569776" start="41782" end="41821" title="Southern Collegiate Athletic Conference" label="Southern Collegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q54540" start="42208" end="42222" title="Chuck McKinley" label="Chuck McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="42258" end="42267" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="42300" end="42309" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830456" start="42385" end="42395" title="Alamo Bowl" label="Alamo Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757701" start="42605" end="42625" title="high school football" label="high school football"/>
<link wikidata="Q555271" start="42674" end="42685" title="Reggie Bush" label="Reggie Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339239" start="42687" end="42698" title="Vince Young" label="Vince Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q373983" start="42700" end="42715" title="Adrian Peterson" label="Adrian Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="42970" end="42985" title="Council–manager government" label="council-manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="43409" end="43416" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868" start="43421" end="43427" title="Laredo, Texas" label="Laredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30323642" start="43635" end="43648" title="Ron Nirenberg" label="Ron Nirenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q28408091" start="43669" end="43673" title="2017 San Antonio mayoral election" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q60523392" start="43735" end="43739" title="2019 San Antonio mayoral election" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q696776" start="43810" end="43822" title="city manager" label="city manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q67554808" start="44101" end="44111" title="Erik Walsh" label="Erik Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013736" start="44166" end="44176" title="CPS Energy" label="CPS Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="44456" end="44464" title="U.S. Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="44471" end="44477" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036942" start="44481" end="44489" title="Ted Cruz" label="Ted Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="44490" end="44493" title="U.S. Republican Party" label="(R)"/>
<link wikidata="Q719568" start="44497" end="44508" title="John Cornyn" label="John Cornyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="44509" end="44512" title="U.S. Republican Party" label="(R)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="44515" end="44539" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167934" start="44562" end="44576" title="Joaquin Castro" label="Joaquin Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="44577" end="44580" title="U.S. Democratic Party" label="(D)"/>
<link wikidata="Q58333615" start="44603" end="44634" title="Chip Roy" label="Charles E. &amp;quot;Chip&amp;quot; Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="44635" end="44638" title="U.S. Republican Party" label="(R)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104648170" start="44661" end="44674" title="Tony Gonzales" label="Tony Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="44675" end="44678" title="U.S. Republican Party" label="(R)"/>
<link wikidata="Q539562" start="44701" end="44714" title="Henry Cuellar" label="Henry Cuellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="44715" end="44718" title="U.S. Democratic Party" label="(D)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104148369" start="44741" end="44751" title="Greg Casar" label="Greg Casar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="44752" end="44755" title="U.S. Democratic Party" label="(D)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589725" start="44758" end="44772" title="Governor of Texas" label="State Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605224" start="44776" end="44787" title="Greg Abbott" label="Greg Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="44788" end="44791" title="U.S. Republican Party" label="(R)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819598" start="44836" end="44872" title="Texas Department of Criminal Justice" label="Texas Department of Criminal Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q568743" start="45091" end="45125" title="Texas Department of Transportation" label="Texas Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="45188" end="45216" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422267" start="45508" end="45537" title="extraterritorial jurisdiction" label="extraterritorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="45573" end="45587" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q974055" start="46248" end="46255" title="Schertz" label="Schertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="46741" end="46753" title="property tax" label="property tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035676" start="47086" end="47100" title="Inner suburb" label="enclave cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q982814" start="47112" end="47125" title="Alamo Heights, Texas" label="Alamo Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q975167" start="47127" end="47143" title="Balcones Heights" label="Balcones Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q665285" start="47145" end="47157" title="Castle Hills, Texas" label="Castle Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q973521" start="47159" end="47179" title="Hill Country Village, Texas" label="Hill Country Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q982788" start="47181" end="47195" title="Hollywood Park, Texas" label="Hollywood Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011883" start="47197" end="47202" title="Kirby, Texas" label="Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q982854" start="47204" end="47215" title="Leon Valley, Texas" label="Leon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q976917" start="47217" end="47227" title="Olmos Park, Texas" label="Olmos Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q982253" start="47229" end="47241" title="Shavano Park, Texas" label="Shavano Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q982341" start="47247" end="47260" title="Terrell Hills, Texas" label="Terrell Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005868" start="47417" end="47438" title="University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio" label="UT Health San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q183170" start="47444" end="47478" title="University of Texas at San Antonio" label="University of Texas at San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707479" start="47480" end="47516" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–San Antonio" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University–San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817686" start="47518" end="47568" title="Troy University" label="Troy University-San Antonio Student Support Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712972" start="47578" end="47610" title="Alamo Community College District" label="Alamo Community College District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311379" start="47722" end="47740" title="Trinity University (Texas)" label="Trinity University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590446" start="47742" end="47768" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s University, Texas" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111021" start="47770" end="47801" title="Our Lady of the Lake University" label="Our Lady of the Lake University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813761" start="47803" end="47835" title="University of the Incarnate Word" label="University of the Incarnate Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465303" start="47837" end="47855" title="Webster University" label="Webster University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857700" start="47857" end="47891" title="Baptist University of the Américas" label="Baptist University of the Américas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643024" start="47893" end="47912" title="Hallmark University" label="Hallmark University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075131" start="47914" end="47939" title="Oblate School of Theology" label="Oblate School of Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322728" start="47941" end="47956" title="ECPI University" label="ECPI University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642025" start="48039" end="48065" title="San Antonio Public Library" label="San Antonio Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143412" start="48253" end="48286" title="The Culinary Institute of America" label="The Culinary Institute of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q222738" start="48293" end="48333" title="National Autonomous University of Mexico" label="National Autonomous University of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q10771871" start="48534" end="48562" title="independent school districts" label="independent school districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705958" start="48632" end="48645" title="Alamo Heights Independent School District" label="Alamo Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328051" start="48648" end="48660" title="East Central Independent School District" label="East Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337906" start="48663" end="48671" title="Edgewood Independent School District (Bexar County, Texas)" label="Edgewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471970" start="48674" end="48690" title="Fort Sam Houston Independent School District" label="Fort Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658439" start="48693" end="48703" title="Harlandale Independent School District" label="Harlandale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304246" start="48706" end="48712" title="Judson Independent School District" label="Judson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135283" start="48715" end="48725" title="North East Independent School District" label="North East"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059748" start="48728" end="48737" title="Northside Independent School District" label="Northside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413335" start="48740" end="48751" title="San Antonio Independent School District" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568366" start="48754" end="48771" title="South San Antonio Independent School District" label="South San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571062" start="48774" end="48783" title="Southside Independent School District" label="Southside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571299" start="48786" end="48795" title="Southwest Independent School District" label="Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559883" start="48798" end="48806" title="Somerset Independent School District" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150491" start="48809" end="48814" title="Comal Independent School District" label="Comal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468735" start="48961" end="48969" title="Lackland Independent School District" label="Lackland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12241709" start="49024" end="49039" title="charter schools" label="charter schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q974950" start="49045" end="49086" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Antonio" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740354" start="49195" end="49210" title="Keystone School" label="Keystone School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588240" start="49212" end="49243" title="St. Gerard Catholic High School" label="St. Gerard Catholic High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060532" start="49245" end="49283" title="Central Catholic Marianist High School" label="Central Catholic Marianist High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014164" start="49285" end="49311" title="Incarnate Word High School (San Antonio, Texas)" label="Incarnate Word High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590302" start="49313" end="49335" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Hall (San Antonio)" label="Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817404" start="49337" end="49358" title="The Atonement Academy" label="The Atonement Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776269" start="49360" end="49400" title="Antonian College Preparatory High School" label="Antonian College Preparatory High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413300" start="49402" end="49421" title="San Antonio Academy" label="San Antonio Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710502" start="49423" end="49445" title="Holy Cross High School (San Antonio, Texas)" label="Holy Cross High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252438" start="49447" end="49469" title="Providence High School (San Antonio)" label="Providence High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047527" start="49471" end="49489" title="The Carver Academy" label="The Carver Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740354" start="49491" end="49506" title="Keystone School" label="Keystone School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17025768" start="49508" end="49543" title="TMI – The Episcopal School of Texas" label="TMI – The Episcopal School of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587082" start="49545" end="49577" title="St. Anthony Catholic High School" label="St. Anthony Catholic High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705717" start="49579" end="49614" title="Lutheran High School of San Antonio" label="Lutheran High School of San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659593" start="49620" end="49643" title="Harmony Science Academy" label="Harmony Science Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416857" start="49861" end="49884" title="Lackland Air Force Base" label="Lackland Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438706" start="50140" end="50156" title="Fort Sam Houston" label="Fort Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946733" start="50337" end="50361" title="San Antonio Express-News" label="San Antonio Express-News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393494" start="50483" end="50494" title="South Texas" label="South Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065024" start="50500" end="50518" title="Hearst Corporation" label="Hearst Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185278" start="50631" end="50641" title="News Corporation (1980–2013)" label="News Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q7413322" start="50920" end="50951" title="San Antonio Current" label="San Antonio &amp;quot;Current&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689686" start="51777" end="51803" title="African-American newspapers" label="African American newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q477993" start="52276" end="52287" title="iHeartMedia" label="iHeartMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953729" start="52354" end="52366" title="WOAI (AM)" label="WOAI AM-1200"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339128" start="52592" end="52603" title="KTSA" label="KTSA AM-550"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="52632" end="52653" title="National Public Radio" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707922" start="52664" end="52682" title="Texas Public Radio" label="Texas Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309240" start="53523" end="53539" title="Regional styles of Mexican music" label="regional Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q431415" start="53541" end="53547" title="Tejano music" label="Tejano"/>
<link wikidata="Q731824" start="53590" end="53599" title="Univision" label="Univision"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710609" start="53606" end="53613" title="KMYO" label="KMYO-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q731824" start="53779" end="53788" title="Univision" label="Univision"/>
<link wikidata="Q202930" start="53831" end="53840" title="reggaeton" label="reggaeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q261" start="54075" end="54086" title="Linkin Park" label="Linkin Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341246" start="54113" end="54141" title="Educational Media Foundation" label="Educational Media Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697708" start="54169" end="54173" title="Air1" label="Air1"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710878" start="54353" end="54360" title="KVBH" label="KVBH-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q45321045" start="54431" end="54437" title="Tejano" label="Tejano"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="54438" end="54445" title="Latinos" label="Latinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="54463" end="54473" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="54702" end="54714" title="demographics" label="demographics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141436" start="54929" end="54947" title="marketing research" label="marketing research"/>
<link wikidata="Q288603" start="54953" end="54962" title="ACNielsen" label="ACNielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6327526" start="55112" end="55116" title="KCWX" label="KCWX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148579" start="55128" end="55139" title="MyNetworkTV" label="MyNetworkTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953728" start="55142" end="55149" title="WOAI-TV" label="WOAI-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="55161" end="55164" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="55171" end="55173" title="The CW" label="CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191354" start="55183" end="55187" title="KENS" label="KENS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="55199" end="55202" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6333001" start="55205" end="55209" title="KLRN" label="KLRN"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="55221" end="55224" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6337463" start="55227" end="55234" title="KSAT-TV" label="KSAT-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="55247" end="55250" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334349" start="55253" end="55260" title="KNIC-DT" label="KNIC-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106818" start="55273" end="55279" title="UniMás" label="UniMás"/>
<link wikidata="Q6324711" start="55282" end="55286" title="KABB" label="KABB"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="55299" end="55302" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="FOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334070" start="55305" end="55309" title="KMYS" label="KMYS"/>
<link wikidata="Q85755491" start="55322" end="55326" title="Dabl" label="Dabl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6340518" start="55329" end="55336" title="KWEX-DT" label="KWEX-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q731824" start="55349" end="55358" title="Univision" label="Univision"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339957" start="55364" end="55368" title="KVDA" label="KVDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q136538" start="55381" end="55390" title="Telemundo" label="Telemundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q184973" start="55481" end="55503" title="Internet radio" label="Internet-based station"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="55547" end="55555" title="cable TV" label="cable TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432706" start="55600" end="55633" title="San Antonio International Airport" label="San Antonio International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358278" start="55740" end="55788" title="List of the busiest airports in the United States" label="6th busiest airport based on passenger boardings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617479" start="55989" end="56014" title="Stinson Municipal Airport" label="Stinson Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="56122" end="56138" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707498" start="56163" end="56179" title="Texas Air Museum" label="Texas Air Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906973" start="56277" end="56301" title="VIA Metropolitan Transit" label="VIA Metropolitan Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="56325" end="56342" title="bus rapid transit" label="bus rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q98188786" start="56357" end="56366" title="VIA Primo" label="VIA Primo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303571" start="56400" end="56420" title="Downtown San Antonio" label="Downtown San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965584" start="56428" end="56454" title="South Texas Medical Center" label="South Texas Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q183170" start="56479" end="56513" title="University of Texas at San Antonio" label="University of Texas at San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q982854" start="56551" end="56562" title="Leon Valley, Texas" label="Leon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564783" start="56603" end="56614" title="Paratransit" label="Paratransit"/>
<link wikidata="Q183170" start="57539" end="57543" title="University of Texas at San Antonio" label="UTSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q540102" start="57572" end="57580" title="SeaWorld" label="SeaWorld"/>
<link wikidata="Q159729" start="57641" end="57646" title="San Antonio Spurs" label="Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="57745" end="57751" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q756538" start="57799" end="57810" title="Texas Eagle" label="Texas Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q906130" start="57872" end="57886" title="Sunset Limited" label="Sunset Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413360" start="58070" end="58088" title="San Antonio station (Texas)" label="old Sunset Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618347" start="58178" end="58187" title="Alamodome" label="Alamodome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="58274" end="58281" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171699" start="58330" end="58350" title="Valley Metro Rail" label="procured one in 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442501" start="58557" end="58561" title="Interstate 10 in Texas" label="I-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="58610" end="58617" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="58619" end="58626" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q975549" start="58687" end="58693" title="Seguin, Texas" label="Seguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="58695" end="58702" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="58704" end="58715" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="58720" end="58732" title="Jacksonville, Florida" label="Jacksonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445457" start="58736" end="58740" title="Interstate 35 in Texas" label="I-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868" start="58822" end="58828" title="Laredo, Texas" label="Laredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="58851" end="58857" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="58859" end="58876" title="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex" label="Dallas–Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="58878" end="58891" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q49266" start="58893" end="58900" title="Wichita, Kansas" label="Wichita"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="58902" end="58913" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q39709" start="58915" end="58925" title="Des Moines, Iowa" label="Des Moines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480013" start="58927" end="58947" title="Minneapolis-Saint Paul" label="Minneapolis-St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q485708" start="58989" end="58995" title="Duluth, Minnesota" label="Duluth"/>
<link wikidata="Q94171" start="58999" end="59003" title="Interstate 37" label="I-37"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818228" start="59086" end="59092" title="U.S. Route 281 in Texas" label="US 281"/>
<link wikidata="Q978246" start="59100" end="59108" title="Edinburg, Texas" label="Edinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q51698" start="59113" end="59120" title="McAllen, Texas" label="McAllen"/>
<link wikidata="Q976326" start="59127" end="59139" title="Three Rivers, Texas" label="Three Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49242" start="59149" end="59163" title="Corpus Christi, Texas" label="Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157410" start="59190" end="59195" title="Interstate 69E" label="I-69E"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818202" start="59196" end="59209" title="U.S. Route 77 in Texas" label="US Highway 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q970495" start="59217" end="59227" title="Kingsville, Texas" label="Kingsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q868869" start="59229" end="59238" title="Harlingen, Texas" label="Harlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q51693" start="59243" end="59254" title="Brownsville, Texas" label="Brownsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451115" start="59306" end="59311" title="Interstate 410" label="I-410"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818277" start="59409" end="59414" title="U.S. Route 90 in Texas" label="US 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q868860" start="59455" end="59461" title="Uvalde, Texas" label="Uvalde"/>
<link wikidata="Q970792" start="59466" end="59473" title="Del Rio, Texas" label="Del Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q976246" start="59509" end="59517" title="Van Horn, Texas" label="Van Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q975549" start="59891" end="59897" title="Seguin, Texas" label="Seguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818228" start="59901" end="59907" title="U.S. Route 281 in Texas" label="US 281"/>
<link wikidata="Q868881" start="59939" end="59951" title="Johnson City, Texas" label="Johnson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q128349" start="59956" end="59969" title="Wichita Falls, Texas" label="Wichita Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159092" start="59991" end="60001" title="concurrency (road)" label="concurrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q981108" start="60050" end="60060" title="Pleasanton, Texas" label="Pleasanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q418095" start="60211" end="60217" title="Texas State Highway 151" label="SH 151"/>
<link wikidata="Q567864" start="60294" end="60302" title="SeaWorld San Antonio" label="SeaWorld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505772" start="60349" end="60358" title="Texas State Highway Loop 1604" label="Loop 1604"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818253" start="60497" end="60502" title="U.S. Route 87 in Texas" label="US 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q784496" start="60518" end="60526" title="Victoria, Texas" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q925598" start="60617" end="60627" title="San Angelo, Texas" label="San Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816885" start="60642" end="60648" title="U.S. Route 181" label="US 181"/>
<link wikidata="Q49242" start="60713" end="60727" title="Corpus Christi, Texas" label="Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q814163" start="60732" end="60740" title="Beeville, Texas" label="Beeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503654" start="60846" end="60851" title="Texas State Highway 16" label="SH 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q967558" start="60858" end="60864" title="Zapata, Texas" label="Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q975627" start="60953" end="60960" title="Bandera, Texas" label="Bandera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503903" start="60963" end="60980" title="Texas State Highway 130" label="State Highway 130"/>
<link wikidata="Q975549" start="61150" end="61156" title="Seguin, Texas" label="Seguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505945" start="61192" end="61203" title="Texas State Highway Spur 421" label="SH Spur 421"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505948" start="61306" end="61317" title="Texas State Highway Spur 422" label="SH Spur 422"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505839" start="61435" end="61443" title="Texas State Highway Loop 345" label="Loop 345"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505847" start="61526" end="61534" title="Texas State Highway Loop 368" label="Loop 368"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039320" start="61614" end="61646" title="Wurzbach Parkway" label="State PA 1502 (Wurzbach Parkway)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505842" start="61820" end="61828" title="Texas State Highway Loop 353" label="Loop 353"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505736" start="61909" end="61916" title="Texas State Highway Loop 13" label="Loop 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416857" start="61974" end="61986" title="Lackland Air Force Base" label="Lackland AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230924" start="61988" end="62004" title="Port San Antonio" label="Port San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974985" start="62026" end="62041" title="Brooks City-Base" label="Brooks CityBase"/>
<link wikidata="Q15021003" start="62213" end="62219" title="Farm to Market Road 471" label="FM 471"/>
<link wikidata="Q655169" start="62221" end="62228" title="Farm to Market Road 1957" label="FM 1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q568449" start="62234" end="62240" title="Texas State Highway 211" label="SH 211"/>
<link wikidata="Q577233" start="63267" end="63274" title="Helotes, Texas" label="Helotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751381" start="64292" end="64309" title="San Antonio River" label="San Antonio River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962040" start="65075" end="65085" title="Walk Score" label="Walk Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822691" start="65117" end="65125" title="Walkability" label="walkable"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="65258" end="65270" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q106617159" start="65290" end="65310" title="single-family zoning" label="single-family zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q177749" start="65355" end="65363" title="sidewalk" label="sidewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921176" start="65371" end="65385" title="Howard W. Peak" label="Howard W. Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894115" start="65612" end="65622" title="Leon Creek" label="Leon Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403402" start="65637" end="65649" title="Salado Creek" label="Salado Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433742" start="65689" end="65701" title="Medina River" label="Medina River"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="65777" end="65784" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q81033" start="65795" end="65804" title="Monterrey" label="Monterrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282" start="65806" end="65816" title="Nuevo León" label="Nuevo León"/>
<link wikidata="Q9022" start="65836" end="65847" title="Guadalajara" label="Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q13160" start="65849" end="65856" title="Jalisco" label="Jalisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q11974" start="65876" end="65902" title="Las Palmas de Gran Canaria" label="Las Palmas de Gran Canaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="65904" end="65918" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q41283" start="65937" end="65944" title="Gwangju" label="Gwangju"/>
<link wikidata="Q181557" start="65969" end="65978" title="Kaohsiung" label="Kaohsiung"/>
<link wikidata="Q14328" start="65998" end="66020" title="Santa Cruz de Tenerife" label="Santa Cruz de Tenerife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="66022" end="66036" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q199889" start="66055" end="66063" title="Kumamoto" label="Kumamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="66082" end="66089" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q42651" start="66108" end="66112" title="Wuxi" label="Wuxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935" start="66131" end="66139" title="Windhoek" label="Windhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973" start="66160" end="66169" title="Darmstadt" label="Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199" start="66171" end="66176" title="Hesse" label="Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q785888" start="66197" end="66203" title="Moguer" label="Moguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777067" start="66251" end="66277" title="Antonio de Olivares" label="Father Antonio de Olivares"/>
<link wikidata="Q42622" start="66308" end="66314" title="Suzhou" label="Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="66349" end="66362" title="Tel Aviv-Yafo" label="Tel Aviv-Yafo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822" start="66398" end="66404" title="Baguio" label="Baguio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805" start="66445" end="66450" title="Amman" label="Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327406" start="66518" end="66586" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Bexar County, Texas" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Bexar County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413303" start="66589" end="66616" title="San Antonio Area Foundation" label="San Antonio Area Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q119984892" start="66619" end="66641" title="San Anto Cultural Arts" label="San Anto Cultural Arts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53849" wikidata="Q34006" url="?curid=53849" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles">
<text>Hollywood, sometimes informally called Tinseltown, is a neighborhood and district in the central region of Los Angeles County, California, within the city of Los Angeles. Its name has come to be a shorthand reference for the U.S. film industry and the people associated with it. Many notable film studios, such as Sony Pictures, Walt Disney Studios, Paramount Pictures, Warner Bros. and Universal Pictures, are located in or near Hollywood.

Hollywood was incorporated as a municipality in 1903. The northern and eastern parts of the neighborhood were consolidated with the City of Los Angeles in 1910. Soon thereafter, the prominent film industry migrated to the area.

==History==
===Initial development===

H. J. Whitley, a real estate developer, arranged to buy the E.C. Hurd ranch. Whitley shared his plans for the new town with General Harrison Gray Otis, publisher of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, and Ivar Weid, a prominent businessman in the area.

Daeida Wilcox, who donated land to help in the development of Hollywood, learned of the name &quot;Hollywood&quot; from an acquaintance who owned an estate by that name in Illinois.
Wilcox is quoted as saying, &quot;I chose the name Hollywood simply because it sounds nice and because I&#x27;m superstitious and holly brings good luck.&quot; She recommended the same name to her husband, Harvey H. Wilcox, who had purchased 120 acres on February 1, 1887. It was not until August 1887 that Wilcox decided to use that name and filed with the Los Angeles County Recorder&#x27;s office on a deed and parcel map of the property.

By 1900, the region had a post office, newspaper, hotel, and two markets. Los Angeles, with a population of 102,479, lay east through the vineyards, barley fields, and citrus groves. A single-track streetcar line ran down the middle of Prospect Avenue from it, but service was infrequent and the trip took two hours. The old citrus fruit-packing house was converted into a livery stable, improving transportation for the inhabitants of Hollywood.

The Hollywood Hotel was opened in 1902 by Whitley, president of the Los Pacific Boulevard and Development Company. Having finally acquired the Hurd ranch and subdivided it, Whitley built the hotel to attract land buyers. Flanking the west side of Highland Avenue, the structure fronted on Prospect Avenue (later Hollywood Boulevard). Although it was still a dusty, unpaved road, it was regularly graded and graveled. The hotel became internationally known and was the center of the civic and social life and home of movie stars for many years.

Whitley&#x27;s company developed and sold one of the early residential areas, the Ocean View Tract. Whitley did much to promote the area. He paid thousands of dollars to install electricity and arrange for electric lighting, and he built both a bank and a road into the Cahuenga Pass. The lighting ran for several blocks down Prospect Avenue. Whitley&#x27;s land was centered on Highland Avenue. His 1918 development, Whitley Heights, was named for him.

===Incorporation and merger===
Hollywood was incorporated as a municipality on November 14, 1903, by a vote of 88 for and 77 against. On January 30, 1904, the voters in Hollywood decided, 113 to 96, to banish the sale of liquor within the city, except for medicinal purposes. Neither hotels nor restaurants were allowed to serve wine or liquor before or after meals.

In 1910, the city voted for a merger with Los Angeles in order to secure an adequate water supply and to gain access to the L.A. sewer system.

With annexation, the name of Prospect Avenue was changed to Hollywood Boulevard and all the street numbers in the new district changed. For example, 100 Prospect Avenue, at Vermont Avenue, became 6400 Hollywood Boulevard; and 100 Cahuenga Boulevard, at Hollywood Boulevard, changed to 1700 Cahuenga Boulevard.

===Motion picture industry===

By 1912, major motion-picture companies had come West to set up production near or in Los Angeles.

In the early 1900s, most motion picture camera and equipment patents were held by Thomas Edison&#x27;s Motion Picture Patents Company in New Jersey, which often sued filmmakers to stop their productions. To escape this, filmmakers began moving to Los Angeles, where attempts to enforce Edison&#x27;s patents were easier to evade. Also, the weather was ideal for filmmaking and there was quick access to various settings. Los Angeles became the capital of the film industry in the United States. The mountains, plains and low land prices made Hollywood a good place to establish film studios.

Director D. W. Griffith was the first to make a motion picture in Hollywood. His 17-minute short film &quot;In Old California&quot; (1910) was filmed for the Biograph Company. Although Hollywood banned movie theaters—of which it had none—before annexation that year, Los Angeles had no such restriction.

The first studio in Hollywood opened in early 1913, on Formosa Avenue down the street from Helen Muir&#x27;s home. Her father John Muir returned from his tour of Europe and East Africa a few months later and continued work on Yosemite and his book, &quot;The Yosemite&quot;. The Nestor Film Company was the first studio, established in October 1911 by the New Jersey–based Centaur Film Company in a roadhouse at 6121 Sunset Boulevard (the corner of Gower). Four major film companies – Paramount, Warner Bros., RKO, and Columbia – had studios in Hollywood, as did several minor companies and rental studios. In the 1920s, Hollywood was the fifth-largest industry in the nation. By the 1930s, Hollywood studios became fully vertically integrated, as production, distribution and exhibition was controlled by these companies, enabling Hollywood to produce 600 films per year.

Hollywood became known as &quot;Tinseltown&quot;
and the &quot;dream factory&quot; because of the glittering image of the movie industry.

===Further development===
A large sign reading &quot;HOLLYWOODLAND&quot; was erected in the Hollywood Hills in 1923 to advertise real estate developers Woodruff&#x27;s and Shoults&#x27; housing development. In 1949, the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce entered a contract with the City of Los Angeles to repair and rebuild the sign. The agreement stipulated that &quot;LAND&quot; be removed to spell &quot;HOLLYWOOD&quot; so the sign would now refer to the district, rather than the housing development.

During the early 1950s, the State of California constructed the Hollywood Freeway through the northeast corner of Hollywood.

The Capitol Records Building on Vine Street, just north of Hollywood Boulevard, was built in 1956. The Hollywood Walk of Fame was created in 1958 as a tribute to artists and other significant contributors to the entertainment industry. The official opening was on February 8, 1960.

The Hollywood Boulevard Commercial and Entertainment District was listed in the National Register of Historic Places in 1984.

In June 1999, the Hollywood extension of the Los Angeles Metro Rail Red Line subway opened from Downtown Los Angeles to the San Fernando Valley, with stops along Hollywood Boulevard at Western Avenue (Hollywood/Western Metro station), Vine Street (Hollywood/Vine Metro station), and Highland Avenue (Hollywood/Highland Metro station).

The Dolby Theatre, which opened in 2001 as the Kodak Theatre at the Hollywood &amp; Highland Center mall, is the site of the annual Academy Awards programs. The mall is located where the Hollywood Hotel once stood.

===Revitalization===
After the neighborhood underwent years of serious decline in the 1980s, with crime, drugs and increasing poverty among some residents, many landmarks were threatened with demolition. Columbia Square, at the northwest corner of Sunset Boulevard and Gower Street, is part of the ongoing rebirth of Hollywood. The Art Deco-style studio complex, completed in 1938, was once the Hollywood headquarters for CBS. It became home to a new generation of broadcasters when cable television networks MTV, Comedy Central, BET and Spike TV consolidated their offices there in 2014 as part of a $420 million office, residential and retail complex.

Since 2000, Hollywood has been increasingly gentrified due to revitalization by private enterprise and public planners. Over 1,200 hotel rooms have been added in the Hollywood area between 2001 and 2016. Four thousand new apartments and over thirty low to mid-rise development projects were approved in 2019.

===Secession movement===

In 2002, some Hollywood voters began a campaign for the area to secede from Los Angeles and become a separate municipality. In June of that year, the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors placed secession referendums for both Hollywood and the San Fernando Valley on the ballot. To pass, they required the approval of a majority of voters in the proposed new municipality as well as a majority of voters in all of Los Angeles. In the November election, both measures failed by wide margins in the citywide vote.

==Geography==
According to the Mapping L.A. project of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, Hollywood is flanked by the Hollywood Hills to the north, Los Feliz to the northeast, East Hollywood or Virgil Village to the east, Larchmont and Hancock Park to the south, Fairfax to the southwest, West Hollywood to the west, and Hollywood Hills West to the northwest.

Street limits of the Hollywood neighborhood are: north, Hollywood Boulevard from La Brea Avenue to the east boundary of Wattles Garden Park and Franklin Avenue between Bonita and Western avenues; east, Western Avenue; south, Melrose Avenue, and west, La Brea Avenue or the West Hollywood city line.

In 1918, H. J. Whitley commissioned architect A. S. Barnes to design Whitley Heights as a Mediterranean-style village on the hills above Hollywood Boulevard. It became the first celebrity community.

Other areas within Hollywood are Franklin Village, Little Armenia, Spaulding Square, Thai Town, and Yucca Corridor.

==Failed trademarking attempt==
In 1994, Hollywood, Alabama, and ten other towns named Hollywood successfully fought an attempt by the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce to trademark the name and force same-named communities to pay royalties to it.

== Climate ==

Like the rest of Los Angeles, Hollywood has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen: &quot;Csa&quot;) or dry-summer subtropical climate. Winters are typically mild and with light rain, but there are still plenty of warm, sunny days in the winter, as well. Summers are hot, sunny and dry, with virtually no rain falling between April and October; while summer days can be warm, they are considerably cooler than in the San Fernando Valley. Spring and fall are generally warm, sunny, and pleasant. Santa Ana winds typically occur during the fall and winter months, although they can occur during any month; Santa Ana winds bring heavy winds, higher temperatures and lower humidity levels, which increases the risk of wildfires, especially in dry years. Smog can sometimes occur during the summer months. May and June can be foggy and cloudy in Hollywood, a phenomenon known by southern California residents as &quot;May Gray&quot; or &quot;June Gloom&quot;.

The all-time record high temperature in Hollywood is on June 26, 1990, and the all-time record low temperature is on both December 8, 1978, and December 23, 1990.

==Demographics==

The 2000 U.S. census counted 77,818 residents in the Hollywood neighborhood—an average of , the seventh-densest neighborhood in all of Los Angeles County. In 2008 the city estimated that the population had increased to 85,489. The median age for residents was 31, about the city&#x27;s average.

Hollywood was said to be &quot;highly diverse&quot; when compared to the city at large. The ethnic breakdown in 2000 was 42.2% Latino or Hispanic, 41% Non-Hispanic White, 7.1% Asian, 5.2% Black, and 4.5% other. Mexico (21.3%) and Guatemala (13%) were the most common places of birth for the 53.8% of the residents who were born abroad, a figure that was considered high for the city as a whole.

The median household income in 2008 was $33,694, considered low for Los Angeles. The average household size of 2.1 people was also lower than the city norm. Renters occupied 92.4% of the housing units, and home- or apartment owners the rest.

The percentages of never-married men (55.1%), never-married women (39.8%) and widows (9.6%) were among the county&#x27;s highest. There were 2,640 families headed by single parents, about average for Los Angeles.

In 2000, there were 2,828 military veterans, or 4.5%, a low rate for the city as a whole.

===Homelessness===
In 2022, there were 1,374 homeless individuals in Hollywood.

==Radio and television==
KNX was the last radio station to broadcast from Hollywood before it left CBS Columbia Square for a studio in the Miracle Mile in 2005.

On January 22, 1947, the first commercial television station west of the Mississippi River, KTLA, began operating in Hollywood. In December of that year, &quot;The Public Prosecutor&quot; became the first network television series to be filmed in Hollywood. Television stations KTLA and KCET, both on Sunset Boulevard, are the last broadcasters (television or radio) with Hollywood addresses, but KCET has since sold its studios to the Church of Scientology on Sunset, and plans to move to another location. KNBC moved in 1962 from the former NBC Radio City Studios at the northeast corner of Sunset Boulevard and Vine Street to NBC Studios in Burbank. KTTV moved in 1996 from its former home at Metromedia Square on Sunset Boulevard to West Los Angeles, and KCOP left its home on La Brea Avenue to join KTTV at the modern-day Fox Television Center. KCBS-TV and KCAL-TV moved from their longtime home at CBS Columbia Square on Sunset Boulevard to a new facility at CBS Studio Center in Studio City.

==Government==

As a neighborhood within the Los Angeles city limits, Hollywood does not have its own municipal government. A person was appointed by the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce to serve as an honorary &quot;Mayor of Hollywood&quot; for ceremonial purposes. Johnny Grant held this position from 1980 until his death on January 9, 2008.

===Emergency services===
The Los Angeles Police Department is responsible for police services. The Hollywood police station is at 1358 N. Wilcox Avenue.

Los Angeles Fire Department operates four fire stations, 27, 41, 52, and 82 in the area.

The Los Angeles County Department of Health Services operates the Hollywood-Wilshire Health Center in Hollywood.

===Post office===
The United States Postal Service operates the Hollywood Post Office, the Hollywood Pavilion Post Office, and the Sunset Post Office.

===Neighborhood councils===
Hollywood is included within the Hollywood United Neighborhood Council (HUNC), Hollywood Hills West Neighborhood Council, and the Hollywood Studio District Neighborhood Council. Neighborhood Councils cast advisory votes on such issues as zoning, planning, and other community issues. The council members are voted in by stakeholders, generally defined as anyone living, working, owning property, or belonging to an organization within the boundaries of the council.

==Education==

Hollywood residents aged 25 and older holding a four-year degree amounted to 28% of the population in 2000, about the same as in the county at large.

===Public libraries===
The Will and Ariel Durant Branch, John C. Fremont Branch, and the Frances Howard Goldwyn – Hollywood Regional Branch of the Los Angeles Public Library are in Hollywood.

===Schools===
Public schools are operated by the Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD).

Schools in Hollywood include:
* Temple Israel of Hollywood Day School, private, 7300 Hollywood Boulevard
* Gardner Street Elementary School, LAUSD, 7450 Hawthorne Avenue
* Selma Avenue Elementary School, LAUSD, 6611 Selma Avenue
* Grant Elementary School, 1530 North Wilton Place
* Young Hollywood, private elementary, 1547 North McCadden Place
* Hollywood High School, LAUSD, 1521 North Highland Avenue
* Hollywood Community Adult School, LAUSD, 1521 North Highland Avenue
* Blessed Sacrament School, private elementary, 6641 Sunset Boulevard
* Helen Bernstein High School, LAUSD, 1309 North Wilton Place
* Richard A. Alonzo Community Day School, LAUSD, 5755 Fountain Avenue
* Beverly Hills RC School, private elementary, 6550 Fountain Avenue
* Hollywood Schoolhouse, private elementary, 1233 North McCadden Place
* Joseph LeConte Middle School, LAUSD, 1316 North Bronson Avenue
* Hollywood Primary Center, LAUSD elementary, 1115 Tamarind Avenue
* Santa Monica Boulevard Community Charter School, 1022 North Van Ness Avenue
* Vine Street Elementary School, LAUSD, 955 North Vine Street
* Hubert Howe Bancroft Middle School, LAUSD, 929 North Las Palmas Avenue
* Larchmont Charter School, elementary, 815 North El Centro Avenue
* Cheder Menachem, private elementary, 1606 South La Cienega Boulevard

===Colleges===
* AFI Conservatory, 2021 N Western Avenue
* Emerson College ELA-Hollywood Center, 5960 Sunset Boulevard
* Los Angeles City College, 855 N Vermont Avenue
* Los Angeles Film School, 6363 Sunset Boulevard
* Los Angeles Recording School, 6690 Sunset Boulevard

==Notable places==

*CBS Columbia Square
*Charlie Chaplin Studios
*Cinerama Dome
*Crossroads of the World
*Dolby Theatre
*Earl Carroll Theatre (currently Nickelodeon on Sunset)
*El Capitan Theatre
*Frederick&#x27;s of Hollywood
*Gower Gulch
*Grauman&#x27;s Chinese Theatre
*Grauman&#x27;s Egyptian Theatre
*Hollywood &amp; Western Building
*Ovation Hollywood
*Hollywood and Vine
*Hollywood Forever Cemetery
*Hollywood Heights, Los Angeles
*Hollywood Heritage Museum
*Hollywood Palladium
*Hollywood Masonic Temple
*Hollywood Museum
*Hollywood Walk of Fame
*Hollywood Wax Museum
*Knickerbocker Hotel
*Madame Tussauds Hollywood
*Musso &amp; Frank Grill
*Pantages Theatre
*Roosevelt Hotel
*Sunset Gower Studios
==Annual events==

The Academy Awards, which honor the preceding year in film, have been held every year in late February/early March since 2004; prior to 2004, they were held in late March/early April. Since 2002, the Oscars have been held at the Dolby Theatre (formerly Kodak Theatre) at Hollywood Boulevard and Highland Avenue, with the exception of 2020, when due to the COVID-19 pandemic they were held in Los Angeles Union Station.

The annual Hollywood Christmas Parade goes down Hollywood Boulevard and is broadcast in the Los Angeles area on KTLA and around the United States on Tribune-owned stations and the WGN superstation. The 75th edition of the parade was held in 2006.

The Hollywood Half Marathon began in 2012 and takes place every April. The event includes a Half Marathon, 10K, 5K, and Kids Fun Run along Hollywood Blvd., and is used to raise funds and awareness for local youth homeless shelters.

==Gallery==
==See also==


*Bibliography of Hollywood
*Bibliography of Los Angeles
*Community newspapers in Hollywood
*Documentary films about Hollywood
*Films about Hollywood
*List of Hollywood novels
*List of Los Angeles Historic-Cultural Monuments in Hollywood

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="0" end="9" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="39" end="49" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Tinseltown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017546" start="56" end="68" title="List of districts and neighborhoods in Los Angeles" label="neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191180" start="89" end="103" title="Central Los Angeles" label="central region"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="107" end="137" title="Los Angeles County, California" label="Los Angeles County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="158" end="169" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="197" end="216" title="metonymy" label="shorthand reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="225" end="243" title="Cinema of the United States" label="U.S. film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q822314" start="314" end="327" title="Sony Pictures" label="Sony Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216535" start="329" end="348" title="Walt Disney Studios (division)" label="Walt Disney Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="350" end="368" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="370" end="382" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="387" end="405" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="474" end="486" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319697" start="500" end="508" title="North Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328620" start="513" end="520" title="East Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q452440" start="552" end="564" title="Merger (politics)" label="consolidated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415395" start="634" end="647" title="film industry" label="film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772021" start="710" end="723" title="H. J. Whitley" label="H. J. Whitley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586271" start="842" end="860" title="Harrison Gray Otis (publisher)" label="Harrison Gray Otis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="885" end="902" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208215" start="963" end="976" title="Daeida Wilcox Beveridge" label="Daeida Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677280" start="1351" end="1367" title="Harvey Henderson Wilcox" label="Harvey H. Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q22715" start="1726" end="1734" title="vineyard" label="vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="1756" end="1762" title="citrus" label="citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="1786" end="1800" title="Tram" label="streetcar line"/>
<link wikidata="Q214252" start="1968" end="1974" title="stable" label="stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632626" start="2040" end="2055" title="Hollywood Hotel" label="Hollywood Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758654" start="2283" end="2298" title="Highland Avenue (Los Angeles)" label="Highland Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q868616" start="2348" end="2367" title="Hollywood Boulevard" label="Hollywood Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982040" start="2851" end="2864" title="Cahuenga Pass" label="Cahuenga Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758654" start="2960" end="2975" title="Highland Avenue (Los Angeles)" label="Highland Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996570" start="2999" end="3014" title="Whitley Heights, Los Angeles" label="Whitley Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="3099" end="3111" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="4051" end="4057" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="4072" end="4085" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894881" start="4093" end="4123" title="Motion Picture Patents Company" label="Motion Picture Patents Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="4127" end="4137" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q51123" start="4592" end="4606" title="D. W. Griffith" label="D. W. Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q400764" start="4691" end="4708" title="In Old California (1910 film)" label="In Old California"/>
<link wikidata="Q465832" start="4741" end="4757" title="Biograph Company" label="Biograph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q379580" start="5014" end="5023" title="John Muir" label="John Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="5050" end="5056" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="5061" end="5072" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q180402" start="5114" end="5122" title="Yosemite National Park" label="Yosemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338476" start="5167" end="5186" title="Nestor Film Company" label="Nestor Film Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059005" start="5261" end="5281" title="Centaur Film Company" label="Centaur Film Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q951791" start="5287" end="5296" title="roadhouse (facility)" label="roadhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q860442" start="5305" end="5321" title="Sunset Boulevard" label="Sunset Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112832" start="5337" end="5342" title="Gower Street (Hollywood)" label="Gower"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="5373" end="5382" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="5384" end="5396" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="5398" end="5401" title="RKO Pictures" label="RKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="5407" end="5415" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571520" start="5610" end="5631" title="Vertical integration" label="vertically integrated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5927" end="5973" title="Hollywood Sign#Origin" label="A large sign reading &amp;quot;HOLLYWOODLAND&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138378" start="5993" end="6008" title="Hollywood Hills" label="Hollywood Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q129155184" start="6121" end="6150" title="Hollywood Chamber of Commerce" label="Hollywood Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589189" start="6431" end="6450" title="Government of California" label="State of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q805844" start="6467" end="6484" title="Hollywood Freeway" label="Hollywood Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937482" start="6533" end="6557" title="Capitol Records Building" label="Capitol Records Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932379" start="6561" end="6572" title="Vine Street" label="Vine Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="6632" end="6654" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q868616" start="6816" end="6873" title="Hollywood Boulevard" label="Hollywood Boulevard Commercial and Entertainment District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="6892" end="6928" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339558" start="6984" end="7006" title="Los Angeles Metro Rail" label="Los Angeles Metro Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778331" start="7007" end="7015" title="B Line (Los Angeles Metro)" label="Red Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="7016" end="7022" title="rapid transit" label="subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q995043" start="7035" end="7055" title="Downtown Los Angeles" label="Downtown Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q816843" start="7063" end="7082" title="San Fernando Valley" label="San Fernando Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987603" start="7124" end="7138" title="Western Avenue (Los Angeles)" label="Western Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q196293" start="7140" end="7171" title="Hollywood/Western (Los Angeles Metro station)" label="Hollywood/Western Metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932379" start="7174" end="7185" title="Vine Street" label="Vine Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q196289" start="7187" end="7215" title="Hollywood/Vine (Los Angeles Metro station)" label="Hollywood/Vine Metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758654" start="7222" end="7237" title="Highland Avenue (Los Angeles)" label="Highland Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q196224" start="7239" end="7271" title="Hollywood/Highland (Los Angeles Metro station)" label="Hollywood/Highland Metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q180615" start="7279" end="7292" title="Dolby Theatre" label="Dolby Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253778" start="7343" end="7374" title="Hollywood &amp;amp; Highland Center" label="Hollywood &amp;amp; Highland Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="7407" end="7421" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632626" start="7462" end="7477" title="Hollywood Hotel" label="Hollywood Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009236" start="7695" end="7710" title="Columbia Square" label="Columbia Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q860442" start="7739" end="7755" title="Sunset Boulevard" label="Sunset Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112832" start="7760" end="7772" title="Gower Street, Hollywood" label="Gower Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="7823" end="7837" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="7913" end="7916" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="8000" end="8003" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="8005" end="8019" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q880256" start="8021" end="8024" title="BET" label="BET"/>
<link wikidata="Q47460738" start="8029" end="8037" title="Spike TV" label="Spike TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="8190" end="8200" title="gentrification" label="gentrified"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692780" start="8395" end="8410" title="low-rise" label="low to mid-rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682069" start="8632" end="8671" title="Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors" label="Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q816843" start="8728" end="8747" title="San Fernando Valley" label="San Fernando Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078772" start="9028" end="9040" title="Mapping L.A." label="Mapping L.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="9062" end="9079" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138378" start="9115" end="9130" title="Hollywood Hills, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682727" start="9145" end="9154" title="Los Feliz, Los Angeles" label="Los Feliz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328620" start="9173" end="9187" title="East Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="East Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488793" start="9219" end="9228" title="Larchmont, Los Angeles" label="Larchmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647060" start="9233" end="9245" title="Hancock Park, Los Angeles" label="Hancock Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430171" start="9260" end="9267" title="Fairfax, Los Angeles" label="Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q846421" start="9286" end="9300" title="West Hollywood, California" label="West Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995694" start="9318" end="9338" title="Hollywood Hills West, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood Hills West"/>
<link wikidata="Q868616" start="9414" end="9433" title="Hollywood Boulevard" label="Hollywood Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6461333" start="9439" end="9453" title="La Brea Avenue" label="La Brea Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9478" end="9497" title="Wattles Mansion#Wattles Park" label="Wattles Garden Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q938144" start="9502" end="9517" title="Franklin Avenue (Los Angeles)" label="Franklin Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987603" start="9560" end="9574" title="Western Avenue (Los Angeles)" label="Western Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305282" start="9583" end="9597" title="Melrose Avenue" label="Melrose Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6461333" start="9609" end="9623" title="La Brea Avenue" label="La Brea Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308569" start="9646" end="9655" title="city limits" label="city line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996570" start="9727" end="9742" title="Whitley Heights" label="Whitley Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q938144" start="9891" end="9907" title="Franklin Village" label="Franklin Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795364" start="9909" end="9923" title="Little Armenia, Los Angeles" label="Little Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574138" start="9925" end="9941" title="Spaulding Square, Los Angeles" label="Spaulding Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519423" start="9943" end="9952" title="Thai Town, Los Angeles" label="Thai Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466308" start="9958" end="9972" title="Yucca Corridor" label="Yucca Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q66045" start="10016" end="10034" title="Hollywood, Alabama" label="Hollywood, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q129155184" start="10110" end="10139" title="Hollywood Chamber of Commerce" label="Hollywood Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="10252" end="10263" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="10281" end="10313" title="hot-summer Mediterranean climate" label="hot-summer Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="10315" end="10321" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="10354" end="10373" title="subtropical climate" label="subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q816843" start="10656" end="10675" title="San Fernando Valley" label="San Fernando Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570423" start="10734" end="10749" title="Santa Ana winds" label="Santa Ana winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="10953" end="10961" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="10989" end="10993" title="Smog" label="Smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312289" start="11176" end="11186" title="June Gloom" label="June Gloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="11381" end="11397" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="11481" end="11488" title="population density" label="densest"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="11512" end="11530" title="Los Angeles County" label="Los Angeles County"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="11800" end="11818" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Latino or Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="11824" end="11842" title="Non-Hispanic Whites" label="Non-Hispanic White"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="11849" end="11854" title="Asian American" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="11861" end="11866" title="African American" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334702" start="12723" end="12726" title="KNX (AM)" label="KNX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009236" start="12797" end="12816" title="CBS Columbia Square" label="CBS Columbia Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315812" start="12837" end="12849" title="Miracle Mile, Los Angeles" label="Miracle Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="12933" end="12950" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140873" start="12952" end="12956" title="KTLA" label="KTLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140873" start="13138" end="13142" title="KTLA" label="KTLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355153" start="13147" end="13151" title="KCET" label="KCET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820380" start="13296" end="13317" title="Church of Scientology" label="Church of Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382261" start="13368" end="13372" title="KNBC" label="KNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267643" start="13403" end="13425" title="NBC Radio City Studios" label="NBC Radio City Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267643" start="13489" end="13500" title="NBC Studios (New York)" label="NBC Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077406" start="13513" end="13517" title="KTTV" label="KTTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824858" start="13556" end="13573" title="Metromedia Square" label="Metromedia Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q6327204" start="13619" end="13623" title="KCOP" label="KCOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191342" start="13710" end="13717" title="KCBS-TV" label="KCBS-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326535" start="13722" end="13729" title="KCAL-TV" label="KCAL-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009236" start="13764" end="13783" title="CBS Columbia Square" label="CBS Columbia Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009278" start="13825" end="13842" title="CBS Studio Center" label="CBS Studio Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143067" start="13846" end="13857" title="Studio City, Los Angeles" label="Studio City"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="13905" end="13916" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q129155184" start="14014" end="14043" title="Hollywood Chamber of Commerce" label="Hollywood Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797723" start="14074" end="14092" title="Mayor of Hollywood" label="Mayor of Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q359857" start="14124" end="14136" title="Johnny Grant (radio personality)" label="Johnny Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q214126" start="14232" end="14261" title="Los Angeles Police Department" label="Los Angeles Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122786" start="14357" end="14384" title="Los Angeles Fire Department" label="Los Angeles Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682073" start="14451" end="14499" title="Los Angeles County Department of Health Services" label="Los Angeles County Department of Health Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="14583" end="14611" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466371" start="14625" end="14646" title="United States Post Office (Hollywood, Los Angeles)" label="Hollywood Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817385" start="15521" end="15547" title="Los Angeles Public Library" label="Los Angeles Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320340" start="15616" end="15651" title="Los Angeles Unified School District" label="Los Angeles Unified School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698601" start="15694" end="15720" title="Temple Israel of Hollywood" label="Temple Israel of Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320340" start="15803" end="15808" title="LAUSD" label="LAUSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882770" start="16009" end="16030" title="Hollywood High School" label="Hollywood High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="16138" end="16155" title="Blessed Sacrament" label="Blessed Sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842747" start="16208" end="16235" title="Helen Bernstein High School" label="Helen Bernstein High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810237" start="16479" end="16493" title="Joseph LeConte" label="Joseph LeConte"/>
<link wikidata="Q116245529" start="16824" end="16848" title="Larchmont Charter School" label="Larchmont Charter School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651503" start="16978" end="16994" title="AFI Conservatory" label="AFI Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17020" end="17056" title="Emerson College#ELA—Hollywood Center (Los Angeles)" label="Emerson College ELA-Hollywood Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727138" start="17082" end="17106" title="Los Angeles City College" label="Los Angeles City College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682225" start="17131" end="17154" title="Los Angeles Film School" label="Los Angeles Film School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077502" start="17180" end="17208" title="Los Angeles Recording School" label="Los Angeles Recording School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009236" start="17254" end="17273" title="CBS Columbia Square" label="CBS Columbia Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q24904690" start="17275" end="17298" title="Charlie Chaplin Studios" label="Charlie Chaplin Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972810" start="17300" end="17313" title="Cinerama Dome" label="Cinerama Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188853" start="17315" end="17338" title="Crossroads of the World" label="Crossroads of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q180615" start="17340" end="17353" title="Dolby Theatre" label="Dolby Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10336724" start="17355" end="17375" title="Earl Carroll Theatre (Los Angeles)" label="Earl Carroll Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10336724" start="17387" end="17408" title="Nickelodeon on Sunset" label="Nickelodeon on Sunset"/>
<link wikidata="Q849284" start="17411" end="17429" title="El Capitan Theatre" label="El Capitan Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373540" start="17431" end="17460" title="Frederick&amp;#x27;s of Hollywood" label="Frederick&amp;#x27;s of Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q692238" start="17462" end="17473" title="Gower Gulch" label="Gower Gulch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122565" start="17475" end="17505" title="Grauman&amp;#x27;s Chinese Theatre" label="Grauman&amp;#x27;s Chinese Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q750733" start="17507" end="17538" title="Grauman&amp;#x27;s Egyptian Theatre" label="Grauman&amp;#x27;s Egyptian Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882542" start="17540" end="17572" title="Hollywood &amp;amp; Western Building" label="Hollywood &amp;amp; Western Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253778" start="17574" end="17591" title="Ovation Hollywood" label="Ovation Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139430" start="17593" end="17611" title="Hollywood and Vine" label="Hollywood and Vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624932" start="17613" end="17639" title="Hollywood Forever Cemetery" label="Hollywood Forever Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882751" start="17641" end="17671" title="Hollywood Heights, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood Heights, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3911675" start="17673" end="17698" title="Hollywood Heritage Museum" label="Hollywood Heritage Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4244839" start="17700" end="17719" title="Hollywood Palladium" label="Hollywood Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139424" start="17721" end="17745" title="Hollywood Masonic Temple" label="Hollywood Masonic Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714427" start="17747" end="17763" title="Hollywood Museum" label="Hollywood Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="17765" end="17787" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5883025" start="17789" end="17809" title="Hollywood Wax Museum" label="Hollywood Wax Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422056" start="17811" end="17830" title="Knickerbocker Hotel (Los Angeles)" label="Knickerbocker Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726337" start="17832" end="17857" title="Madame Tussauds Hollywood" label="Madame Tussauds Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943139" start="17859" end="17882" title="Musso &amp;amp; Frank Grill" label="Musso &amp;amp; Frank Grill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584748" start="17884" end="17900" title="Pantages Theatre (Hollywood)" label="Pantages Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559342" start="17902" end="17917" title="Roosevelt Hotel (Hollywood)" label="Roosevelt Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641261" start="17919" end="17939" title="Sunset Gower Studios" label="Sunset Gower Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="17963" end="17977" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q180615" start="18188" end="18226" title="Dolby Theatre" label="Dolby Theatre (formerly Kodak Theatre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="18315" end="18332" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q198019" start="18351" end="18376" title="Los Angeles Union Station" label="Los Angeles Union Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882661" start="18390" end="18416" title="Hollywood Christmas Parade" label="Hollywood Christmas Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q868616" start="18427" end="18446" title="Hollywood Boulevard" label="Hollywood Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140873" start="18491" end="18495" title="KTLA" label="KTLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q105409747" start="18559" end="18562" title="WGN America" label="WGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984634" start="18631" end="18654" title="Hollywood Half Marathon" label="Hollywood Half Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q116701391" start="18888" end="18913" title="Bibliography of Hollywood" label="Bibliography of Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985878" start="18915" end="18942" title="Bibliography of Los Angeles" label="Bibliography of Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958969" start="18944" end="18977" title="Community newspapers in Hollywood, California" label="Community newspapers in Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18979" end="19012" title=":Category:Documentary films about Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Documentary films about Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19014" end="19035" title=":Category:Films about Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Films about Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573351" start="19037" end="19061" title="List of Hollywood novels" label="List of Hollywood novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577077" start="19063" end="19123" title="List of Los Angeles Historic-Cultural Monuments in Hollywood" label="List of Los Angeles Historic-Cultural Monuments in Hollywood"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53855" wikidata="Q46755" url="?curid=53855" title="Benny Goodman">
<text>Benjamin David Goodman (May 30, 1909 – June 13, 1986) was an American clarinetist and bandleader, known as the &quot;King of Swing&quot;. His orchestra did phenomenally well commercially.

From 1936 until the mid-1940s, Goodman led one of the most popular swing big bands in the United States. His concert at Carnegie Hall in New York City on January 16, 1938, is described by critic Bruce Eder as &quot;the single most important jazz or popular music concert in history: jazz&#x27;s &#x27;coming out&#x27; party to the world of &#x27;respectable&#x27; music.&quot;

Goodman&#x27;s bands started the careers of many jazz musicians. During an era of racial segregation, he led one of the first integrated jazz groups, his trio and quartet. He continued performing until the end of his life while pursuing an interest in classical music.

== Early years ==
Goodman was the ninth of twelve children born to poor Jewish emigrants from the Russian Empire. His father, David Goodman, came to the United States in 1892 from Warsaw in partitioned Poland and became a tailor. His mother, Dora Grisinsky, came from Kaunas. They met in Baltimore, Maryland, and moved to Chicago before Goodman&#x27;s birth. With little income and a large family, they moved to the Maxwell Street neighborhood, an overcrowded slum near railroad yards and factories that was populated by German, Irish, Italian, Polish, Scandinavian, and Jewish immigrants.

Money was a constant problem. On Sundays, his father took the children to free band concerts in Douglass Park, the first time Goodman experienced live professional performances. Believing that music might be a ticket out of poverty for his sons, Goodman’s father enrolled ten-year-old Goodman and two of his brothers in free music classes, from 1919, at the Kehelah Jacob Synagogue. His older brothers were given a tuba and a trumpet, while Benny, the smallest, got a clarinet. Benny also received two years of clarinet lessons from the classically trained clarinetist and Chicago Symphony Orchestra member, Franz Schoepp. During the next year Goodman joined the boys club band at Hull House, where he received lessons from director James Sylvester. By joining the band, he was entitled to spend two weeks at a summer camp near Chicago. It was the only time he could get away from his bleak neighborhood. At 13, he got his first union card. He performed on Lake Michigan excursion boats, and in 1923 played at Guyon&#x27;s Paradise, a local dance hall.

In the summer of 1923, he met cornetist and composer Bix Beiderbecke. He attended the Lewis Institute (Illinois Institute of Technology) in 1924 as a high-school sophomore and played clarinet in a dance hall band. When he was 17, his father was killed by a passing car after stepping off a streetcar, which Goodman called &quot;the saddest thing that ever happened in our family&quot;.

== Career ==
===Early career===
His early influences were New Orleans jazz clarinetists who worked in Chicago, such as Jimmie Noone, Johnny Dodds, and Leon Roppolo. He learned quickly, becoming a strong player at an early age, and was soon playing in bands. He made his professional debut in 1921 at the Central Park Theater on the West Side of Chicago. He entered Harrison Technical High School in Chicago in 1922. At fourteen he became a member of the musicians&#x27; union and worked in a band featuring Bix Beiderbecke. Two years later, in 1926, he joined the Ben Pollack Orchestra and made his first recordings.

===From sideman to bandleader===
Goodman moved to New York City and became a session musician for radio, Broadway musicals, and in studios. In addition to clarinet, he sometimes played alto saxophone and baritone saxophone. His first recording pressed to disc (Victor 20394) occurred on December 9, 1926, in Chicago. The session resulted in the song &quot;When I First Met Mary&quot;, which also included Glenn Miller, Harry Goodman, and Ben Pollack. In a Victor recording session on March 21, 1928, he played alongside Miller, Tommy Dorsey, and Joe Venuti in the All-Star Orchestra directed by Nathaniel Shilkret. He played with the bands of Red Nichols, Ben Selvin, Ted Lewis, and Isham Jones and recorded for Brunswick under the name Benny Goodman&#x27;s Boys, a band that featured Glenn Miller. In 1928, Goodman and Miller wrote &quot;Room 1411&quot;, Miller&#x27;s first known composition, which was released as a Brunswick 78.

He reached the charts for the first time in January 1931 with &quot;He&#x27;s Not Worth Your Tears&quot;, featuring a vocal by Scrappy Lambert for Melotone. After signing with Columbia in 1934, he had top ten hits with &quot;Ain&#x27;t Cha Glad?&quot; and &quot;I Ain&#x27;t Lazy, I&#x27;m Just Dreamin sung by Jack Teagarden, &quot;Ol&#x27; Pappy&quot; sung by Mildred Bailey, and &quot;Riffin&#x27; the Scotch&quot; sung by Billie Holiday. An invitation to play at the Billy Rose Music Hall led to his creation of an orchestra for the four-month engagement. The orchestra recorded &quot;Moonglow&quot;, which became a number one hit and was followed by the Top Ten hits &quot;Take My Word&quot; and &quot;Bugle Call Rag&quot;.

NBC hired Goodman for the radio program &quot;Let&#x27;s Dance&quot;. John Hammond asked Fletcher Henderson if he wanted to write arrangements for Goodman, and Henderson agreed. During the Depression, Henderson disbanded his orchestra because he was in debt. Goodman hired Henderson&#x27;s band members to teach his musicians how to play the music.

Goodman&#x27;s band was one of three to perform on &quot;Let&#x27;s Dance&quot;, playing arrangements by Henderson along with hits such as &quot;Get Happy&quot; and &quot;Limehouse Blues&quot; by Spud Murphy.

Goodman&#x27;s portion of the program was broadcast too late at night to attract a large audience on the east coast. He and his band remained on &quot;Let&#x27;s Dance&quot; until May of that year when a strike by employees of the series&#x27; sponsor, Nabisco, forced the cancellation of the radio show. An engagement was booked at Manhattan&#x27;s Roosevelt Grill filling in for Guy Lombardo, but the audience expected &quot;sweet&quot; music and Goodman&#x27;s band was unsuccessful.

Goodman spent six months performing on &quot;Let&#x27;s Dance&quot;, and during that time he recorded six more Top Ten hits for Columbia.

===Catalyst for the swing era===

On July 31, 1935, &quot;King Porter Stomp&quot; was released with &quot;Sometimes I&#x27;m Happy&quot; on the B-side, both arranged by Henderson and recorded on July 1. In Pittsburgh at the Stanley Theater some members of the audience danced in the aisles. But these arrangements had little impact on the tour until August 19 at McFadden&#x27;s Ballroom in Oakland, California. Goodman and his band, which included trumpeter Bunny Berigan, drummer Gene Krupa, and singer Helen Ward were met by a large crowd of young dancers who cheered the music they had heard on &quot;Let&#x27;s Dance&quot;. Herb Caen wrote, &quot;from the first note, the place was in an uproar.&quot; One night later, at Pismo Beach, the show was a flop, and the band thought the overwhelming reception in Oakland had been a fluke.

The next night, August 21, 1935, at the Palomar Ballroom in Los Angeles, Goodman and his band began a three-week engagement. On top of the &quot;Let&#x27;s Dance&quot; airplay, Al Jarvis had been playing Goodman&#x27;s records on KFWB radio. Goodman started the evening with stock arrangements, but after an indifferent response, he began the second set with arrangements by Fletcher Henderson and Spud Murphy. According to Willard Alexander, the band&#x27;s booking agent, Krupa said, &quot;If we&#x27;re gonna die, Benny, let&#x27;s die playing our own thing.&quot; The crowd broke into cheers and applause. News reports spread word of the exciting music and enthusiastic dancing. The Palomar engagement was such a marked success that it is often described as the beginning of the swing era. According to Donald Clarke, &quot;It is clear in retrospect that the Swing Era had been waiting to happen, but it was Goodman and his band that touched it off.&quot;

The reception of American swing was less enthusiastic in Europe. British author J. C. Squire filed a complaint with BBC Radio to demand it stop playing Goodman&#x27;s music, which he called &quot;an awful series of jungle noises which can hearten no man.&quot; Germany&#x27;s Nazi party barred jazz from the radio, claiming it was part of a Jewish conspiracy to destroy the culture. Italy&#x27;s fascist government banned the broadcast of any music composed or played by Jews which they said threatened &quot;the flower of our race, the youth.&quot;

In November 1935, Goodman accepted an invitation to play in Chicago at the Joseph Urban Room at the Congress Hotel. His stay there was extended to six months, and his popularity was cemented by nationwide radio broadcasts over NBC affiliate stations. While in Chicago, the band recorded &quot;If I Could Be with You (One Hour Tonight)&quot;, &quot;Stompin&#x27; at the Savoy&quot;, and &quot;Goody Goody&quot;. Goodman also played three concerts produced by Chicago socialite and jazz aficionado Helen Oakley. These &quot;Rhythm Club&quot; concerts at the Congress Hotel included sets in which Goodman and Krupa sat in with Fletcher Henderson&#x27;s band, perhaps the first racially integrated big band appearing before a paying audience in the United States. Goodman and Krupa played in a trio with Teddy Wilson on piano. Both combinations were well received, and Wilson remained.

In his 1935–1936 radio broadcasts from Chicago, Goodman was introduced as the &quot;Rajah of Rhythm&quot;. Slingerland Drum Company had been calling Krupa the &quot;King of Swing&quot; as part of a sales campaign, but shortly after Goodman and his crew left Chicago in May 1936 to spend the summer filming &quot;The Big Broadcast of 1937&quot; in Hollywood, the title &quot;King of Swing&quot; was applied to Goodman by the media.

At the end of June 1936, Goodman went to Hollywood, where, on June 30, 1936, his band began CBS&#x27;s &quot;Camel Caravan&quot;, its third and (according to Connor and Hicks) its greatest sponsored radio show, co-starring Goodman and his former boss Nathaniel Shilkret. By spring 1936, Fletcher Henderson was writing arrangements for Goodman&#x27;s band.

=== Carnegie Hall concert ===

In late 1937, Goodman&#x27;s publicist Wynn Nathanson suggested that Goodman and his band play Carnegie Hall in New York City. The sold-out concert was held on the evening of January 16, 1938. It is regarded as one of the most significant concerts in jazz history. After years of work by musicians from all over the country, jazz had finally been accepted by mainstream audiences—according to Stan Ayeroff, &quot;the concert helped jazz evolve from being strictly dance music to music worthy of a discerning listening audience. It was the start of jazz being recognized as an art form on a par with classical music.&quot;

Recordings of the concert were made, but even by the technology of the day the equipment used was not of the finest quality. These recordings were made on acetate, and aluminum studio masters were cut. The idea of recording the concert came from Albert Marx, a friend of Goodman&#x27;s, for the purposes of a gift for his wife Helen Ward, as well as gifting a second set to Goodman. Sometime in or before 1950, Goodman recovered the acetates from his sister-in-law&#x27;s closet, who had informed him about them, and took them to the audio engineer William Savory. The pair took them to Columbia, with Goodman realising the recordings could be used as leverage to make a recording contract with Columbia (having been eager to end his contract with Capitol). A selection was then released as an LP entitled &quot;The Famous 1938 Carnegie Hall Jazz Concert&quot;.

=== Charlie Christian ===
In 1939, pianist and arranger Mary Lou Williams suggested to John Hammond, who was responsible for finding new talent for Goodman, that he see guitarist Charlie Christian. Hammond had seen Christian perform in Oklahoma City on July 10, 1939, and recommended him to Goodman, but Goodman was uninterested in electric guitar and was put off by Christian&#x27;s taste in gaudy clothing. Unbeknownst to Goodman, at an August 16 concert at the Victor Hugo Restaurant in Beverly Hills, Hammond inserted Christian onto the stage. Goodman started playing &quot;Rose Room&quot; on the assumption that Christian didn&#x27;t know it, but his performance impressed the audience immensely. According to Hammond, &quot;before long the crowd was screaming with amazement. &#x27;Rose Room&#x27; continued for more than three quarters of an hour and Goodman received an ovation unlike any even he had before. No one present will ever forget it, least of all Benny.&quot;

Christian was a member of the Benny Goodman Sextet from 1939 to 1941, and during these two years he turned the electric guitar into a popular jazz instrument.

===Decline of swing===

Goodman continued his success throughout the late 1930s with his big band, his trio and quartet, and the sextet formed in August 1939, the same month Goodman returned to Columbia Records after four years with RCA Victor. At Columbia, John Hammond, his future brother-in-law, produced most of his sessions. By the mid-1940s, however, big bands had lost much of their popularity. In 1941, ASCAP had a licensing war with music publishers. From 1942 to 1944, and again in 1948, the musicians&#x27; union went on strike against the major record labels in the United States, and singers acquired the popularity that the big bands had once enjoyed. During the 1942–44 strike, the War Department approached the union and requested the production of V-Discs, a set of records containing new recordings for soldiers, thereby boosting the rise of new artists. Also, by the late 1940s, swing was no longer the dominant style of jazz musicians.

=== Exploring bebop ===

By the 1940s, some jazz musicians were borrowing from classical music, while others, such as Charlie Parker, were broadening the rhythmic, harmonic, and melodic vocabulary of swing to create bebop (or bop). The bebop recordings Goodman made for Capitol were praised by critics. For his bebop band he hired Buddy Greco, Zoot Sims, and Wardell Gray. He consulted his friend Mary Lou Williams for advice on how to approach the music of Dizzy Gillespie and Charlie Parker. Pianist Mel Powell was also an adviser in 1945. Goodman enjoyed bebop. When he heard Thelonious Monk, he said, &quot;I like it, I like that very much. I like the piece and I like the way he played it ... I think he&#x27;s got a sense of humor and he&#x27;s got some good things there.&quot; He also admired Swedish clarinetist Stan Hasselgård. But after playing with a bebop band for over a year, he returned to his swing band because he concluded that was what he knew best. In 1953, he said, &quot;Maybe bop has done more to set music back for years than anything ... Basically it&#x27;s all wrong. It&#x27;s not even knowing the scales ... Bop was mostly publicity and people figuring angles.&quot;

=== Classical repertoire ===
In 1949 he studied with clarinetist Reginald Kell, requiring a change in technique: &quot;instead of holding the mouthpiece between his front teeth and lower lip, as he had done since he first took a clarinet in hand 30 years earlier, Goodman learned to adjust his embouchure to the use of both lips and even to use new fingering techniques. He had his old finger calluses removed and started to learn how to play his clarinet again—almost from scratch.&quot;

Goodman commissioned compositions for clarinet and chamber ensembles or orchestra that have become standard pieces of classical repertoire. He premiered works by composers, such as &quot;Contrasts&quot; by Béla Bartók; Clarinet Concerto No. 2, Op. 115 by Malcolm Arnold; &quot;Derivations for Clarinet and Band&quot; by Morton Gould; Sonata for Clarinet and Piano by Francis Poulenc, and Clarinet Concerto by Aaron Copland. &quot;Prelude, Fugue, and Riffs&quot; by Leonard Bernstein was commissioned for Woody Herman&#x27;s big band, but it was premiered by Goodman. Herman was the dedicatee (1945) and first performer (1946) of Igor Stravinsky&#x27;s &quot;Ebony Concerto&quot;, but many years later Stravinsky made another recording with Goodman as the soloist.

He made a recording of Mozart&#x27;s Clarinet Quintet in July 1956 with the Boston Symphony String Quartet at the Berkshire Festival; on the same occasion he recorded Mozart&#x27;s Clarinet Concerto in A major, K. 622, with the Boston Symphony Orchestra conducted by Charles Munch. He also recorded the clarinet concertos of Weber. In 1972, he was a soloist with the Naumburg Orchestral Concerts, in the Naumburg Bandshell, Central Park, in the summer series. 

After forays outside swing, Goodman started a new band in 1953. According to Donald Clarke, this was not a happy time for Goodman. He reunited the band to tour with Louis Armstrong. But he insulted Armstrong and &quot;was appalled at the vaudeville aspects of Louis&#x27;s act...a contradiction of everything Goodman stood for&quot;. Armstrong left Goodman hanging during a joint performance where Goodman called Armstrong back onstage to wrap up the show. Armstrong refused to perform alongside Goodman, which led essentially to the end of their friendship.

Goodman&#x27;s band appeared as a specialty act in the films &quot;The Big Broadcast of 1937&quot;; &quot;Hollywood Hotel&quot; (1938); &quot;Syncopation&quot; (1942); &quot;The Powers Girl&quot; (1942); &quot;Stage Door Canteen&quot; (1943); &quot;The Gang&#x27;s All Here&quot; (1943); &quot;Sweet and Low-Down&quot; (1944), Goodman&#x27;s only starring feature; &quot;Make Mine Music&quot; (1946) and &quot;A Song Is Born&quot; (1948).

== Later years ==

He continued to play on records and in small groups. In the early 1970s he collaborated with George Benson after the two met taping a PBS tribute to John Hammond, recreating some of Goodman&#x27;s duets with Charlie Christian. Benson appeared on Goodman&#x27;s album &quot;Seven Come Eleven&quot;. Goodman continued to play swing, but he practiced and performed classical pieces and commissioned them for clarinet. In 1960 he performed Mozart&#x27;s Clarinet Concerto with conductor Alfredo Antonini at the Lewisohn Stadium in New York City. Despite health problems, he continued to perform, his last concert being six days before his death. Goodman died on June 13, 1986, from a heart attack while taking a nap at his apartment in Manhattan House.

==Personal life==
One of Goodman&#x27;s closest friends was Columbia producer John Hammond, who influenced Goodman&#x27;s move from Victor to Columbia. Goodman married Hammond&#x27;s sister, Alice Frances Hammond Duckworth (1905–1978), on March 20, 1942. They had two daughters and raised Alice&#x27;s three daughters from her first marriage to British politician Arthur Duckworth. Goodman&#x27;s daughter Rachel became a classical pianist. She sometimes performed in concert with him, beginning when she was sixteen.

Goodman and Hammond had disagreements from the 1930s onwards. For the 1939 Spirituals to Swing concert Hammond had placed Charlie Christian into the Kansas City Six to play before Goodman&#x27;s band, which had angered Goodman. They disagreed over the band&#x27;s music until Goodman refused to listen to Hammond. Their arguments escalated, and in 1941 Hammond left Columbia. Goodman appeared on a 1975 PBS tribute to Hammond but remained at a distance. In the 1980s, after the death of Alice Goodman, Hammond and Goodman reconciled. On June 25, 1985, Goodman appeared at Avery Fisher Hall in New York City for &quot;A Tribute to John Hammond&quot;.

Goodman was regarded by some as a demanding taskmaster, by others as an arrogant and eccentric martinet. Many musicians spoke of &quot;The Ray&quot;, the glare that Goodman directed at a musician who failed to perform to his standards. After guitarist Allan Reuss incurred Goodman&#x27;s displeasure, Goodman relegated him to the rear of the bandstand where his contribution would be drowned out by the other musicians. Vocalists Anita O&#x27;Day and Helen Forrest spoke bitterly of their experiences singing with Goodman: &quot;The twenty or so months I spent with Benny felt like twenty years,&quot; said Forrest. &quot;When I look back, they seem like a life sentence.&quot; He was generous and funded several college educations, though always secretly. When a friend asked him why, he said, &quot;Well, if they knew about it, everyone would come to me with their hand out.&quot;

Goodman helped racial integration in America. In the early 1930s, black and white musicians could not play together in most clubs and concerts. In the Southern states, racial segregation was enforced by Jim Crow laws. Goodman hired Teddy Wilson for his trio and added vibraphonist Lionel Hampton for his quartet. In 1939 he hired guitarist Charlie Christian. This integration in music happened ten years before Jackie Robinson broke Major League Baseball&#x27;s six-decade-long color line. According to &quot;Jazz&quot; (Episode 5) by Ken Burns, Lionel Hampton states that when someone asked Goodman why he &quot;played with that nigger&quot; (referring to Teddy Wilson), Goodman replied, &quot;If you say that again to me, I&#x27;ll take a clarinet and bust you across your head with it&quot;.

In 1962, the Benny Goodman Orchestra toured the Soviet Union as part of a cultural exchange program between the two nations after the Cuban Missile Crisis and the end of that phase of the Cold War; both visits were part of efforts to normalize relations between the United States and the USSR. Members of the band included Jimmy Knepper, Jerry Dodgion, and Turk Van Lake (Vanig Hovsepian). Bassist Bill Crow published a very colorful view of the tour and Goodman&#x27;s conduct during it under the title &quot;To Russia Without Love&quot;.

==Awards and honors==
Goodman was honored with the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award.

After winning polls as best jazz clarinetist, Goodman was inducted into the &quot;DownBeat&quot; Jazz Hall of Fame in 1957.

He was a member of the radio division of the National Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame.

His papers were donated to Yale University after his death. He received honorary doctorates from Union College, the University of Illinois, Southern Illinois University Edwardsville, Bard College, Brandeis University, Columbia University, Harvard University, and Yale University.

== Partial discography ==
* &quot;Swinging 34 Vols. 1 &amp; 2&quot; (Melodeon, 1934)
* &quot;Original Benny Goodman Trio and Quartet Sessions, Vol. 1: After You&#x27;ve Gone&quot; (Bluebird, 1935)
* &quot;Stomping at the Savoy&quot; (Bluebird, 1935)
* &quot;Air Play&quot; (Doctor Jazz, 1936)
* &quot;Sing, Sing, Sing (With a Swing)&quot; (Columbia, 1937)
* &quot;Roll &#x27;Em, Vol. 1&quot; (Columbia, 1937)
* &quot;Roll &#x27;Em, Vol. 2&quot; (Columbia, 1937)
* &quot;Don&#x27;t Be That Way&quot; (Columbia 1938)
* &quot;From Spirituals to Swing&quot; (Vanguard, 1938)
* &quot;The Famous 1938 Carnegie Hall Jazz Concert&quot; Vols. 1–3 (Columbia, 1938)
* &quot;Mozart Clarinet Quintet&quot;, with the Budapest String Quartet (RCA Victor, 1938)
* &quot;Eddie Sauter Arrangements&quot; (Columbia, 1940)
* &quot;Swing into Spring&quot; (Columbia, 1941)
* &quot;Benny Goodman Sextet&quot; (Columbia, 1944)
* &quot;Undercurrent Blues&quot; (Capitol, 1947)
* &quot;Swedish Pastry&quot; (Dragon, 1948)
* &quot;Session for Six&quot; (Capitol, 1950)
* &quot;The Benny Goodman Trio Plays&quot; (Columbia, 1951)
* &quot;Goodman &amp; Teagarden&quot; (Jazz Panorama, 1951)
* &quot;Easy Does It&quot; (Capitol, 1952)
* &quot;Benny at the Ballroom&quot; (Columbia, 1955)
* &quot;BG in Hi-Fi&quot; (Capitol, 1955)
* &quot;Mozart Clarinet Concerto&quot; with the Boston Symphony Orchestra (1956)
* &quot;Mostly Sextets&quot; (Capitol, 1956)
* &quot;The Great Benny Goodman&quot; (Columbia, 1956)
* &quot;Peggy Lee Sings with Benny Goodman&quot; (Harmony, 1957)
* &quot;Benny Rides Again&quot; (1958)
* &quot;Benny Goodman Plays World Favorites in High Fidelity&quot; (1958)
* &quot;Benny in Brussels&quot; Vols. 1 and 2 (Columbia, 1958)
* &quot;In Stockholm 1959&quot; (Phontastic, 1959)
* &quot;The Benny Goodman Treasure Chest&quot; (MGM, 1959)
* &quot;The Hits of Benny Goodman&quot; (Capital Records, 1961)
* &quot;Benny Goodman in Moscow&quot; (RCA Victor, 1962)
* &quot;Weber Clarinet Concertos Nos. 1 and 2&quot; with the Chicago Symphony (RCA, 1968)
* &quot;London Date&quot; (Phillips, 1969)
* &quot;Benny Goodman Today&quot; (London, 1970)
* &quot;This Is Benny Goodman&quot; (RCA Victor, 1971)
* &quot;Benny Goodman – A Legendary Performer&quot; (RCA, 1977)
* &quot;Benny Goodman Live at Carnegie Hall: 40th Anniversary Concert&quot; (1978)
* &quot;Benny Goodman – Live in Hamburg 1981&quot; (Stockfisch, 2019)

===Posthumous===
* &quot;Sing, Sing, Sing&quot; (Bluebird, 1987)
* &quot;And His Orchestra 1935–1939&quot; (Giants of Jazz, 1990)
* &quot;His Orchestra and His Combos 1941–1955&quot; (Giants of Jazz, 1990)
* &quot;The Benny Goodman Sextet Featuring Charlie Christian: 1939–1941&quot; (Columbia/Legacy, 1989)
* &quot;16 Most Requested Songs&quot; (Columbia/Legacy, 1993)
* &quot;Carnegie Hall Jazz Concert &#x27;38&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Bill Dodge All-star Recording&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Live at Carnegie Hall&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Carnegie Hall: The Complete Concert&quot; (2006)
* &quot;The Yale University Music Library, Vol. 2: Live at Basin Street&quot; (Musical Heritage Society, 1988)
* &quot;The Complete RCA Victor Small Group Recordings&quot; (RCA Victor, 1997)
* &quot;Lausanne 1950&quot; (Swiss Radio Days Theatre De Beaulieu, May 13, 1950/TCB, 2005)

==See also==

*&quot;The Benny Goodman Story&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==

== External links ==
* Discography of American Historical Recordings as leader
* Discography of American Historical Recordings as director
* Benny Goodman Audio Collection, Rutgers University
*D. Russell Connor collection of Benny Goodman audio recordings, Institute of Jazz Studies
* Audio interview, May 8, 1980, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Benny Goodman papers, Yale University
* Benny Goodman scores, New York Public Library for the Performing Arts
* Biography at RedHotJazz
* Benny Goodman biography with audio
*D. Russell Connor collection of Benny Goodman interviews, Gilmore Music Library of Yale University.
* Benny Goodman recordings at the Discography of American Historical Recordings.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46755" start="0" end="22" title="Benny Goodman" label="Benjamin David Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8343" start="70" end="78" title="clarinet" label="clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="142" end="151" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q203775" start="256" end="261" title="Swing music" label="swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="262" end="271" title="big bands" label="big bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q581837" start="298" end="322" title="The Famous 1938 Carnegie Hall Jazz Concert" label="concert at Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="909" end="925" title="History of the Jews in the United States#Jewish immigration" label="Jewish emigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="935" end="949" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="1017" end="1023" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q977282" start="1027" end="1045" title="partitioned Poland" label="partitioned Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115712" start="1105" end="1111" title="Kaunas" label="Kaunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="1125" end="1144" title="Baltimore, Maryland" label="Baltimore, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914334" start="1253" end="1267" title="Maxwell Street" label="Maxwell Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301876" start="1524" end="1537" title="Douglass Park" label="Douglass Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050470" start="2001" end="2027" title="Chicago Symphony Orchestra" label="Chicago Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582905" start="2109" end="2119" title="Hull House" label="Hull House"/>
<link wikidata="Q202027" start="2512" end="2521" title="cornetist" label="cornetist"/>
<link wikidata="Q225131" start="2535" end="2550" title="Bix Beiderbecke" label="Bix Beiderbecke"/>
<link wikidata="Q659706" start="2585" end="2617" title="Illinois Institute of Technology" label="Illinois Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q492247" start="2988" end="3000" title="Jimmie Noone" label="Jimmie Noone"/>
<link wikidata="Q498495" start="3002" end="3014" title="Johnny Dodds" label="Johnny Dodds"/>
<link wikidata="Q475358" start="3020" end="3032" title="Leon Roppolo" label="Leon Roppolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22058987" start="3234" end="3264" title="Harrison Technical High School" label="Harrison Technical High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q816581" start="3433" end="3444" title="Ben Pollack" label="Ben Pollack"/>
<link wikidata="Q103651" start="3892" end="3904" title="Glenn Miller" label="Glenn Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470329" start="3943" end="3949" title="Victor Talking Machine Company" label="Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q313529" start="4015" end="4027" title="Tommy Dorsey" label="Tommy Dorsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344139" start="4033" end="4043" title="Joe Venuti" label="Joe Venuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625070" start="4082" end="4100" title="Nathaniel Shilkret" label="Nathaniel Shilkret"/>
<link wikidata="Q495464" start="4130" end="4141" title="Red Nichols" label="Red Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q304517" start="4143" end="4153" title="Ben Selvin" label="Ben Selvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q447255" start="4155" end="4164" title="Ted Lewis (musician)" label="Ted Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q167409" start="4170" end="4181" title="Isham Jones" label="Isham Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q994175" start="4199" end="4208" title="Brunswick Records" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366246" start="4326" end="4335" title="Room 1411" label="Room 1411"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438797" start="4548" end="4563" title="Scrappy Lambert" label="Scrappy Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919695" start="4568" end="4576" title="Melotone Records (US)" label="Melotone"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="4597" end="4605" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q504485" start="4732" end="4746" title="Jack Teagarden" label="Jack Teagarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q257389" start="4783" end="4797" title="Mildred Bailey" label="Mildred Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q104358" start="4847" end="4861" title="Billie Holiday" label="Billie Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907798" start="5010" end="5018" title="Moonglow (song)" label="Moonglow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986212" start="5128" end="5142" title="Bugle Call Rag" label="Bugle Call Rag"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532275" start="5197" end="5213" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Dance (radio)" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q549141" start="5221" end="5233" title="John Hammond (record producer)" label="John Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q505559" start="5240" end="5258" title="Fletcher Henderson" label="Fletcher Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163164" start="5646" end="5655" title="Get Happy (song)" label="Get Happy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10562009" start="5672" end="5687" title="Limehouse Blues (song)" label="Limehouse Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314367" start="5697" end="5708" title="Spud Murphy" label="Spud Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545718" start="5964" end="5971" title="National Biscuit Company" label="Nabisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q467087" start="6092" end="6104" title="Guy Lombardo" label="Guy Lombardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742066" start="6396" end="6413" title="King Porter Stomp" label="King Porter Stomp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560299" start="6444" end="6468" title="Sometimes I&amp;#x27;m Happy" label="Sometimes I&amp;#x27;m Happy"/>
<link wikidata="Q817087" start="6562" end="6577" title="Stanley Theatre, Pittsburgh" label="Stanley Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q491100" start="6797" end="6810" title="Bunny Berigan" label="Bunny Berigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q319980" start="6820" end="6830" title="Gene Krupa" label="Gene Krupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601878" start="6843" end="6853" title="Helen Ward (jazz singer)" label="Helen Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091058" start="6967" end="6976" title="Herb Caen" label="Herb Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q570287" start="7065" end="7076" title="Pismo Beach, California" label="Pismo Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683603" start="7217" end="7233" title="Palomar Ballroom" label="Palomar Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191388" start="7407" end="7411" title="KFWB" label="KFWB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658626" start="7960" end="7969" title="swing era" label="swing era"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294170" start="7984" end="7997" title="Donald Clarke (writer)" label="Donald Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699642" start="8218" end="8230" title="J. C. Squire" label="J. C. Squire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="8254" end="8263" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q282728" start="8479" end="8496" title="International Jewish conspiracy" label="Jewish conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q85017" start="8764" end="8776" title="Joseph Urban" label="Joseph Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q5990351" start="8982" end="9023" title="If I Could Be with You (One Hour Tonight)" label="If I Could Be with You (One Hour Tonight)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618804" start="9037" end="9063" title="Stompin&amp;#x27; at the Savoy" label="Stompin&amp;#x27; at the Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59328" start="9081" end="9092" title="Goody Goody" label="Goody Goody"/>
<link wikidata="Q961968" start="9185" end="9197" title="Helen Oakley Dance" label="Helen Oakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="9363" end="9382" title="Racial integration" label="racially integrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q506052" start="9489" end="9501" title="Teddy Wilson" label="Teddy Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q684172" start="9656" end="9661" title="Raja" label="Rajah"/>
<link wikidata="Q658492" start="9679" end="9703" title="Slingerland Drum Company" label="Slingerland Drum Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169023" start="9884" end="9909" title="The Big Broadcast of 1937" label="The Big Broadcast of 1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025852" start="10113" end="10126" title="Camel Caravan" label="Camel Caravan"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="10487" end="10500" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673255" start="11170" end="11177" title="Acetate disc" label="acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018149" start="11564" end="11578" title="William Savory" label="William Savory"/>
<link wikidata="Q581837" start="11827" end="11869" title="The Famous 1938 Carnegie Hall Jazz Concert" label="The Famous 1938 Carnegie Hall Jazz Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q126677" start="11934" end="11951" title="Mary Lou Williams" label="Mary Lou Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q356490" start="12057" end="12074" title="Charlie Christian" label="Charlie Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="12368" end="12381" title="Beverly Hills, California" label="Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367923" start="12456" end="12465" title="Rose Room" label="Rose Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="13107" end="13115" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="13251" end="13261" title="RCA Records" label="RCA Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="13429" end="13434" title="ASCAP" label="ASCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428137" start="13783" end="13789" title="V-Disc" label="V-Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q103767" start="14093" end="14107" title="Charlie Parker" label="Charlie Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q105513" start="14191" end="14196" title="bebop" label="bebop"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="14245" end="14252" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001203" start="14306" end="14317" title="Buddy Greco" label="Buddy Greco"/>
<link wikidata="Q12344256" start="14319" end="14328" title="Zoot Sims" label="Zoot Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740384" start="14334" end="14346" title="Wardell Gray" label="Wardell Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q743673" start="14477" end="14487" title="Mel Powell" label="Mel Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q109612" start="14554" end="14569" title="Thelonious Monk" label="Thelonious Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q348837" start="14796" end="14811" title="Stan Hasselgård" label="Stan Hasselgård"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907449" start="15237" end="15250" title="Reginald Kell" label="Reginald Kell"/>
<link wikidata="Q175234" start="15466" end="15476" title="embouchure" label="embouchure"/>
<link wikidata="Q714793" start="15849" end="15858" title="Contrasts (Bartók)" label="Contrasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q83326" start="15868" end="15879" title="Béla Bartók" label="Béla Bartók"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126984" start="15881" end="15913" title="Clarinet Concerto No. 2 (Arnold)" label="Clarinet Concerto No. 2, Op. 115"/>
<link wikidata="Q313554" start="15917" end="15931" title="Malcolm Arnold" label="Malcolm Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352656" start="15982" end="15994" title="Morton Gould" label="Morton Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004783" start="15996" end="16025" title="Clarinet Sonata (Poulenc)" label="Sonata for Clarinet and Piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q191408" start="16029" end="16044" title="Francis Poulenc" label="Francis Poulenc"/>
<link wikidata="Q18663619" start="16050" end="16067" title="Clarinet Concerto (Copland)" label="Clarinet Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="16071" end="16084" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240053" start="16092" end="16117" title="Prelude, Fugue, and Riffs" label="Prelude, Fugue, and Riffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="16127" end="16144" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q349357" start="16166" end="16178" title="Woody Herman" label="Woody Herman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="16291" end="16306" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046867" start="16320" end="16334" title="Ebony Concerto (Stravinsky)" label="Ebony Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097994" start="16464" end="16480" title="Clarinet Quintet (Mozart)" label="Clarinet Quintet"/>
<link wikidata="Q864369" start="16503" end="16533" title="Boston Symphony Orchestra" label="Boston Symphony String Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528686" start="16541" end="16559" title="Berkshire Festival" label="Berkshire Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056501" start="16608" end="16636" title="Clarinet Concerto (Mozart)" label="Clarinet Concerto in A major"/>
<link wikidata="Q864369" start="16655" end="16680" title="Boston Symphony Orchestra" label="Boston Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q503940" start="16694" end="16707" title="Charles Munch (conductor)" label="Charles Munch"/>
<link wikidata="Q154812" start="16752" end="16757" title="Carl Maria von Weber" label="Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169023" start="17516" end="17541" title="The Big Broadcast of 1937" label="The Big Broadcast of 1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124807" start="17555" end="17570" title="Hollywood Hotel (film)" label="Hollywood Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113107" start="17591" end="17602" title="Syncopation (1942 film)" label="Syncopation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757986" start="17623" end="17638" title="The Powers Girl" label="The Powers Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108556" start="17659" end="17677" title="Stage Door Canteen (film)" label="Stage Door Canteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734652" start="17698" end="17722" title="The Gang&amp;#x27;s All Here (1943 film)" label="The Gang&amp;#x27;s All Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655595" start="17743" end="17761" title="Sweet and Low-Down" label="Sweet and Low-Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q754736" start="17820" end="17835" title="Make Mine Music" label="Make Mine Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258019" start="17859" end="17873" title="A Song Is Born" label="A Song Is Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q348459" start="18001" end="18014" title="George Benson" label="George Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611327" start="18391" end="18407" title="Alfredo Antonini" label="Alfredo Antonini"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619402" start="18640" end="18655" title="Manhattan House" label="Manhattan House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798507" start="19022" end="19038" title="Arthur Duckworth" label="Arthur Duckworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q790654" start="19749" end="19766" title="Avery Fisher Hall" label="Avery Fisher Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q961314" start="20080" end="20091" title="Allan Reuss" label="Allan Reuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q234413" start="20258" end="20274" title="Anita O&amp;#x27;Day" label="Anita O&amp;#x27;Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q444180" start="20279" end="20292" title="Helen Forrest" label="Helen Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="20880" end="20898" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="20915" end="20927" title="Jim Crow law" label="Jim Crow law"/>
<link wikidata="Q313525" start="20993" end="21007" title="Lionel Hampton" label="Lionel Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="21123" end="21138" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6168169" start="21221" end="21225" title="Jazz (TV series)" label="Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455718" start="21342" end="21348" title="nigger" label="nigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="21642" end="21662" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052535" start="21678" end="21704" title="Cold War (1953–1962)" label="that phase of the Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q666088" start="21831" end="21844" title="Jimmy Knepper" label="Jimmy Knepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q343903" start="21906" end="21915" title="Bill Crow" label="Bill Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q935843" start="22100" end="22133" title="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award" label="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253128" start="22233" end="22250" title="DownBeat Jazz Hall of Fame" label="Jazz Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952127" start="22306" end="22355" title="National Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame" label="National Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="22474" end="22496" title="University of Illinois" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q519349" start="22498" end="22539" title="Southern Illinois University Edwardsville" label="Southern Illinois University Edwardsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q49109" start="22541" end="22553" title="Bard College" label="Bard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813289" start="22708" end="22716" title="Melodeon Records" label="Melodeon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22732" end="22812" title="Original Benny Goodman Trio and Quartet Sessions, Vol. 1: After You&amp;#x27;ve Gone" label="Original Benny Goodman Trio and Quartet Sessions, Vol. 1: After You&amp;#x27;ve Gone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698144" start="22897" end="22905" title="Air Play" label="Air Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202536" start="22940" end="22971" title="Sing, Sing, Sing (With a Swing)" label="Sing, Sing, Sing (With a Swing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="23032" end="23040" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753587" start="23162" end="23186" title="From Spirituals to Swing" label="From Spirituals to Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034661" start="23194" end="23202" title="Vanguard Records" label="Vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q581837" start="23218" end="23260" title="The Famous 1938 Carnegie Hall Jazz Concert" label="The Famous 1938 Carnegie Hall Jazz Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="23577" end="23584" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654797" start="23600" end="23614" title="Swedish Pastry" label="Swedish Pastry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254888" start="23622" end="23628" title="Dragon Records" label="Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="23925" end="23932" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160677" start="24129" end="24163" title="Peggy Lee Sings with Benny Goodman" label="Peggy Lee Sings with Benny Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385949" start="24171" end="24178" title="Harmony Records" label="Harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716527" start="24421" end="24453" title="The Benny Goodman Treasure Chest" label="The Benny Goodman Treasure Chest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881437" start="24461" end="24464" title="MGM Records" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889987" start="24544" end="24567" title="Benny Goodman in Moscow" label="Benny Goodman in Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24601" end="24638" title="Weber Clarinet Concertos Nos. 1 and 2" label="Weber Clarinet Concertos Nos. 1 and 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536003" start="24710" end="24718" title="Philips Records" label="Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889985" start="24734" end="24753" title="Benny Goodman Today" label="Benny Goodman Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q935090" start="24761" end="24767" title="London Records" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q885977" start="25097" end="25105" title="Bluebird Records" label="Bluebird"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25262" end="25325" title="The Benny Goodman Sextet Featuring Charlie Christian: 1939–1941" label="The Benny Goodman Sextet Featuring Charlie Christian: 1939–1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358400" start="25342" end="25348" title="Legacy Recordings" label="Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942508" start="25705" end="25729" title="Musical Heritage Society" label="Musical Heritage Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q16246510" start="25745" end="25791" title="The Complete RCA Victor Small Group Recordings" label="The Complete RCA Victor Small Group Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25825" end="25838" title="Lausanne 1950" label="Lausanne 1950"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25863" end="25896" title="Theatre De Beaulieu, May 13, 1950" label="Theatre De Beaulieu, May 13, 1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248334" start="25930" end="25953" title="The Benny Goodman Story" label="The Benny Goodman Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800691" start="26664" end="26709" title="Discography of American Historical Recordings" label="Discography of American Historical Recordings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53862" wikidata="Q12206942" url="?curid=53862" title="Darth Vader">
<text>Darth Vader () is a fictional character in the &quot;Star Wars&quot; franchise. He was first introduced in the original film trilogy as one of the leaders of the Galactic Empire. The prequel trilogy chronicles his transformation from the Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker into the Sith Lord Darth Vader. His metamorphosis begins when he is lured to the dark side of the Force by Chancellor Palpatine, who later becomes the Emperor. After a lightsaber battle with his former mentor Obi-Wan Kenobi, Vader is severely injured and is transformed into a cyborg. He serves Palpatine for over two decades, hunting down the remaining Jedi and attempting to crush the Rebel Alliance. When Palpatine tries to kill Vader&#x27;s son, Luke Skywalker, the Sith Lord turns against his master and destroys him. Vader is the husband of Padmé Amidala, the father of Luke and his twin sister Leia Organa, and the grandfather of Ben Solo (later known as Kylo Ren).

David Prowse physically portrays Vader in the original trilogy, while James Earl Jones provides his voice in all of the films and some television series. Sebastian Shaw portrays Anakin in &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot; (1983), while Jake Lloyd and Hayden Christensen portray Anakin in the prequel trilogy, with Christensen reprising the role in the series &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi&quot; (2022) and &quot;Ahsoka&quot; (2023). In the standalone film &quot;Rogue One&quot; (2016), Vader is portrayed by Spencer Wilding and Daniel Naprous. The character also appears in novels, comics, and video games. He has become an iconic villain of cinema.

== Creation and development ==

=== Darth Vader ===
As part of the development for the original &quot;Star Wars&quot; film&quot;,&quot; George Lucas hired the artist Ralph McQuarrie to create conceptual images for the characters. For Vader, Lucas asked McQuarrie to depict a &quot;very tall, dark fluttering figure that had a spooky feeling like it came in on the wind.&quot; Because the script described Vader traveling between spaceships, McQuarrie suggested that he should wear a space suit. Lucas agreed, and McQuarrie created Vader&#x27;s iconic mask by combining a full-face breathing mask with a samurai helmet. A 1975 production painting by McQuarrie depicts Vader engaged in a lightsaber duel with Deak Starkiller, who later became Luke Skywalker. Vader is shown wearing black armor, a flowing cape and a skull-like mask and helmet. This early design was similar to Vader&#x27;s final appearance.

Working from McQuarrie&#x27;s concepts, the costume designer John Mollo devised an outfit that combined clerical robes, a motorcycle suit, a German military helmet, and a military gas mask. The prop sculptor Brian Muir created the helmet and armor. The sound of Vader&#x27;s breathing was created by the film&#x27;s sound designer, Ben Burtt, using modified recordings of a scuba breathing apparatus. The sound effect is trademarked at the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.

Lucas has provided differing accounts of how the name &quot;Darth Vader&quot; originated. In a 2005 interview with &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, he claimed it was a modified version of &quot;Dark Father.&quot; On another occasion, he said it was inspired by the phrase &quot;Dark Water&quot;. It is also possible that &quot;Darth Vader&quot; originated from the name of Gary Vader, a boy who went to high school with Lucas.

The names of various &quot;Star Wars&quot; characters have been altered in countries outside the United States. In France, Vader&#x27;s name was changed to () starting with the original film. Although the names of some other characters have been reverted to the English versions over the years, Vader is still referred to as &quot;Dark Vador&quot; in recent French-language &quot;Star Wars&quot; media. The title &quot;Darth&quot; has been replaced with &quot;Dark&quot; for other Sith Lords as well. In Italian-language editions of &quot;Star Wars&quot; films, Darth Vader was called () starting with the original trilogy. In 2004, the dubbing director for the Italian-language version of &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot; (2005) asked Italian fans to decide which name to use in the film; the Italian name was chosen. However, the name was switched to &quot;Darth Vader&quot; for &quot;The Force Awakens&quot; (2015). In Iceland, Darth Vader&#x27;s name is , which means &quot;black-head&quot;.

=== Anakin Skywalker ===
The films &quot;Swiss Family Robinson&quot; (1960) and &quot;Battle of the Bulge&quot; (1965) influenced the original &quot;Star Wars&quot; trilogy, but Lucas&#x27;s publicist has denied that Anakin Skywalker was named after Ken Annakin, the director of those films. The original surname of Anakin and Luke was &quot;Starkiller&quot;, and it remained in the script until a few months into filming &quot;Star Wars&quot;. It was dropped due to what Lucas called &quot;unpleasant connotations&quot; with Charles Manson, who became a &quot;star killer&quot; in 1969 when he murdered actress Sharon Tate. Lucas replaced &quot;Starkiller&quot; with &quot;Skywalker&quot;.

&quot;The Phantom Menace&quot; introduced the possibility that Anakin could be the Chosen One of an ancient Jedi prophecy, who is destined to bring balance to the Force. Lucas stated in an interview that &quot;Anakin is the Chosen One. Even when Anakin turns into Darth Vader, he is still the Chosen One.&quot; Hayden Christensen said of Anakin: &quot;He believes that he&#x27;s the Chosen One. He&#x27;s not doing wrong things knowing that it&#x27;s having a negative impact. So there&#x27;s that sort of naivety to him...and it makes him more human in a lot of ways.&quot; Lucas later clarified that the plot element of Anakin&#x27;s virgin birth was meant to align the character with heroes from mythology in general and not specifically Jesus.

After completing principal photography for &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot; in 2003, Lucas made changes to Anakin&#x27;s character by rewriting his turn to the dark side. He accomplished this through editing the principal footage and filming new scenes during pickups in London in 2004. In previous versions of the script, Anakin had several reasons for turning to the dark side, including his sincere belief that the Jedi were plotting to seize control of the Republic. Although he retains this belief in the finished film, Lucas&#x27;s changes emphasized his desire to rescue Padmé from death. Thus, in the theatrical version of &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot;, Anakin falls to the dark side primarily to save Padmé.

Anakin&#x27;s apprentice Ahsoka Tano was introduced in the 2008 animated film &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;. Giving Anakin responsibility for a Padawan was meant to place the character in a role that forced him to become more cautious and responsible. It was also meant to provide him with insight about his relationship with his own master, Obi-Wan Kenobi, and show how their relationship matured. Anakin&#x27;s relationship with Ahsoka was seen as an essential story arc spanning both the film and the 2008 television series &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;.

== Portrayals ==

=== Darth Vader ===
David Prowse, a bodybuilder and actor, portrays Vader in the original trilogy. Prowse was originally offered the role of Chewbacca, but turned it down, as he wanted to play the villain. Bob Anderson, a former Olympic fencer, portrays Vader during lightsaber fight scenes in &quot;The Empire Strikes Back&quot; and &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot;. Lucas chose to have a different actor provide Vader&#x27;s voice, because he felt Prowse&#x27;s West Country English accent was inappropriate for the character. The director originally considered Orson Welles for the role, but selected James Earl Jones instead after deciding that Welles&#x27;s voice would be too recognizable to audiences. Jones initially felt his role was too small to warrant recognition, and he chose to be uncredited in &quot;Star Wars&quot; and &quot;The Empire Strikes Back.&quot; He was finally credited in &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot; in 1983.

When filming the scene in &quot;The Empire Strikes Back&quot; in which Vader confesses he is Luke&#x27;s father, Prowse was given modified dialogue to read that did not exist in the script. He was known for repeatedly leaking information to the public, and the filmmakers wanted to keep Vader&#x27;s revelation a secret until the film was released. Prowse was asked to read the line &quot;Obi-Wan killed your father&quot; instead of &quot;No, I am your father.&quot; Only the director, the producers, and Mark Hamill knew the actual line, which was dubbed in later by Jones. Prowse did not know the real line until he viewed the finished film.

Hayden Christensen portrays Vader in &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot;, while Brock Peters provides his voice in the &quot;Star Wars&quot; radio series. Scott Lawrence voices Vader in video games, including the 2019 virtual reality series &quot;Vader Immortal&quot;. Matt Sloan voices the Sith Lord in both video games and television productions. Both Spencer Wilding and Daniel Naprous portray Vader in &quot;Rogue One&quot;, with Jones providing the voice. Jones also voices Vader in the &quot;Star Wars Holiday Special&quot; (1978) and the animated series &quot;Star Wars Rebels&quot;. In September 2022, it was confirmed that Jones would retire from voicing the character. His voice was digitally recreated by the company Respeecher for use in the series &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi&quot;, and he later signed over the rights to his voice for future &quot;Star Wars&quot; productions.

=== Anakin Skywalker ===
Near the end of &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot;, Luke removes Vader&#x27;s mask. Although Prowse had portrayed the Sith Lord throughout the trilogy, the filmmakers wanted a more experienced actor to play the unmasked Vader. Sebastian Shaw was selected for the role, which appears as &quot;Anakin Skywalker&quot; in the credits. Shaw&#x27;s presence on set was kept secret from all but the minimum cast and crew, and Shaw was contractually obligated not to discuss any film secrets with anyone, even his family. In the final scene of the film, Shaw portrays Anakin&#x27;s Force spirit. His likeness in this scene was replaced with that of Hayden Christensen in the 2004 DVD release.

When &quot;The Phantom Menace&quot; was being developed, hundreds of actors were auditioned for the role of young Anakin before Jake Lloyd was cast. Rick McCallum, the film&#x27;s producer, said that Lloyd was &quot;smart, mischievous and love[d] anything mechanicaljust like Anakin.&quot; When casting the role of 19-year-old Anakin for &quot;Attack of the Clones&quot;, the filmmakers reviewed about 1,500 candidates before selecting Hayden Christensen. The Canadian actor reprises the role in &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot; and in the series &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi&quot; and &quot;Ahsoka&quot;. His performance in &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot; garnered him a nomination for the Saturn Award for Best Actor, while his portrayal of Anakin in &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi&quot; earned him the Saturn Award for Best Guest Performance in a Streaming Series.

Anakin is voiced by Mat Lucas and Frankie Ryan Manriquez in the 2003 animated micro-series &quot;Clone Wars&quot;, and is voiced by Kirby Morrow in several television productions. Matt Lanter provides the character&#x27;s voice in video games and in various television productions, including &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;, &quot;Rebels&quot;, &quot;Forces of Destiny&quot; and &quot;Star Wars: Tales.&quot; Lanter also voices Anakin in the film version of &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;. During the second-season finale of &quot;Rebels&quot;, Lanter&#x27;s voice is sometimes blended with the voice of James Earl Jones.

== Appearances ==
=== Original trilogy ===

Vader was introduced in &quot;Star Wars&quot; (1977) as a cyborg commander serving the Galactic Empire. He and Grand Moff Tarkin have been tasked with recovering architectural plans for the Death Star battle station, which were stolen by the Rebel Alliance. Vader captures and interrogates the Rebel leader Princess Leia, who has sent the plans to Vader&#x27;s former master Obi-Wan Kenobi. During Leia&#x27;s rescue by Obi-Wan&#x27;s allies Luke Skywalker and Han Solo, Vader strikes down his mentor in a lightsaber duel. After placing a tracking device aboard Han&#x27;s ship, Vader locates the Rebel base on Yavin 4. When the Rebels attack the Death Star, Vader pursues Luke in his TIE fighter. Before he can shoot Luke down, Han intervenes and sends Vader&#x27;s ship spiraling off course, which allows Luke to destroy the Death Star.

In &quot;The Empire Strikes Back&quot; (1980), Vader has become obsessed with finding Luke, who is now a Rebel commander. Vader&#x27;s forces assault the Rebel base on Hoth, but the Rebels escape. Vader convinces the Emperor that Luke could be a valuable ally if he were turned to the dark side of the Force. Vader engages bounty hunters to follow Luke&#x27;s companions, and compels the Cloud City administrator Lando Calrissian to set a trap for them. After Han, Leia, Chewbacca and C-3PO arrive, Vader tortures and freezes Han in carbonite and gives him to the bounty hunter Boba Fett. When Luke lands on Cloud City to help his friends, Vader overpowers him and severs his hand. He tells Luke that he is his father, and tries to persuade him to join the dark side and help him overthrow the Emperor. Horrified, Luke escapes through an air shaft. Vader telepathically tells Luke that it is his destiny to join the dark side.

Vader and the Emperor supervise the construction of the second Death Star in &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot; (1983). Believing there is still good in his father, Luke surrenders to Vader in an attempt to bring him back from the dark side. Vader takes his son to the Death Star and brings him before the Emperor, who attempts to seduce him to the dark side. Luke lashes out at the Emperor with his lightsaber, but Vader blocks his strike, and the two of them duel once again. As Luke regains control of his emotions, Vader senses that he has a sister, and threatens to turn her to the dark side if Luke will not submit. Enraged, Luke overpowers Vader and severs his hand. The Emperor then betrays his apprentice by ordering Luke to kill Vader and take his place, but Luke refuses.

Enraged, the Emperor begins torturing Luke with Force lightning, leading to Luke begging his father to save him. Unwilling to see his son die, Vader throws the Emperor down a reactor shaft to his death, but is mortally wounded in the process. Luke carries him to a docking bay, where Imperial forces are evacuating in the face of a Rebel assault. At Vader&#x27;s request, Luke removes his father&#x27;s mask and looks upon the face of Anakin Skywalker for the first time. The redeemed Anakin Skywalker encourages him to go and tells him that he has saved him, before peacefully dying. On Endor, Luke burns his father&#x27;s body on a funeral pyre. As the Rebels celebrate the destruction of the Death Star and the fall of the Empire, Luke sees Anakin&#x27;s spirit appear alongside the spirits of Obi-Wan and Yoda.

=== Prequel trilogy ===

The first film of the prequel trilogy, &quot;The Phantom Menace&quot; (1999), takes place 32 years before &quot;Star Wars&quot;. Anakin is a nine-year-old slave living on Tatooine with his mother Shmi. He is a gifted pilot and mechanic, and has built his own protocol droid, C-3PO. The Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn meets Anakin after making an emergency landing on Tatooine with Padmé Amidala, the queen of Naboo. Qui-Gon learns that Anakin was conceived without a father and can see the future. He becomes convinced that Anakin is the &quot;Chosen One&quot; of Jedi prophecy who will bring balance to the Force. After winning his freedom in a podrace wager, Anakin departs the planet with Qui-Gon to be trained as a Jedi, leaving his mother behind.

During the journey to Coruscant, Anakin forms a bond with Padmé. Qui-Gon asks the Jedi Council for permission to train Anakin, but they refuse, concerned that the fear he exhibits makes him vulnerable to the dark side. During a conflict with the Trade Federation, Anakin helps end the blockade of Naboo by destroying a control ship. Qui-Gon is mortally wounded in a duel with the Sith Lord Darth Maul, and with his dying breath asks his apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi to train Anakin. With the council&#x27;s reluctant approval, Anakin becomes Obi-Wan&#x27;s apprentice. Palpatine, the newly elected Chancellor of the Galactic Republic, takes an interest in Anakin and his career as a Jedi.

&quot;Attack of the Clones&quot; (2002) is set ten years after &quot;The Phantom Menace&quot;. Anakin has grown powerful but arrogant, and believes that Obi-Wan is holding him back. After rescuing Padmé from an assassination attempt, he travels with her to Naboo as her bodyguard. They begin to fall in love, despite a Jedi Code prohibition against romantic relationships. Sensing that his mother is in danger, Anakin travels with Padmé to Tatooine and finds that she was kidnapped by Tusken Raiders. He locates her at a Tusken campsite, where she dies in his arms. Overcome with grief and rage, Anakin massacres the Tusken tribe. Padmé is disturbed by what he has done, but comforts him nevertheless. Anakin and Padmé then go to Geonosis to aid , only to be captured by the Sith Lord Count Dooku. Facing execution, Anakin and Padmé profess their love for each other. They are saved from death by an army of Jedi and clone troopers, led by the Jedi Masters Mace Windu and Yoda. Anakin and then confront Dooku, but he defeats them both and severs Anakin&#x27;s arm. After being rescued by Yoda, Anakin is fitted with a robotic arm and marries Padmé in a secret ceremony.&quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot; (2005) is set three years after &quot;Attack of the Clones&quot;. Anakin, who is now a Jedi Knight and a hero of the Clone Wars, leads a mission with to rescue Chancellor Palpatine from the Separatist commander General Grievous. The two Jedi again battle Count Dooku, whom Anakin overpowers and then slaughters at Palpatine&#x27;s urging. Anakin returns to Coruscant to reunite with Padmé, who tells him she is pregnant. Although initially excited, Anakin soon begins to have nightmares about his wife dying in childbirth.

Palpatine appoints Anakin to the Jedi Council as his personal representative, but the council is suspicious of the Chancellor. They decline to grant Anakin the rank of Jedi Master and instruct him to spy on Palpatine, which upsets Anakin. Later, Palpatine reveals to Anakin that he is the Sith Lord Darth Sidious, the mastermind of the Clone Wars. He suggests that Anakin can prevent Padmé&#x27;s death by using the dark side of the Force. Anakin reports Sidious&#x27; treachery to Windu, who confronts and subdues the Sith Lord. Desperate to save Padmé, Anakin betrays Windu by cutting off his hand, which allows the Sith Lord to kill him. Anakin then betrays the Jedi by pledging himself to the Sith, and Sidious appoints him Darth Vader.

On Sidious&#x27; orders, Vader slaughters all the Jedi in the Jedi Temple, including the younglings. After learning what her husband has done, a distraught Padmé travels to Mustafar and pleads with him to abandon the dark side, but he refuses. Believing that Padmé and are conspiring against him, Vader uses the Force to strangle his wife into unconsciousness. He then engages in a lightsaber duel that ends with severing his limbs and leaving him for dead on the banks of a lava flow, where he catches fire and sustains severe burns. Sidious finds the barely-alive Vader and takes him to Coruscant, where his mutilated body is covered in black armor that keeps him alive. When Vader asks if Padmé is safe, Sidious lies to him and says that his strangulation killed her, which causes Vader to scream in anguish. At the end of the film, Vader supervises the construction of the first Death Star alongside Sidious and Tarkin.

=== &quot;The Rise of Skywalker&quot; ===
Anakin&#x27;s voice is heard briefly in the third film of the sequel trilogy, &quot;The Rise of Skywalker&quot; (2019), set 31 years after the events of &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot;. During Rey&#x27;s confrontation with the resurrected Darth Sidious, she hears the voices of various deceased Jedi, including Anakin. He encourages her to return balance to the Force like he once did.

=== &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; (film) ===
In the 2008 animated film &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;, set shortly after the events of &quot;Attack of the Clones&quot;, Yoda assigns Anakin an apprentice, Ahsoka Tano. Anakin is at first reluctant to accept this responsibility. He calls Ahsoka &quot;Snips&quot; for her &quot;snippy&quot; attitude, while Ahsoka refers to him as &quot;Skyguy&quot;. After earning Anakin&#x27;s respect during a dangerous mission, Ahsoka joins him on a quest to rescue Jabba the Hutt&#x27;s infant son, Rotta. Her impetuousness both annoys and endears her to Anakin, and he develops a friendly affection towards her.

=== &quot;Rogue One&quot; ===
In the standalone film &quot;Rogue One&quot; (2016), set immediately before the events of &quot;A New Hope&quot;, Vader summons the weapons developer Orson Krennic to his castle on Mustafar. He confronts him about his handling of the Death Star project and the destruction of Jedha City. When Krennic asks Vader for an audience with the Emperor, Vader refuses. At the end of the film, Vader boards a Rebel flagship and kills several Rebel soldiers as he tries to recover the stolen Death Star plans. Vader&#x27;s role in the film was different in early versions of the story. In Gary Whitta&#x27;s original pitch, the Sith Lord appeared on Scarif and slaughtered a Rebel blockade. In another early storyline, Vader killed Krennic for his failure to prevent the Rebels from stealing the Death Star schematics.

=== Television series ===
==== &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; ====
Anakin is featured in all seasons of &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; (2008–2014, 2020), set between the events of &quot;Attack of the Clones&quot; and &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot;. As a Jedi Knight, he leads the 501st Legion on missions with both his master Obi-Wan and his apprentice Ahsoka. Some of Anakin&#x27;s actions taken out of concern for Ahsoka violate the Jedi code, such as torturing prisoners who may know her location. Throughout the series there are references to Anakin&#x27;s eventual fall to the dark side, including visions of his future as Vader and his disillusionment with the Jedi Council after they wrongly accuse Ahsoka of bombing the Jedi Temple. While Ahsoka is later forgiven after the true culprit is found, she nonetheless chooses to leave the Jedi Order. Dooku&#x27;s death at Anakin&#x27;s hands during &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot; is references by Obi Wan. Anakin appears as Vader in the final scene of the series finale, which occurs after &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot;. He investigates the crash site of a &quot;Venator&quot;-class Star Destroyer, which was demolished during Order 66. Finding one of Ahsoka&#x27;s lightsabers among the wreckage, he assumes that his former Padawan has perished.

==== &quot;Star Wars Rebels&quot; ====
Vader appears in the animated series &quot;Star Wars Rebels&quot; (2014–2018), which takes place fourteen years after the conclusion of &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;. The Sith Lord makes minor appearances throughout the first season, and plays a larger role in the second season. At the beginning of the series, he leads a squad of Force-sensitive Imperial Inquisitors who kill Jedi and children. He dispatches the Grand Inquisitor to hunt a Rebel cell on Lothal, and later arrives personally to deal with the Rebel threat after the Inquisitor is killed.

In the second-season premiere, Vader orchestrates the murder of Imperial Minister Maketh Tua, who tried to defect to the Rebellion, and confronts the two Jedi Kanan Jarrus and Ezra Bridger. When Vader attacks the fleet of the Phoenix Squadron, he discovers that Ahsoka is still alive and has joined the Rebel Alliance. She is overwhelmed when she recognizes Anakin under a &quot;layer of hate&quot;. The Emperor then orders Vader to send another Inquisitor to capture her. Later in the season, Ahsoka has a vision in which Anakin blames her for his fall to the dark side. In the season finale, Ahsoka duels with Vader inside a Sith Temple. As the episode concludes, Vader emerges from the ruins of the temple, while Ahsoka&#x27;s fate is left unknown.

==== &quot;Forces of Destiny&quot; ====
Anakin appears in multiple episodes of the animated web series &quot;Forces of Destiny&quot; (2017–2018).

==== &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi&quot; ====
Hayden Christensen portrays both Anakin and Vader in the 2022 miniseries &quot;Obi-Wan Kenobi,&quot; set a decade after &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot; and 9 years before &quot;A New Hope&quot;. The series reveals that for a decade after their duel on Mustafar, Obi-Wan believed his fallen apprentice to be dead. While attempting to draw out of hiding, the Imperial Inquisitor Reva Sevander tells him that Anakin is still alive. Vader begins hunting , which eventually leads them to duel again. Although Vader initially overpowers his former master, recovers his strength and wounds Vader multiple times. He slashes open Vader&#x27;s helmet to partially reveal his face, then leaves him, weakened and wheezing. Flashback sequences in the series depict Anakin training under in the years preceding the Clone Wars, as well as a newly minted Vader carrying out the massacre at the Jedi Temple.

==== &quot;Ahsoka&quot;====
Hayden Christensen portrays Anakin in &quot;Ahsoka&quot; (2023), which takes place after the original trilogy. Anakin appears in spirit-form to his former apprentice Ahsoka in the World Between Worlds, an ethereal realm that exists outside of time and space. He leads her through visions of their shared past together, including her training, their battles during the Clone Wars, her departure from the Jedi Order and his fall to the dark side. Industrial Light and Magic used &quot;de-aging&quot; technology to make the 42-year-old Christensen appear younger.

=== Video games ===
Vader is featured in the three-episode virtual reality game series &quot;Vader Immortal&quot;, which is set between &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot; and &quot;Rogue One&quot;. The first episode became available with the launch of the Oculus Quest virtual reality headset in May 2019, while the last was released in November of the same year. The series was later released for the Oculus Rift. In August 2020, all three episodes were released for PlayStation VR.

Vader makes a brief appearance at the end of &quot;Jedi: Fallen Order&quot; (2019). He kills the Second Sister for her failure to secure a Jedi Holocron that could lead the Empire to a number of Force-sensitive children. He then attempts to personally take the Holocron from Cal Kestis, who barely manages to escape. Vader returns as a boss in the sequel, &quot;Jedi: Survivor&quot; (2023), where he leads an Imperial assault on a Jedi hideout on the planet Jedha. He duels Cere Junda, whom he manages to slay after a prolonged battle.

Both Vader and Anakin are playable characters in every Lego &quot;Star Wars&quot; video game. Vader is a playable character and a boss in &quot;Disney Infinity 3.0&quot;, and can be unlocked as a playable character for a limited time in &quot;Disney Magic Kingdoms&quot;. A bird version of Vader appears as a playable character and a boss in &quot;Angry Birds Star Wars&quot; and its sequel.

=== Novels ===
&quot;Star Wars: Lords of the Sith&quot; was one of four canon novels released between 2014 and 2015. In it, Vader and Palpatine find themselves hunted by revolutionaries on the planet Ryloth.

=== Comics ===
The 25-issue Marvel comic series &quot;Darth Vader&quot; (2015–2016) focuses on the Sith Lord in the aftermath of the Death Star&#x27;s destruction, as well as his life after learning about his son&#x27;s existence. The series takes place parallel to the 2015 series &quot;Star Wars&quot;, in which Vader and Luke meet; the two series have a crossover titled &quot;Vader Down&quot;. A continuation series set between &quot;The Empire Strikes Back&quot; and &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot; debuted in 2020. The first few issues focus on Vader exacting revenge on those who concealed Luke; he also visits Padmé&#x27;s tomb on Naboo and encounters her handmaidens. A subsequent story arc depicts Vader being tested by the Emperor. The five-issue series &quot;Obi-Wan &amp; Anakin&quot; (2016) depicts the lives of the two Jedi between &quot;The Phantom Menace&quot; and &quot;Attack of the Clones&quot;.

Between 2017 and 2018, Charles Soule wrote a prequel-era series, also called &quot;Darth Vader&quot; (sometimes subtitled &quot;Dark Lord of the Sith&quot;). It begins immediately after Vader wakes up in his armor at the end of &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot; and explores his emotional transformation upon learning of Padmé&#x27;s death, his adjustment to his mechanical suit, how he creates his red-bladed lightsaber, and his hunting of Jedi in the Inquisitor program. Its final arc, which depicts the construction of Vader&#x27;s fortress on Mustafar, implies that Palpatine used the Force to conceive Anakin &quot;in utero&quot;, as some had theorized that &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot; indicates. A Lucasfilm story group member later clarified that &quot;This is all in Anakin&#x27;s head&quot;.

A five-issue limited series titled &quot;Vader: Dark Visions&quot;, was released in 2019. &quot;Vader Down&quot; writer Jason Aaron wrote part of the miniseries &quot;Darth Vader: Black, White &amp; Red&quot;, an extension of a Marvel event highlighting fan-favorite characters.

== &quot;Star Wars Legends&quot; ==

Following the acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company in 2012, most of the licensed &quot;Star Wars&quot; Expanded Universe material produced between 1977 and 2014 was rebranded as &quot;Star Wars Legends&quot; and declared non-canon to the franchise. The &quot;Legends&quot; works comprise a separate narrative universe.

=== Books ===
Vader is featured prominently in novels set in the &quot;Star Wars&quot; universe. In the 1978 novel &quot;Splinter of the Mind&#x27;s Eye&quot; by Alan Dean Foster, Vader meets Luke for the first time and engages him in a lightsaber duel that ends with Luke cutting off Vader&#x27;s arm and Vader falling into a deep pit. &quot;Shadows of the Empire&quot; (1996) reveals that Vader is conflicted about trying to turn his son to the dark side, and knows deep down that he still has good in him.

Vader&#x27;s supposedly indestructible glove is the MacGuffin of the young-reader&#x27;s book &quot;The Glove of Darth Vader&quot; (1992). Anakin Skywalker&#x27;s redeemed spirit appears in &quot;The Truce at Bakura&quot; (1993), set a few days after the end of &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot;. He appears to Leia, imploring her forgiveness. Leia condemns Anakin for his crimes and banishes him from her life. He promises that he will be there for her when she needs him, and disappears. In &quot;Tatooine Ghost&quot; (2003), Leia learns to forgive her father after learning about his childhood as a slave and his mother&#x27;s traumatic death. In &quot;The Unifying Force&quot; (2003), Anakin tells his grandson Jacen Solo to &quot;stand firm&quot; in his battle with the Supreme Overlord of the Yuuzhan Vong.

Upon the release of the prequel films, the Expanded Universe grew to include novels about Vader&#x27;s former life as Anakin. Greg Bear&#x27;s 2000 novel &quot;Rogue Planet&quot; and Jude Watson&#x27;s &quot;Jedi Quest&quot; series chronicle Anakin&#x27;s early missions with Obi-Wan, while James Luceno&#x27;s 2005 novel &quot;Labyrinth of Evil&quot;, set during the Clone Wars, depicts Anakin battling Separatist commander General Grievous. In Luceno&#x27;s &quot;Dark Lord: The Rise of Darth Vader&quot; (2005), set a few months after the events of &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot;, Vader disavows his identity as Anakin as he hunts down surviving Jedi and cements his position in the Empire.

In the &quot;Dark Nest&quot; trilogy (2005), Luke and Leia uncover old recordings of their parents in R2-D2&#x27;s memory drive; for the first time, they see their own birth and their mother&#x27;s death, as well as their father&#x27;s corruption to the dark side. In &quot;Bloodlines&quot; (2006), Han and Leia&#x27;s son Jacen—who has turned to the dark side—uses the Force to envision Vader slaughtering the children at the Jedi Temple.

Vader also appears in a series of tongue-in-cheek children&#x27;s books by Jeffrey Brown. In Brown&#x27;s series, a hapless Vader sets out to be a father to a young Luke and Leia, with some scenes portraying light-hearted versions of their darker film counterparts. For example, one scene shows Vader, Luke and Leia at the carbonite freezing chamber on Bespin, with Vader pronouncing the freezer adequate for making ice cream.

=== Comics ===
Vader appears in several comic books such as Marvel Comics&#x27; &quot;Star Wars&quot; (1977–1986). In &quot;Dark Empire II&quot;, he is revealed to have had a castle on the planet Vjun. Anakin Skywalker is a major character in Dark Horse Comics&#x27; &quot;Star Wars: Republic&quot; series (1998–2006). In &quot;Boba Fett: Enemy of the Empire&quot; (1999), Vader hires Fett a few years before the events of &quot;A New Hope&quot;. In &quot;Vader&#x27;s Quest&quot; (1999), set soon after &quot;A New Hope&quot;, the dark lord encounters Luke for the first time. &quot;Star Wars: Empire&quot; (2002–2005) spans from about a year before &quot;A New Hope&quot; to several months afterwards. Anakin and Vader appear in the non-canonical &quot;Star Wars Tales&quot; (1999–2005); in the story &quot;Resurrection&quot;, Darth Maul is resurrected and faces Vader in battle.

Vader-centric comics released and set just after &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot; include &quot;Dark Times&quot; (2006–2013), &quot;Darth Vader and the Lost Command&quot; (2011), &quot;Darth Vader and the Ghost Prison&quot; (2012), and &quot;Darth Vader and the Cry of Shadows&quot; (2013–14).

=== &quot;Clone Wars&quot; ===
Anakin is featured in all three seasons of the &quot;Clone Wars&quot; micro-series (2003–2005), which takes place shortly after the conclusion of &quot;Attack of the Clones&quot;. Anakin becomes a Jedi Knight and is quickly promoted to General of the Republic, due in part to Palpatine&#x27;s influence. Among other missions, he fights a duel with Dooku&#x27;s apprentice Asajj Ventress, helps Obi-Wan capture a Separatist-controlled fortress, and rescues the Jedi Master Saesee Tiin during a space battle. During the third season, Anakin frees a planet&#x27;s indigenous species from Separatist control and sees a cryptic vision of his future as Darth Vader. In the series finale, Anakin and Obi-Wan embark on a mission to rescue Palpatine from General Grievous, which leads into the opening of &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot;. The series was removed from canon in 2014 and placed in the &quot;Legends&quot; universe.

=== Video games ===
Vader plays a central role in the &quot;Legends&quot; game &quot;Star Wars: The Force Unleashed&quot; (2008), where he is playable in the first level and later appears as a boss. The game&#x27;s main character, Galen Marek, or Starkiller, is Vader&#x27;s secret apprentice. Vader also appears in the sequel, &quot;Star Wars: The Force Unleashed II&quot; (2010), as the final boss.

== Other appearances ==
The &quot;Star Wars Holiday Special&quot;, a television special broadcast by CBS in 1978, features a brief appearance of Darth Vader, who appears on-screen speaking with Imperial officer &quot;Chief Bast&quot; in footage cut from the original 1977 film. The sequence is dubbed with new dialogue, performed by James Earl Jones. In the story, Vader colludes with Boba Fett to entrap the Rebels.

The character appears in various &quot;Lego Star Wars&quot; shorts, voiced by Matt Sloan as Vader and by Kirby Morrow as Anakin.

Darth Vader features in the 1981 radio drama adaptation of &quot;Star Wars&quot;, voiced by the actor Brock Peters. Vader makes his first appearance on the planet Ralltiir, where he treats Princess Leia with suspicion. In later extended scenes, he is heard interrogating and torturing Leia on board his Star Destroyer and aboard the Death Star.

== Analysis ==
The French psychiatrist Eric Bui and his colleagues have considered Vader to be a useful example for explaining borderline personality disorder to medical students. Anakin&#x27;s origin story in &quot;The Phantom Menace&quot; has been compared to signifiers of African American racial identity, particularly his being a slave, and his dissatisfaction with his life has been compared to Siddartha&#x27;s before he became Gautama Buddha.

== Cultural impact ==

In 2003, the American Film Institute listed Vader as the third greatest movie villain in cinema history on AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Heroes &amp; Villains, behind Hannibal Lecter and Norman Bates. In 2010, &quot;IGN&quot; ranked Darth Vader 25th in the &quot;Top 100 Videogame Villains&quot;. His role as a tragic hero in the saga has also met with positive reviews. Contrarily, in 1977, a &quot;New Journal and Guide&quot; writer criticized the lack of racial diversity in the original &quot;Star Wars&quot; film, pointing out that &quot;the force of evil ... is dressed in all black and has the voice of a black man.&quot; George Lucas felt hurt at such accusations.

Vader is parodied as &quot;Dark Helmet&quot; (Rick Moranis) in the &quot;Star Wars&quot; parody &quot;Spaceballs&quot; (1987). One of the primary antagonists of &quot;Final Fantasy IV&quot; (1991), Golbez, was stated by game creator Takashi Tokita to be based on Vader. A Mexican church advised Christians against seeing &quot;The Phantom Menace&quot; because it portrays Anakin as a Christ figure.

The slime-mold beetle &quot;Agathidium vaderi&quot; is named after Vader, as is the louse &quot;Ricinus vaderi&quot;. In 2022 researchers at the University of Hanoi thought they identified a new species of giant isopod, seeking confirmation they sent specimens to the Lee Kong Chian Natural History Museum in Singapore who confirmed it was a previously unidentified species and named it &quot;Bathynomus vaderi&quot; as they found its head resembled Darth Vader&#x27;s helmet. A grotesque of Darth Vader looms over the east face of the Washington National Cathedral&#x27;s northwest tower.

Many commentators and comedians have also evoked Vader&#x27;s visage to satirize politicians and other public figures, and several American political figures have been unflatteringly compared to the character. In response to Ronald Reagan&#x27;s proposed Strategic Defense Initiative (dubbed &quot;Star Wars&quot; by his political opponents), German news magazine &quot;Der Spiegel&quot; portrayed the president wearing Vader&#x27;s helmet on its cover in 1984. In 2005, Al Gore referred to Tele-Communications Inc.&#x27;s John C. Malone as the &quot;Darth Vader of cable&quot;, and political strategist Lee Atwater was known by his political enemies as &quot;the Darth Vader of the Republican Party&quot;. Native American artist Bunky Echohawk portrayed General George Armstrong Custer as Vader in his painting &quot;Darth Custer&quot;. In 2015, a statue of Vladimir Lenin in Odesa, Ukraine, was converted into one of Vader due to a law on decommunization. Former Vice President of the United States Dick Cheney has been compared to Darth Vader after he was quoted during a discussion on the war on terror saying, &quot;I suppose, sometimes, people look at my demeanor and say, &#x27;Well, he&#x27;s the Darth Vader of the administration.&#x27;&quot; This led to him being referred to as &quot;Darth Cheney&quot; by Jon Stewart and Stephen Colbert. This comparison was followed by George Lucas stating that Cheney is more akin to Palpatine, and that a better stand-in for Vader would be George W. Bush.

In Ukraine, the Internet Party of Ukraine has had multiple people run for election under the name Darth Vader.
The Fedayeen Saddam, an Iraqi paramilitary organisation, was issued with fiber glass Darth Vader-style helmets from 1995, apparently at the instigation of their commander, Uday Hussein, who was said to have been an avid &quot;Star Wars&quot; fan. A number of them were brought to the United States and the United Kingdom as souvenirs following the 2003 invasion of Iraq.

In 2019, an original Vader helmet from &quot;The Empire Strikes Back&quot; was sold for $900,000 in an online auction.

In 2014, Hot Wheels created a full-size Darth Vader-inspired car (dubbed as the &#x27;Darth Car&#x27;) to coincide their partnership with Star Wars franchise. Built by Action Vehicle Engineering and designed by Bryan Benedict, the car was built on the Chevrolet Corvette C5 chassis and sporting a small-block LS3 V8 engine. The car was made its public debut at San Diego Comic-Con that year and currently as part of the Garage of Legends car collection.

== See also ==
* Skywalker family
* &quot;Star Wars&quot; books
* &quot;Star Wars&quot; comics
* &quot;Star Wars&quot; video games

== Notes ==
== References ==
===Citations===
===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12206942" start="0" end="11" title="Darth Vader" label="Darth Vader"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="53" end="62" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q25540859" start="111" end="132" title="Star Wars original trilogy" label="original film trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52347" start="162" end="177" title="Galactic Empire (Star Wars)" label="Galactic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25540924" start="183" end="198" title="Star Wars prequel trilogy" label="prequel trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51724" start="238" end="249" title="Jedi" label="Jedi Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206942" start="250" end="266" title="Darth Vader" label="Anakin Skywalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q51771" start="276" end="280" title="Sith" label="Sith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093766" start="348" end="370" title="Dark side (Star Wars)" label="dark side of the Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q51770" start="385" end="394" title="Palpatine" label="Palpatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873" start="435" end="445" title="lightsaber" label="lightsaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q51740" start="476" end="490" title="Obi-Wan Kenobi" label="Obi-Wan Kenobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q235799" start="544" end="550" title="cyborg" label="cyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q52316" start="654" end="668" title="Rebel Alliance" label="Rebel Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q51746" start="717" end="731" title="Luke Skywalker" label="Luke Skywalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q51789" start="814" end="827" title="Padmé Amidala" label="Padmé Amidala"/>
<link wikidata="Q51797" start="868" end="879" title="Princess Leia" label="Leia Organa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21515016" start="904" end="912" title="Kylo Ren" label="Ben Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q128379" start="941" end="953" title="David Prowse" label="David Prowse"/>
<link wikidata="Q203960" start="1011" end="1027" title="James Earl Jones" label="James Earl Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q532184" start="1095" end="1109" title="Sebastian Shaw (actor)" label="Sebastian Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q181803" start="1135" end="1153" title="Return of the Jedi" label="Return of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q435050" start="1174" end="1184" title="Jake Lloyd" label="Jake Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q192812" start="1189" end="1207" title="Hayden Christensen" label="Hayden Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q104154217" start="1303" end="1317" title="Obi-Wan Kenobi (TV series)" label="Obi-Wan Kenobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q104153367" start="1341" end="1347" title="Ahsoka (TV series)" label="Ahsoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q19590955" start="1391" end="1400" title="Rogue One" label="Rogue One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576224" start="1437" end="1452" title="Spencer Wilding" label="Spencer Wilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="1663" end="1702" title="Star Wars (film)" label="the original &amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; film"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="1716" end="1728" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q508242" start="1746" end="1761" title="Ralph McQuarrie" label="Ralph McQuarrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720878" start="2183" end="2197" title="samurai helmet" label="samurai helmet"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2206" end="2225" title=":File:Ralph McQuarrie Darth Vader production painting.jpg" label="production painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701116" start="2548" end="2558" title="John Mollo" label="John Mollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q767924" start="2628" end="2650" title="Stahlhelm" label="German military helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964825" start="2695" end="2705" title="Brian Muir (sculptor)" label="Brian Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q816456" start="2819" end="2828" title="Ben Burtt" label="Ben Burtt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="2927" end="2959" title="U.S. Patent and Trademark Office" label="U.S. Patent and Trademark Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="3083" end="3096" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367163" start="4421" end="4442" title="Swiss Family Robinson (1960 film)" label="Swiss Family Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q700682" start="4466" end="4485" title="Battle of the Bulge (1965 film)" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q470818" start="4630" end="4641" title="Ken Annakin" label="Ken Annakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q485508" start="4906" end="4920" title="Charles Manson" label="Charles Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q228699" start="4992" end="5003" title="Sharon Tate" label="Sharon Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q51724" start="5155" end="5165" title="Chosen One (Star Wars)" label="Chosen One"/>
<link wikidata="Q490846" start="5708" end="5720" title="Miraculous births" label="virgin birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="5813" end="5818" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="5838" end="5859" title="principal photography" label="principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190680" start="6080" end="6087" title="Pick-up (filmmaking)" label="pickups"/>
<link wikidata="Q51755" start="6565" end="6576" title="Ahsoka Tano" label="Ahsoka Tano"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6624" end="6638" title="Star Wars: The Clone Wars (film)" label="The Clone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7070" end="7084" title="Star Wars: The Clone Wars (2008 TV series)" label="The Clone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q503412" start="7317" end="7329" title="Bob Anderson (fencer)" label="Bob Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="7673" end="7685" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q210447" start="8555" end="8566" title="Mark Hamill" label="Mark Hamill"/>
<link wikidata="Q580587" start="8771" end="8783" title="Brock Peters" label="Brock Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601116" start="8810" end="8844" title="Star Wars (radio)" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; radio series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141130" start="8846" end="8860" title="Scott Lawrence" label="Scott Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8938" end="8952" title="Vader Immortal: A Star Wars VR Series" label="Vader Immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789352" start="8960" end="8970" title="Matt Sloan (voice actor)" label="Matt Sloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538082" start="9189" end="9214" title="Star Wars Holiday Special" label="Star Wars Holiday Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q28787" start="9258" end="9274" title="Star Wars Rebels" label="Star Wars Rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q118904793" start="9419" end="9429" title="Respeecher" label="Respeecher"/>
<link wikidata="Q532184" start="9824" end="9838" title="Sebastian Shaw (actor)" label="Sebastian Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093766" start="10171" end="10183" title="Force spirit" label="Force spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q435050" start="10411" end="10421" title="Jake Lloyd" label="Jake Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q683785" start="10432" end="10445" title="Rick McCallum" label="Rick McCallum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259362" start="10965" end="10992" title="Saturn Award for Best Actor" label="Saturn Award for Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851679" start="11153" end="11162" title="Mat Lucas" label="Mat Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11230" end="11240" title="Star Wars: Clone Wars (2003 TV series)" label="Clone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120020" start="11265" end="11277" title="Kirby Morrow" label="Kirby Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q312535" start="11313" end="11324" title="Matt Lanter" label="Matt Lanter"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11431" end="11445" title="Star Wars: The Clone Wars (2008 TV series)" label="The Clone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q30140895" start="11479" end="11496" title="Star Wars Forces of Destiny" label="Forces of Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11513" end="11529" title="Star Wars: Tales" label="Star Wars: Tales"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11570" end="11582" title="Star Wars: The Clone Wars (film)" label="film version"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="11821" end="11830" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q51800" start="11902" end="11919" title="Grand Moff Tarkin" label="Grand Moff Tarkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19907" start="11981" end="11991" title="Death Star" label="Death Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q51802" start="12252" end="12260" title="Han Solo" label="Han Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q837921" start="12402" end="12409" title="Yavin" label="Yavin 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q19884" start="12476" end="12487" title="TIE fighter" label="TIE fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q181795" start="12640" end="12663" title="The Empire Strikes Back" label="The Empire Strikes Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q739771" start="12799" end="12803" title="Hoth" label="Hoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q51770" start="12844" end="12855" title="Palpatine" label="the Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q621613" start="12954" end="12967" title="bounty hunter" label="bounty hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="13019" end="13029" title="Bespin" label="Cloud City"/>
<link wikidata="Q51799" start="13044" end="13060" title="Lando Calrissian" label="Lando Calrissian"/>
<link wikidata="Q51803" start="13102" end="13111" title="Chewbacca" label="Chewbacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q51787" start="13116" end="13121" title="C-3PO" label="C-3PO"/>
<link wikidata="Q51790" start="13209" end="13218" title="Boba Fett" label="Boba Fett"/>
<link wikidata="Q181803" start="13642" end="13660" title="Return of the Jedi" label="Return of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093766" start="14387" end="14402" title="Force lightning" label="Force lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q51730" start="15148" end="15152" title="Yoda" label="Yoda"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15225" end="15243" title="Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace" label="The Phantom Menace"/>
<link wikidata="Q54311" start="15376" end="15380" title="Shmi Skywalker" label="Shmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q51787" start="15455" end="15460" title="C-3PO" label="C-3PO"/>
<link wikidata="Q51736" start="15478" end="15490" title="Qui-Gon Jinn" label="Qui-Gon Jinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="15583" end="15588" title="Naboo" label="Naboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412312" start="15820" end="15827" title="podrace" label="podrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q719329" start="15949" end="15958" title="Coruscant" label="Coruscant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51724" start="16009" end="16021" title="Jedi Council" label="Jedi Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133061" start="16173" end="16189" title="Trade Federation" label="Trade Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q51766" start="16317" end="16327" title="Darth Maul" label="Darth Maul"/>
<link wikidata="Q733195" start="16540" end="16557" title="Galactic Republic" label="Galactic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16620" end="16640" title="Episode II: Attack of the Clones" label="Attack of the Clones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266831" start="17099" end="17113" title="Tusken Raiders" label="Tusken Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="17344" end="17352" title="Geonosis" label="Geonosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q51727" start="17399" end="17410" title="Count Dooku" label="Count Dooku"/>
<link wikidata="Q51796" start="17531" end="17544" title="clone trooper" label="clone trooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q51725" start="17571" end="17581" title="Mace Windu" label="Mace Windu"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17789" end="17808" title="Episode III: Revenge of the Sith" label="Revenge of the Sith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133061" start="17932" end="17942" title="Clone Wars (Star Wars)" label="Clone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q51792" start="18026" end="18042" title="General Grievous" label="General Grievous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="19254" end="19262" title="Mustafar" label="Mustafar"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20132" end="20153" title="Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker" label="The Rise of Skywalker"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20508" end="20522" title="Star Wars: The Clone Wars (film)" label="The Clone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q51755" start="20631" end="20642" title="Ahsoka Tano" label="Ahsoka Tano"/>
<link wikidata="Q51794" start="20927" end="20941" title="Jabba the Hutt" label="Jabba the Hutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q19590955" start="21135" end="21144" title="Rogue One" label="Rogue One"/>
<link wikidata="Q28039497" start="21256" end="21269" title="Orson Krennic" label="Orson Krennic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526151" start="21685" end="21696" title="Gary Whitta" label="Gary Whitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012083" start="21713" end="21718" title="Pitch (filmmaking)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="21746" end="21752" title="Scarif" label="Scarif"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22022" end="22036" title="Star Wars: The Clone Wars (2008 TV series)" label="The Clone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q51796" start="22189" end="22201" title="501st Legion (Star Wars)" label="501st Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q51724" start="23093" end="23101" title="Order 66 (Star Wars)" label="Order 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q28787" start="23296" end="23312" title="Star Wars Rebels" label="Star Wars Rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q51771" start="23598" end="23617" title="Imperial Inquisitor" label="Imperial Inquisitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q51805" start="23661" end="23681" title="Grand Inquisitor (Star Wars)" label="the Grand Inquisitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="23706" end="23712" title="Lothal (Star Wars)" label="Lothal"/>
<link wikidata="Q24953533" start="23965" end="23977" title="Kanan Jarrus" label="Kanan Jarrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24953547" start="23982" end="23994" title="Ezra Bridger" label="Ezra Bridger"/>
<link wikidata="Q30140895" start="24668" end="24685" title="Star Wars Forces of Destiny" label="Forces of Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q104154217" start="24822" end="24836" title="Obi-Wan Kenobi (TV series)" label="Obi-Wan Kenobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q51805" start="25120" end="25133" title="Reva Sevander" label="Reva Sevander"/>
<link wikidata="Q746676" start="26108" end="26134" title="Industrial Light and Magic" label="Industrial Light and Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325377" start="26146" end="26154" title="de-aging" label="de-aging"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26318" end="26332" title="Vader Immortal: A Star Wars VR Series" label="Vader Immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q63777286" start="26478" end="26490" title="Oculus Quest" label="Oculus Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274429" start="26624" end="26635" title="Oculus Rift" label="Oculus Rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q16011703" start="26690" end="26704" title="PlayStation VR" label="PlayStation VR"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26758" end="26776" title="Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order" label="Jedi: Fallen Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q63581338" start="26982" end="26992" title="Cal Kestis" label="Cal Kestis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27069" end="27083" title="Star Wars Jedi: Survivor" label="Jedi: Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="27165" end="27170" title="Jedha" label="Jedha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191068" start="27299" end="27336" title="Lego Star Wars video games" label="Lego &amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q19861433" start="27388" end="27407" title="Disney Infinity 3.0" label="Disney Infinity 3.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q29877581" start="27487" end="27508" title="Disney Magic Kingdoms" label="Disney Magic Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q54854" start="27592" end="27613" title="Angry Birds Star Wars" label="Angry Birds Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q14943254" start="27624" end="27634" title="Angry Birds Star Wars II" label="its sequel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27658" end="27686" title="Star Wars: Lords of the Sith" label="Star Wars: Lords of the Sith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="27837" end="27843" title="Ryloth" label="Ryloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q60315766" start="28128" end="28149" title="Star Wars (2015 comic book)" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q21192427" start="28203" end="28212" title="Crossover (fiction)" label="crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="29380" end="29388" title="Uterus" label="in utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220782" start="29686" end="29697" title="Jason Aaron" label="Jason Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q242446" start="29912" end="29921" title="Lucasfilm" label="Lucasfilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="29925" end="29948" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q783985" start="30265" end="30313" title="List of Star Wars books" label="novels set in the &amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262725" start="30339" end="30370" title="Splinter of the Mind&amp;#x27;s Eye" label="Splinter of the Mind&amp;#x27;s Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q575345" start="30380" end="30396" title="Alan Dean Foster" label="Alan Dean Foster"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30561" end="30582" title="Star Wars: Shadows of the Empire (novel)" label="Shadows of the Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q488733" start="30780" end="30789" title="MacGuffin" label="MacGuffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6172775" start="30828" end="30852" title="The Glove of Darth Vader" label="The Glove of Darth Vader"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770508" start="30924" end="30943" title="The Truce at Bakura" label="The Truce at Bakura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688217" start="31224" end="31238" title="Tatooine Ghost" label="Tatooine Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743959" start="31381" end="31399" title="The Unifying Force" label="The Unifying Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087845" start="31440" end="31450" title="Jacen Solo" label="Jacen Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326686" start="31524" end="31536" title="Yuuzhan Vong" label="Yuuzhan Vong"/>
<link wikidata="Q317491" start="31665" end="31674" title="Greg Bear" label="Greg Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q798623" start="31699" end="31711" title="Rogue Planet (novel)" label="Rogue Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q458860" start="31722" end="31733" title="Jude Watson" label="Jude Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6172777" start="31747" end="31757" title="Jedi Quest" label="Jedi Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q957931" start="31830" end="31842" title="James Luceno" label="James Luceno"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467729" start="31867" end="31884" title="Labyrinth of Evil" label="Labyrinth of Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q51792" start="31964" end="31980" title="General Grievous" label="General Grievous"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32005" end="32039" title="Dark Lord: The Rise of Darth Vader" label="Dark Lord: The Rise of Darth Vader"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728968" start="32242" end="32271" title="The Dark Nest trilogy" label="&amp;quot;Dark Nest&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517323" start="32509" end="32519" title="Bloodlines (Star Wars novel)" label="Bloodlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026859" start="32751" end="32764" title="Jeffrey Brown (cartoonist)" label="Jeffrey Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="33164" end="33177" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27563322" start="33190" end="33199" title="Star Wars (1977 comic book)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968324" start="33228" end="33242" title="Dark Empire II" label="Dark Empire II"/>
<link wikidata="Q373933" start="33347" end="33364" title="Dark Horse Comics" label="Dark Horse Comics"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33377" end="33396" title="Star Wars: Republic" label="Star Wars: Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908206" start="33560" end="33578" title="Vader&amp;#x27;s Quest" label="Vader&amp;#x27;s Quest"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33688" end="33705" title="Star Wars: Empire" label="Star Wars: Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q979484" start="33859" end="33874" title="Star Wars Tales" label="Star Wars Tales"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33913" end="33925" title="Star Wars Tales Volume 3#Star Wars Tales 9" label="Resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34082" end="34092" title="Star Wars: Dark Times" label="Dark Times"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34365" end="34375" title="Star Wars: Clone Wars (2003 TV series)" label="Clone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q14417" start="34684" end="34698" title="Asajj Ventress" label="Asajj Ventress"/>
<link wikidata="Q51805" start="34784" end="34795" title="Saesee Tiin" label="Saesee Tiin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35317" end="35347" title="Star Wars: The Force Unleashed" label="Star Wars: The Force Unleashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808802" start="35479" end="35489" title="List of Star Wars Legends characters" label="Starkiller"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35566" end="35599" title="Star Wars: The Force Unleashed II" label="Star Wars: The Force Unleashed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538082" start="35668" end="35693" title="Star Wars Holiday Special" label="Star Wars Holiday Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="35735" end="35738" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36085" end="36118" title="Lego Star Wars#Films and videos" label="&amp;quot;Lego Star Wars&amp;quot; shorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120020" start="36157" end="36169" title="Kirby Morrow" label="Kirby Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601116" start="36215" end="36262" title="Star Wars (radio)" label="radio drama adaptation of &amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q580587" start="36284" end="36296" title="Brock Peters" label="Brock Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="36345" end="36353" title="Ralltiir" label="Ralltiir"/>
<link wikidata="Q208166" start="36655" end="36686" title="borderline personality disorder" label="borderline personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801374" start="36790" end="36800" title="Sign (semiotics)" label="signifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q457289" start="36929" end="36938" title="Siddhartha (novel)" label="Siddartha"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="36963" end="36977" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="37016" end="37039" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610957" start="37110" end="37158" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Heroes &amp;amp; Villains" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Heroes &amp;amp; Villains"/>
<link wikidata="Q211013" start="37167" end="37182" title="Hannibal Lecter" label="Hannibal Lecter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467893" start="37187" end="37199" title="Norman Bates" label="Norman Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="37216" end="37219" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969230" start="37311" end="37322" title="tragic hero" label="tragic hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982561" start="37400" end="37421" title="New Journal and Guide" label="New Journal and Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q336282" start="37720" end="37732" title="Rick Moranis" label="Rick Moranis"/>
<link wikidata="Q498442" start="37776" end="37786" title="Spaceballs" label="Spaceballs"/>
<link wikidata="Q911226" start="37841" end="37857" title="Final Fantasy IV" label="Final Fantasy IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073822" start="37872" end="37878" title="Golbez" label="Golbez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657029" start="37907" end="37921" title="Takashi Tokita" label="Takashi Tokita"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108947" start="38058" end="38071" title="Christ figure" label="Christ figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q391354" start="38102" end="38119" title="Agathidium vaderi" label="Agathidium vaderi"/>
<link wikidata="Q22916507" start="38170" end="38184" title="Ricinus vaderi" label="Ricinus vaderi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076729" start="38219" end="38238" title="Vietnam National University, Hanoi" label="University of Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14746702" start="38280" end="38292" title="giant isopod" label="giant isopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840336" start="38342" end="38379" title="Lee Kong Chian Natural History Museum" label="Lee Kong Chian Natural History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="38383" end="38392" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q131825296" start="38467" end="38484" title="Bathynomus vaderi" label="Bathynomus vaderi"/>
<link wikidata="Q672590" start="38553" end="38562" title="grotesque (architecture)" label="grotesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q668710" start="38610" end="38639" title="Washington National Cathedral" label="Washington National Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225114" start="38737" end="38745" title="political satire" label="satirize"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="38890" end="38903" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211031" start="38920" end="38948" title="Strategic Defense Initiative" label="Strategic Defense Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q131478" start="39035" end="39046" title="Der Spiegel" label="Der Spiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="39136" end="39143" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131902" start="39156" end="39180" title="Tele-Communications Inc." label="Tele-Communications Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q3181165" start="39188" end="39202" title="John C. Malone" label="John C. Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811707" start="39269" end="39280" title="Lee Atwater" label="Lee Atwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="39348" end="39364" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997795" start="39395" end="39409" title="Bunky Echohawk" label="Bunky Echohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188205" start="39428" end="39451" title="George Armstrong Custer" label="George Armstrong Custer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="39524" end="39538" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="39542" end="39556" title="Odesa, Ukraine" label="Odesa, Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19801088" start="39606" end="39621" title="Decommunization in Ukraine" label="decommunization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="39630" end="39665" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q48259" start="39666" end="39677" title="Dick Cheney" label="Dick Cheney"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="39758" end="39771" title="war on terror" label="war on terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="39885" end="39903" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="the administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q211987" start="39982" end="39993" title="Jon Stewart" label="Jon Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q212886" start="39998" end="40013" title="Stephen Colbert" label="Stephen Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="40153" end="40167" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076329" start="40186" end="40211" title="Internet Party of Ukraine" label="Internet Party of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142173" start="40285" end="40300" title="Fedayeen Saddam" label="Fedayeen Saddam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="40354" end="40365" title="fiber glass" label="fiber glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q311916" start="40453" end="40465" title="Uday Hussein" label="Uday Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="40629" end="40650" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q585537" start="40782" end="40792" title="Hot Wheels" label="Hot Wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135711" start="41025" end="41046" title="Chevrolet Corvette C5" label="Chevrolet Corvette C5"/>
<link wikidata="Q724143" start="41082" end="41085" title="General Motors LS-based small-block engine" label="LS3"/>
<link wikidata="Q279385" start="41134" end="41153" title="San Diego Comic-Con" label="San Diego Comic-Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q54311" start="41245" end="41261" title="Skywalker family" label="Skywalker family"/>
<link wikidata="Q783985" start="41264" end="41291" title="List of Star Wars books" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; books"/>
<link wikidata="Q857836" start="41294" end="41322" title="Star Wars comics" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q54300" start="41325" end="41358" title="Star Wars video games" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; video games"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53863" wikidata="Q2088182" url="?curid=53863" title="Visual binary">
<text>A visual binary is a gravitationally bound binary star system that can be resolved into two stars. These stars are estimated, via Kepler&#x27;s third law, to have periods ranging from a few years to thousands of years. A visual binary consists of two stars, usually of a different brightness. Because of this, the brighter star is called the primary and the fainter one is called the companion. If the primary is too bright, relative to the companion, this can cause a glare making it difficult to resolve the two components. However, it is possible to resolve the system if observations of the brighter star show it to wobble about a centre of mass. In general, a visual binary can be resolved into two stars with a telescope if their centres are separated by a value greater than or equal to one arcsecond, but with modern professional telescopes, interferometry, or space-based equipment, stars can be resolved at closer distances.

For a visual binary system, measurements taken need to specify, in arc-seconds, the apparent angular separation on the sky and the position angle which is the angle measured eastward from North in degrees of the companion star relative to the primary star. Taken over a period of time, the apparent relative orbit of the visual binary system will appear on the celestial sphere. The study of visual binaries reveals useful stellar characteristics: masses, densities, surface temperatures, luminosity, and rotation rates.

==Distance==
In order to work out the masses of the components of a visual binary system, the distance to the system must first be determined, since from this astronomers can estimate the period of revolution and the separation between the two stars. The trigonometric parallax provides a direct method of calculating a star&#x27;s mass. This will not apply to the visual binary systems, but it does form the basis of an indirect method called the dynamical parallax.

===Trigonometric parallax===
In order to use this method of calculating distance, two measurements are made of a star, one each at opposite sides of the Earth&#x27;s orbit about the Sun. The star&#x27;s position relative to the more distant background stars will appear displaced. The parallax value is considered to be the displacement in each direction from the mean position, equivalent to the angular displacement from observations one astronomical unit apart. The distance formula_1, in parsecs is found from the following equation,
:formula_2
Where formula_3 is the parallax, measured in units of arc-seconds.

===Dynamical parallax===
This method is used solely for binary systems. The mass of the binary system is assumed to be twice that of the Sun. Kepler&#x27;s Laws are then applied and the separation between the stars is determined. Once this distance is found, the distance away can be found via the arc subtended in the sky, providing a temporary distance measurement. From this measurement and the apparent magnitudes of both stars, the luminosities can be found, and by using the mass–luminosity relationship, the masses of each star. These masses are used to re-calculate the separation distance, and the process is repeated a number of times, with accuracies as high as 5% being achieved. A more sophisticated calculation factors in a star&#x27;s loss of mass over time.

===Spectroscopic parallax===
Spectroscopic parallax is another commonly used method for determining the distance to a binary system. No parallax is measured, the word is simply used to place emphasis on the fact that the distance is being estimated. In this method, the luminosity of a star is estimated from its spectrum. It is important to note that the spectra from distant stars of a given type are assumed to be the same as the spectra of nearby stars of the same type. The star is then assigned a position on the Hertzsprung-Russel diagram based on where it is in its life-cycle. The star&#x27;s luminosity can be estimated by comparison of the spectrum of a nearby star. The distance is then determined via the following inverse square law:

:formula_4

where formula_5 is the apparent brightness and formula_6 is the luminosity.

Using the Sun as a reference we can write

:formula_7

where the subscript formula_8 represents a parameter associated with the Sun.

Rearranging for formula_9 gives an estimate for the distance.

:formula_10

==Kepler&#x27;s laws==

The two stars orbiting each other, as well as their centre of mass, must obey Kepler&#x27;s laws. 
This means that the orbit is an ellipse with the centre of mass at one of the two foci (Kepler&#x27;s 1st law) and the orbital motion satisfies the fact that a line joining the star to the centre of mass sweeps out equal areas over equal time intervals (Kepler&#x27;s 2nd law). The orbital motion must also satisfy Kepler&#x27;s 3rd law.

Kepler&#x27;s 3rd Law can be stated as follows: &quot;The square of the orbital period of a planet is directly proportional to the cube of its semi-major axis.&quot; Mathematically, this translates as 
:formula_11 
where formula_12 is the orbital period of the planet and formula_13 is the semi-major axis of the orbit.

===Newton&#x27;s generalisation===
Consider a binary star system. This consists of two objects, of mass formula_14 and formula_15, orbiting around their centre of mass. formula_14 has position vector formula_17 and orbital velocity formula_18, and formula_15 has position vector formula_20 and orbital velocity formula_21 relative to the centre of mass. The separation between the two stars is denoted formula_22, and is assumed to be constant. Since the gravitational force acts along a line joining the centers of both stars, we can assume the stars have an equivalent time period around their center of mass, and therefore a constant separation between each other.

To arrive at Newton&#x27;s version of Kepler&#x27;s 3rd law we can start by considering Newton&#x27;s 2nd law which states: &quot;The net force acting on an object is proportional to the objects mass and resultant acceleration.&quot; 
:formula_23 
where formula_24 is the net force acting on the object of mass formula_25, and formula_13 is the acceleration of the object.

Applying the definition of centripetal acceleration to Newton&#x27;s second law gives a force of 
:formula_27 
Then using the fact that the orbital velocity is given as 
:formula_28 
we can state the force on each star as 
:formula_29 and formula_30

If we apply Newton&#x27;s 3rd law- &quot;For every action there is an equal and opposite reaction&quot;
:formula_31 
We can set the force on each star equal to each other.
:formula_32 
This reduces to 
:formula_33 
If we assume that the masses are not equal, then this equation tells us that the smaller mass remains farther from the centre of mass than does the larger mass.

The separation formula_22 of the two objects is 
:formula_35 
Since formula_17 and formula_20 would form a line starting from opposite directions and joining at the centre of mass.

Now we can substitute this expression into one of the equations describing the force on the stars and rearrange for formula_17 to find an expression relating the position of one star to the masses of both and the separation between them. Equally, this could have been solved for formula_20. We find that
:formula_40

Substituting this equation into the equation for the force on one of the stars, setting it equal to Newton&#x27;s Universal Law of Gravitation (namely, formula_41, and solving for the period squared yields the required result.
:formula_42 
This is Newton&#x27;s version of Kepler&#x27;s 3rd Law. Unless formula_43 is in non-standard units, this will not work if mass is measured in solar masses, the orbital period is measured in years, and the orbital semi-major axis is measured in astronomical units (e.g., use the Earth&#x27;s orbital parameters). It will work if SI units, for instance, are used throughout.

==Determining stellar masses ==
Binary systems are particularly important here because they are orbiting each other, their gravitational interaction can be studied by observing parameters of their orbit around each other and the centre of mass. Before applying Kepler&#x27;s 3rd Law, the inclination of the orbit of the visual binary must be taken into account. Relative to an observer on Earth, the orbital plane will usually be tilted. If it is at 0° the planes will be seen to coincide and if at 90° they will be seen edge on. Due to this inclination, the elliptical true orbit will project an elliptical apparent orbit onto the plane of the sky. Kepler&#x27;s 3rd law still holds but with a constant of proportionality that changes with respect to the elliptical apparent orbit.
The inclination of the orbit can be determined by measuring the separation between the primary star and the apparent focus. Once this information is known the true eccentricity and the true semi-major axis can be calculated since the apparent orbit will be shorter than the true orbit, assuming an inclination greater than 0°, and this effect can be corrected for using simple geometry

:formula_44

Where formula_45 is the true semi-major axis and formula_46 is the parallax.

Once the true orbit is known, Kepler&#x27;s 3rd law can be applied. We re-write it in terms of the observable quantities such that

:formula_47

From this equation we obtain the sum of the masses involved in the binary system. Remembering a previous equation we derived,

:formula_33

where

:formula_49

we can solve the ratio of the semi-major axis and therefore a ratio for the two masses since

:formula_50

and

:formula_51

The individual masses of the stars follow from these ratios and knowing the separation between each star and the centre of mass of the system.

==Mass–luminosity relationship==
In order to find the luminosity of the stars, the rate of flow of radiant energy, otherwise known as radiant flux, must be observed. When the observed luminosities and masses are graphed, the mass–luminosity relation is obtained. This relationship was found by Arthur Eddington in 1924.

:formula_52

Where L is the luminosity of the star and M is its mass. &quot;L&quot;⊙ and &quot;M&quot;⊙ are the luminosity and mass of the Sun. The value &quot;formula_53&quot; = 3.5 is commonly used for main-sequence stars. This equation and the usual value of a = 3.5 only applies to main-sequence stars with masses 2&quot;M&quot;⊙ &lt; &quot;M&quot; &lt; 20&quot;M&quot;⊙ and does not apply to red giants or white dwarfs. For these stars, the equation applies with different constants, since these stars have different masses. For the different ranges of masses, an adequate form of the Mass–Luminosity Relation is

:formula_54
:formula_55
:formula_56
:formula_57

The greater a star&#x27;s luminosity, the greater its mass will be. The absolute magnitude or luminosity of a star can be found by knowing the distance to it and its apparent magnitude. The stars bolometric magnitude is plotted against its mass, in units of the Sun&#x27;s mass. This is determined through observation and then the mass of the star is read of the plot. Giants and main sequence stars tend to agree with this, but super giants do not and neither do white dwarfs. The Mass–Luminosity Relation is very useful because, due to the observation of binaries, particularly the visual binaries since the masses of many stars have been found this way, astronomers have gained insight into the evolution of stars, including how they are born.

==Spectral classification==
Generally speaking, there are three classes of binary systems. These can be determined by considering the colours of the two components.

&quot;1. Systems consisting of a red or reddish primary star and a blueish secondary star, usually a magnitude or more fainter...
2. Systems in which the differences in magnitude and colour are both small...
3. Systems in which the fainter star is the redder of the two...&quot;

The luminosity of class 1. binaries is greater than that of class 3. binaries. There is a relationship between the colour difference of binaries and their reduced proper motions. In 1921, Frederick C. Leonard, at the Lick Observatory, wrote &quot;1. The spectrum of the secondary component of a dwarf star is generally redder than that of the primary, whereas the spectrum of the fainter component of a giant star is usually bluer than that of the brighter one. In both cases, the absolute difference in spectral class seems ordinarily to be related to the disparity between the components...2. With some exceptions, the spectra of the components of double stars are so related to each other that they conform to the Hertzsprung-Russell configuration of the stars...&quot;

An interesting case for visual binaries occurs when one or both components are located above or below the Main-Sequence. If a star is more luminous than a Main-Sequence star, it is either very young, and therefore contracting due to gravity, or is at the post Main-Sequence stage of its evolution. The study of binaries is useful here because, unlike with single stars, it is possible to determine which reason is the case. If the primary is gravitationally contracting, then the companion will be further away from the Main-Sequence than the primary since the more massive star becomes a Main-Sequence star much faster than the less massive star.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2088182" start="2" end="15" title="Visual binary" label="visual binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q50053" start="43" end="54" title="binary star" label="binary star"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="130" end="136" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="144" end="153" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws of planetary motion#Third_law" label="third law"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="1727" end="1735" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="2367" end="2384" title="astronomical unit" label="astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129" start="2419" end="2425" title="parsec" label="parsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q83219" start="4469" end="4487" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws" label="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="5907" end="5928" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s 2nd law" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s 2nd law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11376" start="6220" end="6244" title="centripetal acceleration" label="centripetal acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="6456" end="6477" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s 3rd law" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s 3rd law"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="7888" end="7896" title="SI units" label="SI units"/>
<link wikidata="Q21143897" start="8907" end="8922" title="semi-major axis" label="semi-major axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="9738" end="9752" title="centre of mass" label="centre of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="9823" end="9833" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259526" start="9868" end="9882" title="radiant energy" label="radiant energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907452" start="9994" end="10018" title="mass–luminosity relation" label="mass–luminosity relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="10294" end="10307" title="main sequence" label="main-sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="10830" end="10848" title="absolute magnitude" label="absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="10924" end="10942" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="10954" end="10974" title="bolometric magnitude" label="bolometric magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q13890" start="12602" end="12614" title="double stars" label="double stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270143" start="12669" end="12688" title="Hertzsprung-Russell" label="Hertzsprung-Russell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53869" wikidata="Q221482" url="?curid=53869" title="Jim Thorpe">
<text>James Francis Thorpe (, May 22 or 28, 1887March 28, 1953) was an American athlete and Olympic gold medalist. A citizen of the Sac and Fox Nation, Thorpe was the first Native American to win a gold medal for the United States in the Olympics. Considered one of the most versatile athletes of modern sports, he won two Olympic gold medals in the 1912 Summer Olympics (one in classic pentathlon and the other in decathlon). He also played football (collegiate and professional), professional baseball, and professional basketball.

He lost his Olympic titles after it was found he had been paid for playing two seasons of semi-professional baseball before competing in the Olympics, thus violating the contemporary amateurism rules. In 1983, 30 years after his death, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) restored his Olympic medals with replicas, after ruling that the decision to strip him of his medals fell outside of the required 30 days. Official IOC records still listed Thorpe as co-champion in decathlon and pentathlon until 2022, when it was decided to restore him as the sole champion in both events.

Thorpe grew up in the Sac and Fox Nation in Indian Territory (what is now the U.S. state of Oklahoma). As a youth, he attended Carlisle Indian Industrial School in Carlisle, Pennsylvania, where he was a two-time All-American for the school&#x27;s football team under coach Pop Warner. After his Olympic success in 1912, which included a record score in the decathlon, he added a victory in the All-Around Championship of the Amateur Athletic Union. Later in 1913, Thorpe signed with the New York Giants, and he played six seasons in Major League Baseball between 1913 and 1919. Thorpe joined the Canton Bulldogs American football team in 1915, helping them win three professional championships. He later played for six teams in the National Football League (NFL). He played as part of several all-American Indian teams throughout his career, and barnstormed as a professional basketball player with a team composed entirely of American Indians.

From 1920 to 1921, Thorpe was nominally the first president of the American Professional Football Association, which became the NFL in 1922. He played professional sports until age 41, the end of his sports career coinciding with the start of the Great Depression. He struggled to earn a living after that, working several odd jobs. He suffered from alcoholism, and lived his last years in failing health and poverty. He was married three times and had eight children, including Grace Thorpe, an environmentalist and Native rights activist, before suffering from heart failure and dying in 1953.

Thorpe has received numerous accolades for his athletic accomplishments. The Associated Press ranked him as the &quot;greatest athlete&quot; from the first 50 years of the 20th century, and the Pro Football Hall of Fame inducted him as part of its inaugural class in 1963. The town of Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania, was named in his honor. It has a monument site that contains his remains, which were the subject of legal action. Thorpe appeared in several films and was portrayed by Burt Lancaster in the 1951 film &quot;Jim Thorpe – All-American&quot;.

== Early life ==
Information about Thorpe&#x27;s birth, name and ethnic background varies widely. He was baptized &quot;Jacobus Franciscus Thorpe&quot; in the Catholic Church. Thorpe was born in Indian Territory of the United States (later Oklahoma), but no birth certificate has been found. The Jim Thorpe Museum lists his birth date as May 28, 1887,; however, others have listed it as May 22, 1887, near the town of Prague. Thorpe said in a note to &quot;The Shawnee News-Star&quot; in 1943 that he was born May 28, 1888, &quot;near and south of Bellemont – Pottawatomie County – along the banks of the North Fork River ... hope this will clear up the inquiries as to my birthplace.&quot; May 22, 1887, is listed on his baptismal certificate. Thorpe referred to Shawnee as his birthplace in his 1943 note to the newspaper.

Thorpe&#x27;s father, Hiram Thorpe (Sac and Fox), had an Irish father and a Sac and Fox mother. His mother, Charlotte Vieux, was the daughter of Citizen Potawatomi Nation members Elizabeth and Jacob Vieux, and was a descendant of Chief Louis Vieux. 

Thorpe was raised in the Sauk, or Thâkîwaki, culture, and his Sauk name was Wa-Tho-Huk, which translates as &quot;Bright path the lightning makes as it goes across the sky&quot;, often shortened to &quot;Bright Path&quot;. Thorpe&#x27;s parents were both Roman Catholic, a faith which Thorpe observed throughout his adult life.

Thorpe attended the Sac and Fox Indian Agency School in Stroud, with his twin brother, Charlie. Charlie helped him through school until he died of pneumonia when they were nine years old. Thorpe ran away from school several times. His father sent him to the Haskell Institute, an Indian boarding school in Lawrence, Kansas, so that he would not run away again.

When Thorpe&#x27;s mother died of childbirth complications two years later, he became depressed. After several arguments with his father, he left home to work on a horse ranch.

In 1904, the 16-year-old Thorpe returned to his father and decided to attend Carlisle Indian Industrial School in Carlisle, Pennsylvania. There his athletic ability was recognized and he was coached by Glenn Scobey &quot;Pop&quot; Warner, one of the most influential coaches of early American football history. Later that year he was orphaned when his father Hiram Thorpe died from gangrene poisoning, after being wounded in a hunting accident. The young Thorpe again dropped out of school. He resumed farm work for a few years before returning to Carlisle School.

==Amateur career==
===College career===

Thorpe began his athletic career at Carlisle in 1907 when he walked past the track and, still in street clothes, beat all the school&#x27;s high jumpers with an impromptu 5-ft 9-in jump. His earliest recorded track and field results come from 1907. He also competed in football, baseball, lacrosse, and ballroom dancing, winning the 1912 intercollegiate ballroom dancing championship.

Pop Warner was hesitant to allow Thorpe, his best track and field athlete, to compete in such a physical game as football. Thorpe, however, convinced Warner to let him try some rushing plays in practice against the school team&#x27;s defense; Warner assumed he would be tackled easily and give up the idea. Thorpe &quot;ran around past and through them not once, but twice&quot;. He walked over to Warner and said, &quot;Nobody is going to tackle Jim&quot;, while flipping him the ball.

Thorpe first gained nationwide notice in 1911 for his athletic ability. As a running back, defensive back, placekicker and punter, Thorpe scored all of his team&#x27;s four field goals in an 18–15 upset of Harvard, a top-ranked team in the early days of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). His team finished the season 11–1. In 1912, Carlisle won the national collegiate championship largely as a result of Thorpe&#x27;s efforts: he scored 25 touchdowns and 198 points during the season, according to CNN&#x27;s Greg Botelho. Steve Boda, a researcher for the NCAA, credits Thorpe with 27 touchdowns and 224 points. Thorpe rushed 191 times for 1,869 yards, according to Boda; the figures do not include statistics from two of Carlisle&#x27;s 14 games in 1912 because full records are not available.

Carlisle&#x27;s 1912 record included a 27–6 victory over the West Point Army team. In that game, Thorpe&#x27;s 92-yard touchdown was nullified by a teammate&#x27;s penalty, but on the next play Thorpe rushed for a 97-yard touchdown. Future President Dwight D. Eisenhower, who played against him in that game, recalled of Thorpe in a 1961 speech:

Thorpe was a third-team All-American in 1908 and a first-team All-American in 1911 and 1912. Football was – and remained – Thorpe&#x27;s favorite sport. He did not compete in track and field in 1910 or 1911, although this turned out to be the sport in which he gained his greatest fame.

In the spring of 1912, he started training for the Olympics. He had confined his efforts to jumps, hurdles and shot-puts, but now added pole vaulting, javelin, discus, hammer and 56 lb weight. In the Olympic trials held at Celtic Park in New York, his all-round ability stood out in all these events and so he earned a place on the team that went to Sweden.

The poet Marianne Moore, who taught Thorpe at Carlisle, recalled: He had a kind of ease in his gait that is hard to describe. Equilibrium with no stricture, but couched in the lineup of football he was the epitome of concentration, wary, with an effect of plenty in reserve.

=== Olympic career ===
For the 1912 Summer Olympics in Stockholm, Sweden, two new multi-event disciplines were included, the pentathlon and the decathlon. A pentathlon, based on the ancient Greek event, had been introduced at the 1906 Intercalated Games. The 1912 version consisted of the long jump, javelin throw, 200-meter dash, discus throw, and 1500-meter run.

The decathlon was a relatively new event in modern athletics, although a similar competition known as the all-around championship had been part of American track meets since the 1880s. A men&#x27;s version had been featured on the program of the 1904 St. Louis Olympics. The events of the new decathlon differed slightly from the American version.

Thorpe was so versatile that he served as Carlisle&#x27;s one-man team in several track meets. According to his obituary in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, he could run the 100-yard dash in 10 seconds flat; the 220 in 21.8 seconds; the 440 in 51.8 seconds; the 880 in 1:57, the mile in 4:35; the 120-yard high hurdles in 15 seconds; and the 220-yard low hurdles in 24 seconds. He could long jump 23 ft 6 in and high-jump 6 ft 5 in. He could pole vault 11 feet; put the shot 47 ft 9 in; throw the javelin 163 feet; and throw the discus 136 feet.

Thorpe entered the U.S. Olympic trials for both the pentathlon and the decathlon. He easily earned a place on the pentathlon team, winning three events. The decathlon trial was subsequently cancelled, and Thorpe was chosen to represent the U.S. in the event. The pentathlon and decathlon teams also included Avery Brundage, a future International Olympic Committee president.

Thorpe was extremely busy in the Olympics. Along with the decathlon and pentathlon, he competed in the long jump and high jump. The first competition was the pentathlon on July 7. He won four of the five events and placed third in the javelin, an event he had not competed in before 1912. Although the pentathlon was primarily decided on place points, points were also earned for the marks achieved in the individual events. Thorpe won the gold medal. That same day, he qualified for the high jump final, in which he finished in a tie for fourth. On July 12, Thorpe placed seventh in the long jump.

Thorpe&#x27;s final event was the decathlon, his first (and as it turned out, his only) decathlon. Strong competition from local favorite Hugo Wieslander was expected. Thorpe, however, defeated Wieslander by 688 points. He placed in the top four in all ten events, and his Olympic record of 8,413 points stood for nearly two decades. Even more remarkably, because someone had stolen his shoes just before he was due to compete, he found a mismatched pair of replacements, including one from a trash can, and won the gold medal wearing them. Overall, Thorpe won eight of the 15 individual events comprising the pentathlon and decathlon.

As was the custom of the day, the medals were presented to the athletes during the closing ceremonies of the games. Along with the two gold medals, Thorpe also received two challenge prizes, which had been donated by King Gustav V of Sweden for the decathlon and Czar Nicholas II of Russia for the pentathlon. Several sources recount that, when awarding Thorpe his prize, King Gustav said, &quot;You, sir, are the greatest athlete in the world&quot;, to which Thorpe replied, &quot;Thanks, King&quot;. Thorpe biographer Kate Buford suggests that the story is apocryphal, as she believes that such a comment &quot;would have been out of character for a man who was highly uncomfortable in public ceremonies and hated to stand out.&quot; The anecdote appeared in newspapers by 1948, 36 years after his appearance in the Olympics and time for myth making, and in books as early as 1952.

Thorpe&#x27;s successes were followed in the United States. On the Olympic team&#x27;s return, Thorpe was the star attraction in a ticker-tape parade on Broadway. He remembered later, &quot;I heard people yelling my name, and I couldn&#x27;t realize how one fellow could have so many friends.&quot;

Apart from his track and field appearances, Thorpe also played in one of two exhibition baseball games at the 1912 Olympics, which featured two teams composed mostly of U.S. track and field athletes. Thorpe had previous experience in the sport, as the public soon learned.

===All-Around champion===
After his victories at the Olympic Games in Sweden, on September 2, 1912, Thorpe returned to Celtic Park, the home of the Irish American Athletic Club, in Queens, New York (where he had qualified four months earlier for the Olympic Games), to compete in the Amateur Athletic Union&#x27;s All-Around Championship. Competing against Bruno Brodd of the Irish American Athletic Club and John L. Bredemus of Princeton University, he won seven of the ten events contested and came in second in the remaining three. With a total point score of 7,476 points, Thorpe broke the previous record of 7,385 points set in 1909 (also at Celtic Park), by Martin Sheridan, the champion athlete of the Irish American Athletic Club. Sheridan, a five-time Olympic gold medalist, was present to watch his record broken. He approached Thorpe after the event and shook his hand saying, &quot;Jim, my boy, you&#x27;re a great man. I never expect to look upon a finer athlete.&quot; He told a reporter from &quot;New York World&quot;, &quot;Thorpe is the greatest athlete that ever lived. He has me beaten fifty ways. Even when I was in my prime, I could not do what he did today.&quot;

===Controversy===
In 1912, strict rules regarding amateurism were in effect for athletes participating in the Olympics. Athletes who received money prizes for competitions, were sports teachers, or had competed previously against professionals, were not considered amateurs. They were barred from competition.

In late January 1913, the &quot;Worcester Telegram&quot; reported that Thorpe had played semi-professional baseball before the Olympics, and other U.S. newspapers followed up the story. Thorpe had played semi-professional baseball in the Eastern Carolina League for Rocky Mount, North Carolina, in 1909 and 1910, receiving meager pay; reportedly as little as US$2 ($ today) per game and as much as US$35 ($ today) per week. College players, in fact, regularly spent summers playing professionally in order to earn some money, but most used aliases, unlike Thorpe. Although the public did not seem to care much about Thorpe&#x27;s past, the Amateur Athletic Union (AAU), and especially its secretary James Edward Sullivan, took the case very seriously.

Thorpe wrote a letter to Sullivan, in which he admitted playing professional baseball:

His letter did not help. The AAU decided to withdraw Thorpe&#x27;s amateur status retroactively. Later that year, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) unanimously decided to strip Thorpe of his Olympic titles, medals and awards, and declare him a professional.

Although Thorpe had played for money, the AAU and IOC did not follow their own rules for disqualification. The rulebook for the 1912 Olympics stated that protests had to be made &quot;within 30 days from the closing ceremonies of the games.&quot; The first newspaper reports did not appear until January 1913, about six months after the Stockholm Games had concluded. There is also some evidence that Thorpe was known to have played semi-professional baseball before the Olympics, but the AAU had ignored the issue until being confronted with it in 1913. The only positive aspect of this affair for Thorpe was that, as soon as the news was reported that he had been declared a professional, he received offers from professional sports clubs.

==Professional career==

===Baseball===
In 1910, Thorpe had the unusual status of a sought-after free agent at the major league level during the era of the reserve clause, because the minor league team that last held his contract had disbanded that year, so he was free to choose which baseball team to play for. In January 1913, he turned down a starting position with the St. Louis Browns, then at the bottom of the American League. Thorpe signed with the New York Giants baseball club in 1913, the defending 1912 National League champion. With Thorpe playing in 19 of their 151 games, they repeated as the 1913 National League champions. Immediately following the Giants&#x27; October loss in the 1913 World Series, Thorpe and the Giants joined the Chicago White Sox for a world tour. Barnstorming across the United States and around the world, Thorpe was the celebrity of the tour.

Thorpe&#x27;s presence increased the publicity, attendance and gate receipts for the tour. He met with Pope Pius X and Abbas II Hilmi Bey (the last Khedive of Egypt), and played before 20,000 people in London including King George V. Thorpe was the last man to compete in both the Olympics (in a non-baseball sport) and Major League Baseball before Eddy Alvarez did the same in 2020.

Thorpe played sporadically with the Giants as an outfielder for three seasons. After playing in the minor leagues with the Milwaukee Brewers in 1916, he returned to the Giants in 1917. He was sold to the Cincinnati Reds early in the season. In the &quot;double no-hitter&quot; between Fred Toney of the Reds and Hippo Vaughn of the Chicago Cubs, Thorpe drove in the winning run in the 10th inning. Late in the season, he was sold back to the Giants. Again, he played sporadically for them in 1918 before being traded to the Boston Braves on May 21, 1919, for Pat Ragan. In his career, he amassed 91 runs scored, 82 runs batted in and a .252 batting average over 289 games. He continued to play minor league baseball until 1922, and once played for the minor league Toledo Mud Hens.

=== Football ===
Thorpe had not abandoned football either. He first played professional football in 1913 as a member of the Indiana-based Pine Village Pros, a team that had a several-season winning streak against local teams during the 1910s. He signed with the Canton Bulldogs in 1915. They paid him $250 ($) a game, a tremendous wage at the time. Before signing him Canton was averaging 1,200 fans a game, but 8,000 showed up for Thorpe&#x27;s debut against the Massillon Tigers. The team won titles in 1916, 1917, and 1919. Thorpe reportedly ended the 1919 championship game by kicking a wind-assisted 95-yard punt from his team&#x27;s own 5-yard line, effectively putting the game out of reach.

In 1920, the Bulldogs were one of 14 teams to form the American Professional Football Association, which became the National Football League (NFL) two years later. Thorpe was nominally their first president, but spent most of the year playing for Canton; a year later, he was replaced as president by Joseph Carr. He continued to play for Canton, coaching the team as well. Between 1921 and 1923, he helped organize and played for the Oorang Indians (LaRue, Ohio), an all-Native American team. Although the team&#x27;s record was 3–6 in 1922, and 1–10 in 1923, Thorpe played well and was selected for the &quot;Green Bay Press-Gazette&quot; first All-NFL team in 1923. This was later formally recognized in 1931 by the NFL as the league&#x27;s official All-NFL team.

Thorpe never played for an NFL championship team. He retired from professional football at age 41, having played 52 games for six teams from 1920 to 1928.

=== Basketball ===
Most of Thorpe&#x27;s biographers were unaware of his basketball career until a ticket that documented his time in professional basketball was discovered in an old book in 2005. By 1926, he was the main feature of the World Famous Indians of LaRue, Ohio, a traveling basketball team. The team barnstormed for at least two years (1927–28) in multiple states. Although stories about Thorpe&#x27;s team were published in some local newspapers at the time, his basketball career is not well-documented.

For a brief time in 1913, he was considering going into professional hockey for the Tecumseh Hockey Club in Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

==Marriage and family==
Thorpe married three times and had a total of eight children. In 1913, Thorpe married Iva M. Miller, whom he had met at Carlisle. In 1917, Iva and Thorpe bought a house now known as the Jim Thorpe House in Yale, Oklahoma, and lived there until 1923. They had four children: James F., Gale, Charlotte, and Grace Frances, an environmentalist and Native rights activist. Miller filed for divorce from Thorpe in 1925, claiming desertion.

In 1926, Thorpe married Freeda Verona Kirkpatrick (September 19, 1905 – March 2, 2007). She was working for the manager of the baseball team for which he was playing at the time. They had four sons: Phillip, William, Richard, and John Thorpe. Kirkpatrick divorced Thorpe in 1941, after they had been married for 15 years.

Lastly, Thorpe married Patricia Gladys Askew on June 2, 1945. She was with him when he died.

== Later life, film career, and death ==
After his athletic career, Thorpe struggled to provide for his family. He found it difficult to work a non-sports-related job and never held a job for an extended period of time. During the Great Depression in particular, he had various jobs, among others as a movie actor, mostly as an extra, usually playing an American Indian in Westerns, starting with the 1931 serial &quot;Battling with Buffalo Bill&quot;. In the 1932 comedy &quot;Always Kickin″&quot;, Thorpe was prominently cast in a speaking part as himself, a kicking coach teaching young football players to drop-kick. He played the captain of the guard in 1935&#x27;s &quot;She&quot;, an umpire in the 1940 film &quot;Knute Rockne, All American&quot;, and a member of the Navajo Nation in the 1950 film &quot;Wagon Master&quot;. An &quot;American Indian Magazine&quot; article states Thorpe appeared in over 70 films.

In 1931, during the Great Depression, Thorpe sold the film rights to his life story to MGM for $1,500 (). Warner Bros. eventually acquired the rights and memorialized Thorpe in &quot;Jim Thorpe – All-American&quot; (1951), starring Burt Lancaster. The film was directed by Michael Curtiz. Although there were rumors that Thorpe received no money, he was paid $15,000 by Warner Bros. plus a $2,500 donation toward an annuity for him by the studio&#x27;s head of publicity. The movie included archival footage of the 1912 and 1932 Olympics. Thorpe was seen in one scene as a coaching assistant. It was also distributed in the United Kingdom, where it was called &quot;Man of Bronze&quot;.

Apart from his career in films, he worked as a construction worker, a doorman/bouncer, a security guard, and a ditchdigger. He briefly joined the United States Merchant Marine in 1945, during World War II. Thorpe was a chronic alcoholic during his later life. He ran out of money sometime in the early 1950s. When hospitalized for lip cancer in 1950, Thorpe was admitted as a charity case. At a press conference announcing the procedure, his wife, Patricia, wept and pleaded for help, saying, &quot;We&#x27;re broke ... Jim has nothing but his name and his memories. He has spent money on his own people and has given it away. He has often been exploited.&quot;

In early 1953, Thorpe went into heart failure for the third time while dining with Patricia in their home in Lomita, California. He was briefly revived by artificial respiration and spoke to those around him, but lost consciousness shortly afterward. He died on March 28 at the age of 65.

==Victim of racism==
Thorpe, whose parents were both mixed-race, was raised as a Native American. He accomplished his athletic feats despite the severe racial inequality of the United States. It has often been suggested that his Olympic medals were stripped by the athletic officials because of his ethnicity. While it is difficult to prove this, the public comment at the time largely reflected this view. At the time Thorpe won his gold medals, not all Native Americans were recognized as U.S. citizens (the U.S. government had frequently demanded that they make concessions to adopt European-American ways to receive such recognition). Citizenship was not granted to all American Indians until 1924.

When Thorpe attended Carlisle, the students&#x27; ethnicity was used for marketing purposes. The football team was called the Indians. To create headlines, the school and journalists often portrayed sporting competitions as conflicts of Indians against whites. The first notice of Thorpe in &quot;The New York Times&quot; was headlined &quot;Indian Thorpe in Olympiad; Redskin from Carlisle Will Strive for Place on American Team.&quot; Throughout his life, Thorpe&#x27;s accomplishments were described in a similar racial context by other newspapers and sportswriters, which reflected the era.

==Legacy==

=== Olympic awards reinstated ===
Over the years, supporters of Thorpe attempted to have his Olympic titles reinstated. American Olympic officials, including former teammate and later president of the IOC Avery Brundage, rebuffed several attempts. Brundage once said, &quot;Ignorance is no excuse.&quot; Most persistent were the author Robert Wheeler and his wife, Florence Ridlon. They succeeded in having the AAU and United States Olympic Committee overturn its decision and restore Thorpe&#x27;s amateur status before 1913.

In 1982, Wheeler and Ridlon established the Jim Thorpe Foundation and gained support from the U.S. Congress. Armed with this support and evidence from 1912 proving that Thorpe&#x27;s disqualification had occurred after the 30-day time period allowed by Olympics rules, they succeeded in making the case to the IOC. In October 1982, the IOC Executive Committee approved Thorpe&#x27;s reinstatement. In an unusual ruling, they declared that Thorpe was co-champion with Ferdinand Bie and Hugo Wieslander, although both of these athletes had always said they considered Thorpe to be the only champion. In a ceremony on January 18, 1983, the IOC presented two of Thorpe&#x27;s children, Gale and Bill, with commemorative medals. Thorpe&#x27;s original medals had been held in museums, but they were stolen and have never been recovered. The IOC listed Thorpe as a co-gold medalist.

In July 2020, a petition from Bright Path Strong began circulating that called upon the IOC to reinstate Thorpe as the sole winner in his events in the 1912 Olympics. It was backed by Pictureworks Entertainment, which is making a film about Thorpe. The petition was supported by Olympian Billy Mills, who won a gold medal in the 10,000 meters at the 1964 Tokyo Games. The IOC voted to reinstate Thorpe as the sole winner of both events on July 14, 2022, after the National Olympic Committees of Norway and Sweden, representing Bie and Wieslander, had given their approval.

===Honors===

Thorpe&#x27;s tribe, the Sac and Fox Nation, added Olympic rings to their official flag to honor him.

Thorpe&#x27;s monument, featuring the quote from Gustav V (&quot;You, sir, are the greatest athlete in the world.&quot;), still stands near the town named for him, Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania. The grave rests on mounds of soil from Thorpe&#x27;s native Oklahoma and from the stadium in which he won his Olympic medals.

Thorpe&#x27;s achievements received great acclaim from sports journalists, both during his lifetime and since his death. In 1950, an Associated Press poll of almost 400 sportswriters and broadcasters voted Thorpe the &quot;greatest athlete&quot; of the first half of the 20th century. That same year, the Associated Press ranked Thorpe as the &quot;greatest American football player&quot; of the first half of the century. Pro Football Hall of Fame voters selected him for the NFL 50th Anniversary All-Time Team in 1967. In 1999, the Associated Press placed him third on its list of the top athletes of the century, following Babe Ruth and Michael Jordan. ESPN ranked Thorpe seventh on their list of best North American athletes of the century.

Thorpe was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1963, one of seventeen players in the charter class. Thorpe is memorialized in the Pro Football Hall of Fame rotunda with a larger-than-life statue. He was also inducted into halls of fame for college football, American Olympic teams, and the national track and field competition.

In 2018, Thorpe became one of the inductees in the first induction ceremony held by the National Native American Hall of Fame. The fitness center and a hall at Haskell Indian Nations University are named in honor of Thorpe.

President Richard Nixon, as authorized by U.S. Senate Joint Resolution 73, proclaimed Monday, April 16, 1973, as &quot;Jim Thorpe Day&quot; to promote nationwide recognition of Thorpe&#x27;s life. In 1986, the Jim Thorpe Association established an award with Thorpe&#x27;s name. The Jim Thorpe Award is given annually to the best defensive back in college football. The annual Thorpe Cup athletics meeting is named in his honor. The United States Postal Service issued a 32¢ stamp on February 3, 1998, as part of the Celebrate the Century stamp sheet series.

In a poll of sports fans published in 2000 by ABC Sports, Thorpe was voted the Greatest Athlete of the Twentieth Century; the pool of 15 other top athletes included Muhammad Ali, Pelé, Babe Ruth, Jesse Owens, Wayne Gretzky, Jack Nicklaus, and Michael Jordan.

In 2018, Thorpe was honored on the Native American dollar coin; proposed designs were released in 2015.

In 2024, President Joe Biden announced that Thorpe would be awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian honor given in the United States.

===Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania===
After Thorpe&#x27;s funeral was held at St. Benedict&#x27;s Catholic Church in Shawnee, Oklahoma, his body lay in state at Fairview Cemetery. Residents had paid to have it returned to Shawnee by train from California. The people began a fund-raising effort to erect a memorial for Thorpe at the town&#x27;s athletic park. Local officials had asked state legislators for funding, but a bill that included $25,000 for their proposal was vetoed by Governor Johnston Murray.

Meanwhile, Thorpe&#x27;s third wife, unbeknownst to the rest of his family, took Thorpe&#x27;s body and had it shipped to Pennsylvania when she heard that the small Pennsylvania towns of Mauch Chunk and East Mauch Chunk were seeking to attract business. She made a deal with officials which, according to Thorpe&#x27;s son Jack, was made by the widowed Patricia for monetary considerations. The towns &quot;bought&quot; Thorpe&#x27;s remains, erected a monument to him at the grave, merged, and renamed the newly united town in his honor as Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania. Thorpe had never been there. The monument site contains his tomb, two statues of him in athletic poses, and historical markers recounting his life story.

In June 2010, Jack Thorpe filed a federal lawsuit against the borough of Jim Thorpe, seeking to have his father&#x27;s remains returned to his homeland and re-interred near other family members in Oklahoma. Citing the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, Jack was arguing to bring his father&#x27;s remains to the reservation in Oklahoma, to be buried near those of his father, sisters and brother, a mile from the place he was born. He claimed that the agreement between his stepmother and Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania, borough officials was made against the wishes of other family members, who want him buried in Native American land. Jack Thorpe died at 73 on February 22, 2011.

In April 2013, U.S. District Judge Richard Caputo ruled that Jim Thorpe borough amounts to a museum under the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (&quot;NAGPRA&quot;), and therefore is bound by that law. A lawyer for Bill and Richard Thorpe said the men would pursue the legal process to have their father&#x27;s remains returned to Sac and Fox land in central Oklahoma. On October 23, 2014, the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit reversed Judge Caputo&#x27;s ruling. The appeals court held that Jim Thorpe borough is not a &quot;museum&quot;, as that term is used in NAGPRA, and that the plaintiffs therefore could not invoke that federal statute to seek reinterment of Thorpe&#x27;s remains. In NAGPRA language, &quot;&#x27;museum&#x27; means any institution or State or local government agency (including any institution of higher learning) that receives Federal funds and has possession of, or control over, Native American cultural items.&quot; The Court of Appeals directed the trial court to enter a judgment in favor of the borough. The appeals court said Pennsylvania law allows the plaintiffs to ask a state court to order reburial of Thorpe&#x27;s remains, but noted, &quot;once a body is interred there is great reluctance in permitting same to be moved, absent clear and compelling reasons for such a move.&quot; On October 5, 2015, the United States Supreme Court refused to hear the matter, effectively bringing the legal process to an end.

===Jim Thorpe Marathon===
The Jim Thorpe Area Running Festival is a series of races started in 2019 in Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania. It includes a marathon, a 26.2 mile footrace that features a steady elevation drop from start to finish.

==Notes==
==References==

===Inline citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q221482" start="0" end="20" title="Jim Thorpe" label="James Francis Thorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474201" start="126" end="144" title="Sac and Fox Nation" label="Sac and Fox Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="167" end="182" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q8118" start="344" end="364" title="1912 Summer Olympics" label="1912 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="373" end="391" title="pentathlon#Athletics pentathlons" label="classic pentathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q184654" start="409" end="418" title="decathlon" label="decathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="436" end="444" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q772866" start="532" end="555" title="List of stripped Olympic medals" label="lost his Olympic titles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="712" end="722" title="Olympic Games#Amateurism and professionalism" label="amateurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="769" end="800" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628376" start="913" end="944" title="Athletics at the 1912 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s decathlon" label="outside of the required 30 days"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="1159" end="1175" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="1207" end="1215" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041396" start="1242" end="1275" title="Carlisle Indian Industrial School" label="Carlisle Indian Industrial School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010228" start="1279" end="1301" title="Carlisle, Pennsylvania" label="Carlisle, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="1327" end="1338" title="All-America" label="All-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041389" start="1348" end="1375" title="Carlisle Indians football" label="school&amp;#x27;s football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569101" start="1388" end="1398" title="Pop Warner" label="Pop Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q455573" start="1540" end="1562" title="Amateur Athletic Union" label="Amateur Athletic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="1602" end="1617" title="San Francisco Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="1648" end="1669" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q975275" start="1711" end="1726" title="Canton Bulldogs" label="Canton Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="1847" end="1871" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861985" start="1961" end="1972" title="Barnstorming (sports)" label="barnstormed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2105" end="2120" title="History of the NFL Commissioner#Jim Thorpe (1920–1921)" label="first president"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2308" end="2324" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="2411" end="2421" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113023" start="2540" end="2552" title="Grace Thorpe" label="Grace Thorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="2735" end="2751" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="2852" end="2877" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Pro Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025791" start="2943" end="2967" title="Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania" label="Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q160528" start="3137" end="3151" title="Burt Lancaster" label="Burt Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988230" start="3175" end="3200" title="Jim Thorpe – All-American" label="Jim Thorpe – All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3368" end="3383" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="3404" end="3420" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="3449" end="3457" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q83900" start="3467" end="3484" title="birth certificate" label="birth certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953283" start="3627" end="3633" title="Prague, Oklahoma" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763720" start="3666" end="3687" title="The Shawnee News-Star" label="The Shawnee News-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q107503644" start="3757" end="3766" title="Bellemont, Oklahoma" label="Bellemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q495880" start="3769" end="3788" title="Pottawatomie County, Oklahoma" label="Pottawatomie County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="3931" end="3952" title="Baptism" label="baptismal certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q843999" start="3973" end="3980" title="Shawnee, Oklahoma" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474201" start="4071" end="4082" title="Sac and Fox" label="Sac and Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122575" start="4180" end="4205" title="Citizen Potawatomi Nation" label="Citizen Potawatomi Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437595" start="4320" end="4329" title="Thâkîwaki" label="Thâkîwaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q126811326" start="4348" end="4352" title="Sauk language" label="Sauk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294176" start="4671" end="4677" title="Stroud, Oklahoma" label="Stroud"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="4762" end="4771" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545700" start="4810" end="4818" title="truancy" label="ran away"/>
<link wikidata="Q845332" start="4873" end="4890" title="Haskell Indian Nations University" label="Haskell Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096204" start="4895" end="4917" title="American Indian boarding schools" label="Indian boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q493840" start="4921" end="4937" title="Lawrence, Kansas" label="Lawrence, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041396" start="5232" end="5265" title="Carlisle Indian Industrial School" label="Carlisle Indian Industrial School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010228" start="5269" end="5291" title="Carlisle, Pennsylvania" label="Carlisle, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569101" start="5357" end="5392" title="Pop Warner" label="Glenn Scobey &amp;quot;Pop&amp;quot; Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q168805" start="5537" end="5545" title="gangrene" label="gangrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q165704" start="5902" end="5911" title="high jump" label="high jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003786" start="6051" end="6059" title="field lacrosse" label="lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085001" start="6065" end="6081" title="ballroom dancing" label="ballroom dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569101" start="6148" end="6158" title="Glenn Scobey Warner" label="Pop Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q912985" start="6713" end="6725" title="running back" label="running back"/>
<link wikidata="Q674953" start="6727" end="6741" title="defensive back" label="defensive back"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638113" start="6743" end="6754" title="placekicker" label="placekicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q525495" start="6759" end="6765" title="punter (football position)" label="punter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676339" start="6842" end="6849" title="Harvard Crimson football" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6894" end="6934" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association#History" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q650807" start="7096" end="7105" title="touchdown" label="touchdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="7154" end="7157" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="7524" end="7533" title="United States Military Academy" label="Army team"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="7702" end="7722" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146372" start="7823" end="7835" title="College Football All-America Team" label="All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q278495" start="8455" end="8469" title="Marianne Moore" label="Marianne Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8118" start="8753" end="8773" title="1912 Summer Olympics" label="1912 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163125" start="8847" end="8857" title="pentathlon" label="pentathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q184654" start="8866" end="8875" title="decathlon" label="decathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8105" start="8952" end="8975" title="1906 Intercalated Games" label="1906 Intercalated Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q170737" start="9011" end="9020" title="long jump" label="long jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q178108" start="9022" end="9035" title="javelin throw" label="javelin throw"/>
<link wikidata="Q182570" start="9053" end="9065" title="discus throw" label="discus throw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210386" start="9275" end="9293" title="Athletics at the 1904 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s all-around" label="men&amp;#x27;s version"/>
<link wikidata="Q8098" start="9334" end="9357" title="1904 Summer Olympics" label="1904 St. Louis Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="9567" end="9585" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q185027" start="9878" end="9888" title="pole vault" label="pole vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q180935" start="9898" end="9910" title="shot put" label="put the shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q178108" start="9923" end="9940" title="javelin throw" label="throw the javelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182570" start="9965" end="9971" title="discus throw" label="discus"/>
<link wikidata="Q155928" start="10291" end="10305" title="Avery Brundage" label="Avery Brundage"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="10316" end="10347" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351983" start="11098" end="11113" title="Hugo Wieslander" label="Hugo Wieslander"/>
<link wikidata="Q52890" start="11819" end="11837" title="Gustaf V" label="Gustav V of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11865" end="11886" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Nicholas II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12156" end="12166" title="Apocrypha#Metaphorical usage" label="apocryphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q378575" start="12613" end="12631" title="ticker-tape parade" label="ticker-tape parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="12635" end="12643" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724549" start="12870" end="12905" title="Baseball at the 1912 Summer Olympics" label="baseball games at the 1912 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070483" start="13204" end="13232" title="Irish American Athletic Club" label="Irish American Athletic Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="13237" end="13243" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q455573" start="13340" end="13362" title="Amateur Athletic Union" label="Amateur Athletic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979154" start="13413" end="13424" title="Bruno Brodd" label="Bruno Brodd"/>
<link wikidata="Q56665382" start="13465" end="13481" title="John L. Bredemus" label="John L. Bredemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="13485" end="13505" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q347267" start="13720" end="13735" title="Martin Sheridan" label="Martin Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066835" start="14069" end="14083" title="New York World" label="New York World"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14271" end="14283" title="Olympic Games#Amateurism and professionalism" label="strict rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991269" start="14294" end="14304" title="Amateur sports" label="amateurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696200" start="14587" end="14605" title="Worcester Telegram" label="Worcester Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330048" start="14793" end="14816" title="Eastern Carolina League" label="Eastern Carolina League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021026" start="14821" end="14848" title="Rocky Mount, North Carolina" label="Rocky Mount, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q455573" start="15195" end="15217" title="Amateur Athletic Union" label="Amateur Athletic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371853" start="15254" end="15275" title="James Edward Sullivan" label="James Edward Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="15514" end="15545" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q772866" start="15575" end="15580" title="List of stripped Olympic medals" label="strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="16503" end="16513" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315269" start="16562" end="16576" title="reserve clause" label="reserve clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q11314813" start="16780" end="16796" title="St. Louis Browns" label="St. Louis Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559523" start="16806" end="16839" title="1912 St. Louis Browns season" label="the bottom of the American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="16864" end="16879" title="New York Giants (baseball)" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559500" start="16917" end="16946" title="1912 New York Giants season" label="1912 National League champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559678" start="17015" end="17045" title="1913 New York Giants season" label="1913 National League champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559717" start="17106" end="17123" title="1913 World Series" label="1913 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="17158" end="17175" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861985" start="17194" end="17206" title="Barnstorming (sports)" label="Barnstorming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527029" start="17356" end="17369" title="gate receipts" label="gate receipts"/>
<link wikidata="Q43739" start="17396" end="17407" title="Pope Pius X" label="Pope Pius X"/>
<link wikidata="Q157159" start="17412" end="17430" title="Abbas II of Egypt" label="Abbas II Hilmi Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q127861" start="17441" end="17457" title="Khedive of Egypt" label="Khedive of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="17512" end="17525" title="George V of the United Kingdom" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="17613" end="17634" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q15781892" start="17642" end="17654" title="Eddy Alvarez" label="Eddy Alvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861687" start="17801" end="17818" title="Milwaukee Brewers (minor league baseball team)" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="17882" end="17897" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q429049" start="17939" end="17948" title="no-hitter" label="no-hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496415" start="17963" end="17973" title="Fred Toney" label="Fred Toney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11330089" start="17990" end="18002" title="Hippo Vaughn" label="Hippo Vaughn"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="18010" end="18022" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869139" start="18202" end="18215" title="Boston Braves (baseball)" label="Boston Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143944" start="18237" end="18246" title="Pat Ragan" label="Pat Ragan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210151" start="18277" end="18288" title="runs scored" label="runs scored"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="18293" end="18307" title="runs batted in" label="runs batted in"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="18319" end="18334" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="18372" end="18393" title="minor league baseball" label="minor league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q787652" start="18443" end="18458" title="Toledo Mud Hens" label="Toledo Mud Hens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18599" end="18616" title="Pine Village, Indiana#Professional football" label="Pine Village Pros"/>
<link wikidata="Q975275" start="18723" end="18738" title="Canton Bulldogs" label="Canton Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784676" start="18925" end="18941" title="Massillon Tigers" label="Massillon Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="19216" end="19258" title="American Professional Football Association" label="American Professional Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="19277" end="19301" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19346" end="19367" title="History of the NFL Commissioner#Jim Thorpe (1920–1921)" label="their first president"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282006" start="19462" end="19473" title="Joseph Carr" label="Joseph Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q641567" start="19596" end="19610" title="Oorang Indians" label="Oorang Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413269" start="19612" end="19623" title="LaRue, Ohio" label="LaRue, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116075" start="19772" end="19795" title="Green Bay Press-Gazette" label="Green Bay Press-Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q60743828" start="20322" end="20342" title="World Famous Indians" label="World Famous Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413269" start="20346" end="20357" title="LaRue, Ohio" label="LaRue, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="20673" end="20679" title="Ice hockey" label="hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="20712" end="20719" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198506" start="20949" end="20965" title="Jim Thorpe House" label="Jim Thorpe House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846167" start="20969" end="20983" title="Yale, Oklahoma" label="Yale, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113023" start="21068" end="21081" title="Grace Thorpe" label="Grace Frances"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="21846" end="21862" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q658371" start="21943" end="21948" title="extra (drama)" label="extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q172980" start="21988" end="21996" title="Western movie" label="Westerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107047" start="22034" end="22060" title="Battling with Buffalo Bill" label="Battling with Buffalo Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q14955134" start="22225" end="22234" title="drop-kick" label="drop-kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2800583" start="22292" end="22295" title="She (1935 film)" label="She"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777688" start="22336" end="22362" title="Knute Rockne, All American" label="Knute Rockne, All American"/>
<link wikidata="Q977899" start="22427" end="22439" title="Wagon Master" label="Wagon Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075141" start="22456" end="22480" title="American Indian Magazine" label="American Indian Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="22624" end="22627" title="MGM" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="22643" end="22655" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q1988230" start="22720" end="22745" title="Jim Thorpe – All-American" label="Jim Thorpe – All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q160528" start="22769" end="22783" title="Burt Lancaster" label="Burt Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q51491" start="22810" end="22824" title="Michael Curtiz" label="Michael Curtiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860242" start="23295" end="23310" title="bouncer (doorman)" label="doorman/bouncer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772052" start="23371" end="23400" title="United States Merchant Marine" label="United States Merchant Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="23920" end="23933" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q984162" start="23997" end="24015" title="Lomita, California" label="Lomita, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q545991" start="24043" end="24065" title="artificial respiration" label="artificial respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q155928" start="25695" end="25709" title="Avery Brundage" label="Avery Brundage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418438" start="25909" end="25940" title="United States Olympic &amp;amp; Paralympic Committee" label="United States Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="26112" end="26125" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q725162" start="26485" end="26498" title="Ferdinand Bie" label="Ferdinand Bie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351983" start="26503" end="26518" title="Hugo Wieslander" label="Hugo Wieslander"/>
<link wikidata="Q436062" start="27184" end="27195" title="Billy Mills" label="Billy Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q8420" start="27246" end="27262" title="1964 Summer Olympics" label="1964 Tokyo Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025791" start="27751" end="27775" title="Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania" label="Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="28037" end="28053" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="28209" end="28225" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="28327" end="28352" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Pro Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q96394980" start="28381" end="28415" title="National Football League 50th Anniversary All-Time Team" label="NFL 50th Anniversary All-Time Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="28530" end="28539" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41421" start="28544" end="28558" title="Michael Jordan" label="Michael Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="28560" end="28564" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="28679" end="28704" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Pro Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q123474567" start="29078" end="29115" title="National Native American Hall of Fame" label="National Native American Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q845332" start="29150" end="29183" title="Haskell Indian Nations University" label="Haskell Indian Nations University"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="29225" end="29238" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q639465" start="29498" end="29514" title="Jim Thorpe Award" label="Jim Thorpe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q674953" start="29545" end="29559" title="defensive back" label="defensive back"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="29563" end="29579" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q327588" start="29592" end="29602" title="Thorpe Cup" label="Thorpe Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="29648" end="29676" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972283" start="29732" end="29753" title="Celebrate the Century" label="Celebrate the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q903850" start="29821" end="29831" title="ESPN on ABC" label="ABC Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="29940" end="29952" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="29954" end="29958" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q52651" start="29971" end="29982" title="Jesse Owens" label="Jesse Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="29984" end="29997" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q9424" start="29999" end="30012" title="Jack Nicklaus" label="Jack Nicklaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784228" start="30070" end="30092" title="Sacagawea dollar" label="Native American dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="30159" end="30168" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="30212" end="30241" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q430402" start="30784" end="30799" title="Johnston Murray" label="Johnston Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025791" start="30989" end="31021" title="Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania" label="Mauch Chunk and East Mauch Chunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025791" start="31343" end="31367" title="Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania" label="Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140298" start="31742" end="31796" title="Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act" label="Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q250438" start="32637" end="32689" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="33609" end="33636" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53878" wikidata="Q12124" url="?curid=53878" title="Betelgeuse">
<text>Betelgeuse is a red supergiant star in the constellation of Orion. It is usually the tenth-brightest star in the night sky and, after Rigel, the second brightest in its constellation. It is a distinctly reddish, semiregular variable star whose apparent magnitude, varying between +0.0 and +1.6, has the widest range displayed by any first-magnitude star. Betelgeuse is the brightest star in the night sky at near-infrared wavelengths. Its Bayer designation is &#x27;, Latinised to Alpha Orionis and abbreviated Alpha Ori or &#x27;.

With a radius between 640 and 764 times that of the Sun, if it were at the center of our Solar System, its surface would lie beyond the asteroid belt and it would engulf the orbits of Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars. Calculations of Betelgeuse&#x27;s mass range from slightly under ten to a little over twenty times that of the Sun. For various reasons, its distance has been quite difficult to measure; current best estimates are of the order of 400–600 light-years from the Suna comparatively wide uncertainty for a relatively nearby star. Its absolute magnitude is about −6. With an age of less than 10 million years, Betelgeuse has evolved rapidly because of its large mass, and is expected to end its evolution with a supernova explosion, most likely within 100,000 years. When Betelgeuse explodes, it will shine as bright as the half-Moon for more than three months; life on Earth will be unharmed. Having been ejected from its birthplace in the Orion OB1 associationwhich includes the stars in Orion&#x27;s Beltthis runaway star has been observed to be moving through the interstellar medium at a speed of , creating a bow shock over four light-years wide.

Betelgeuse became the first extrasolar star whose photosphere&#x27;s angular size was measured in 1920, and subsequent studies have reported an angular diameter (i.e., apparent size) ranging from 0.042 to 0.056 arcseconds; that range of determinations is ascribed to non-sphericity, limb darkening, pulsations and varying appearance at different wavelengths. It is also surrounded by a complex, asymmetric envelope, roughly 250 times the size of the star, caused by mass loss from the star itself. The Earth-observed angular diameter of Betelgeuse is exceeded only by those of R Doradus and the Sun.

Starting in October 2019, Betelgeuse began to dim noticeably, and by mid-February 2020 its brightness had dropped by a factor of approximately 3, from magnitude 0.5 to 1.7. It then returned to a more normal brightness range, reaching a peak of 0.0 visual and 0.1 V-band magnitude in April 2023. Infrared observations found no significant change in luminosity over the last 50 years, suggesting that the dimming was due to a change in extinction around the star rather than a more fundamental change. A study using the Hubble Space Telescope suggests that occluding dust was created by a surface mass ejection; this material was cast millions of miles from the star, and then cooled to form the dust that caused the dimming.

== Nomenclature ==
The star&#x27;s designation is &quot;&quot; (Latinised to &quot;Alpha Orionis&quot;), given by Johann Bayer in 1603.

The traditional name &quot;Betelgeuse&quot; was derived from the Arabic &quot;the hand of &quot;al-Jawzā’&quot; [i.e. Orion]&quot;. An error in the 13th-century reading of the Arabic initial &quot;yā’&quot; () as &quot;bā’&quot; (—a difference in i‘jām) led to the European name. In English, there are four common pronunciations of this name, depending on whether the first &quot;e&quot; is pronounced short or long and whether the &quot;s&quot; is pronounced or :
* ;
* , popularized for sounding like &quot;beetle juice&quot;.

In 2016, the International Astronomical Union organized a Working Group on Star Names (WGSN) to catalog and standardize proper names for stars. The WGSN&#x27;s first bulletin, issued July 2016, included a table of the first two batches of names approved by the WGSN, which included &quot;Betelgeuse&quot; for this star. It is now so entered in the IAU Catalog of Star Names.

== Observational history ==
Betelgeuse and its red coloration have been noted since antiquity; the classical astronomer Ptolemy described its color as (, &#x27;more or less orange-tawny&#x27;), a term later described by a translator of Ulugh Beg&#x27;s &quot;Zij-i Sultani&quot; as , Latin for &#x27;ruddiness&#x27;. In the 19th century, before modern systems of stellar classification, Angelo Secchi included Betelgeuse as one of the prototypes for his Class III (orange to red) stars. Three centuries before Ptolemy, in contrast, Chinese astronomers observed Betelgeuse as yellow; such an observation, if accurate, could suggest the star was in a yellow supergiant phase around this time, a credible possibility, given current research into these stars&#x27; complex circumstellar environment.

=== Nascent discoveries ===
Aboriginal groups in South Australia have shared oral tales of the variable brightness of Betelgeuse for an unknown period.
The variation in Betelgeuse&#x27;s brightness was described in 1836 by Sir John Herschel in &quot;Outlines of Astronomy&quot;. From 1836 to 1840, he noticed significant changes in magnitude when Betelgeuse outshone Rigel in October 1837 and again in November 1839. A 10-year quiescent period followed; then in 1849, Herschel noted another short cycle of variability, which peaked in 1852. Later observers recorded unusually high maxima with an interval of years, but only small variations from 1957 to 1967. The records of the American Association of Variable Star Observers (AAVSO) show a maximum brightness of 0.2 in 1933 and 1942, and a minimum of 1.2, observed in 1927 and 1941. This variability in brightness may explain why Johann Bayer, with the publication of his &quot;Uranometria&quot; in 1603, designated the star &quot;alpha&quot;, as it probably rivaled the usually brighter Rigel (&quot;beta&quot;). From Arctic latitudes, Betelgeuse&#x27;s red colour and higher location in the sky than Rigel meant the Inuit regarded it as brighter, and one local name was &quot;Ulluriajjuaq&quot; (&quot;large star&quot;).

In 1920, Albert A. Michelson and Francis G. Pease mounted a six-meter interferometer on the front of the 2.5-meter telescope at Mount Wilson Observatory, helped by John August Anderson. The trio measured the angular diameter of Betelgeuse at 0.047″, a figure that resulted in a diameter of () based on the parallax value of . But limb darkening and measurement errors resulted in uncertainty about the accuracy of these measurements.

The 1950s and 1960s saw two developments that affected stellar convection theory in red supergiants: the Stratoscope projects and the 1958 publication of &quot;Structure and Evolution of the Stars&quot;, principally the work of Martin Schwarzschild and his colleague at Princeton University, Richard Härm.
This book disseminated ideas on how to apply computer technologies to create stellar models, while the Stratoscope projects, by taking balloon-borne telescopes above the Earth&#x27;s turbulence, produced some of the finest images of solar granules and sunspots ever seen, thus confirming the existence of convection in the solar atmosphere.
=== Imaging breakthroughs ===

Astronomers saw some major advances in astronomical imaging technology in the 1970s, beginning with Antoine Labeyrie&#x27;s invention of speckle interferometry, a process that significantly reduced the blurring effect caused by astronomical seeing. It increased the optical resolution of ground-based telescopes, allowing for more precise measurements of Betelgeuse&#x27;s photosphere. With improvements in infrared telescopy atop Mount Wilson, Mount Locke, and Mauna Kea in Hawaii, astrophysicists began peering into the complex circumstellar shells surrounding the supergiant, causing them to suspect the presence of huge gas bubbles resulting from convection. However, it was not until the late 1980s and early 1990s, when Betelgeuse became a regular target for aperture masking interferometry, that breakthroughs occurred in visible-light and infrared imaging. Pioneered by J.E. Baldwin and colleagues of the Cavendish Astrophysics Group, the new technique employed a small mask with several holes in the telescope pupil plane, converting the aperture into an ad hoc interferometric array. The technique contributed some of the most accurate measurements of Betelgeuse while revealing bright spots on the star&#x27;s photosphere. These were the first optical and infrared images of a stellar disk other than the Sun, taken first from ground-based interferometers and later from higher-resolution observations of the COAST telescope. The &quot;bright patches&quot; or &quot;hotspots&quot; observed with these instruments appeared to corroborate a theory put forth by Schwarzschild decades earlier of massive convection cells dominating the stellar surface.

In 1995, the Hubble Space Telescope&#x27;s Faint Object Camera captured an ultraviolet image with a resolution superior to that obtained by ground-based interferometers—the first conventional-telescope image (or &quot;direct-image&quot; in NASA terminology) of the disk of another star.
Because ultraviolet light is absorbed by the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, observations at these wavelengths are best performed by space telescopes.
This image, like earlier pictures, contained a bright patch indicating a region in the southwestern quadrant hotter than the stellar surface.
Subsequent ultraviolet spectra taken with the Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph suggested that the hot spot was one of Betelgeuse&#x27;s poles of rotation. This would give the rotational axis an inclination of about 20° to the direction of Earth, and a position angle from celestial North of about 55°.

=== 2000s studies ===
In a study published in December 2000, the star&#x27;s diameter was measured with the Infrared Spatial Interferometer (ISI) at mid-infrared wavelengths producing a limb-darkened estimate of – a figure entirely consistent with Michelson&#x27;s findings eighty years earlier.
At the time of its publication, the estimated parallax from the Hipparcos mission was , yielding an estimated radius for Betelgeuse of . However, an infrared interferometric study published in 2009 announced that the star had shrunk by 15% since 1993 at an increasing rate without a significant diminution in magnitude.
Subsequent observations suggest that the apparent contraction may be due to shell activity in the star&#x27;s extended atmosphere.

In addition to the star&#x27;s diameter, questions have arisen about the complex dynamics of Betelgeuse&#x27;s extended atmosphere. The mass that makes up galaxies is recycled as stars are formed and destroyed, and red supergiants are major contributors, yet the process by which mass is lost remains a mystery.
With advances in interferometric methodologies, astronomers may be close to resolving this conundrum. Images released by the European Southern Observatory in July 2009, taken by the ground-based Very Large Telescope Interferometer (VLTI), showed a vast plume of gas extending from the star into the surrounding atmosphere.
This mass ejection was equal to the distance between the Sun and Neptune and is one of multiple events occurring in Betelgeuse&#x27;s surrounding atmosphere. Astronomers have identified at least six shells surrounding Betelgeuse. Solving the mystery of mass loss in the late stages of a star&#x27;s evolution may reveal those factors that precipitate the explosive deaths of these stellar giants.

===2019–2020 fading===

A pulsating semiregular variable star, Betelgeuse is subject to multiple cycles of increasing and decreasing brightness due to changes in its size and temperature. The astronomers who first noted the dimming of Betelgeuse, Villanova University astronomers Richard Wasatonic and Edward Guinan, and amateur Thomas Calderwood, theorize that a coincidence of a normal 5.9 year light-cycle minimum and a deeper-than-normal 425 day period are the driving factors.
Other possible causes hypothesized by late 2019 were an eruption of gas or dust or fluctuations in the star&#x27;s surface brightness.

By August 2020, long-term and extensive studies of Betelgeuse, primarily using ultraviolet observations by the Hubble Space Telescope, had suggested that the unexpected dimming was probably caused by an immense amount of superhot material ejected into space. The material cooled and formed a dust cloud that blocked the starlight coming from about a quarter of Betelgeuse&#x27;s surface. Hubble captured signs of dense, heated material moving through the star&#x27;s atmosphere in September, October and November before several telescopes observed the more marked dimming in December and the first few months of 2020.

By January 2020, Betelgeuse had dimmed by a factor of approximately 2.5 from magnitude 0.5 to 1.5 and was reported still fainter in February in &quot;The Astronomer&#x27;s Telegram&quot; at a record minimum of +1.614, noting that the star is currently the &quot;least luminous and coolest&quot; in the 25 years of their studies and also calculating a decrease in radius.
&quot;Astronomy&quot; magazine described it as a &quot;bizarre dimming&quot;,
and popular speculation inferred that this might indicate an imminent supernova.
This dropped Betelgeuse from one of the top 10 brightest stars in the sky to outside the top 20, noticeably dimmer than its near neighbor Aldebaran. Mainstream media reports discussed speculation that Betelgeuse might be about to explode as a supernova,
but astronomers note that the supernova is expected to occur within approximately the next 100,000 years and is thus unlikely to be imminent.

By 17 February 2020, Betelgeuse&#x27;s brightness had remained constant for about 10 days, and the star showed signs of rebrightening.
On 22 February 2020, Betelgeuse may have stopped dimming altogether, all but ending the dimming episode.
On 24 February 2020, no significant change in the infrared over the last 50 years was detected; this seemed unrelated to the recent visual fading and suggested that an impending core collapse may be unlikely.
Also on 24 February 2020, further studies suggested that occluding &quot;large-grain circumstellar dust&quot; may be the most likely explanation for the dimming of the star.
A study that uses observations at submillimetre wavelengths rules out significant contributions from dust absorption. Instead, large starspots appear to be the cause for the dimming.
Followup studies, reported on 31 March 2020 in &quot;The Astronomer&#x27;s Telegram&quot;, found a rapid rise in the brightness of Betelgeuse.

Betelgeuse is almost unobservable from the ground between May and August because it is too close to the Sun. Before entering its 2020 conjunction with the Sun, Betelgeuse had reached a brightness of +0.4 . Observations with the STEREO-A spacecraft made in June and July 2020 showed that the star had dimmed by 0.5 since the last ground-based observation in April. This is surprising, because a maximum was expected for August/September 2020, and the next minimum should occur around April 2021. However Betelgeuse&#x27;s brightness is known to vary irregularly, making predictions difficult. The fading could indicate that another dimming event might occur much earlier than expected.
On 30 August 2020, astronomers reported the detection of a second dust cloud emitted from Betelgeuse, and associated with recent substantial dimming (a secondary minimum on 3 August) in luminosity of the star.

In June 2021, the dust was explained as possibly caused by a cool patch on its photosphere
and in August a second independent group confirmed these results. The dust is thought to have resulted from the cooling of gas ejected from the star. An August 2022
study using the Hubble Space Telescope confirmed previous research and suggested the dust could have been created by a surface mass ejection. It conjectured as well that the dimming could have come from a short-term minimum coinciding with a long-term minimum producing a grand minimum, a 416-day cycle and 2010 day cycle respectively, a mechanism first suggested by astronomer L. Goldberg.
In April 2023, astronomers reported the star reached a peak of 0.0 visual and 0.1 V-band magnitude.

== Observation ==

As a result of its distinctive orange-red color and position within Orion, Betelgeuse is easy to find with the naked eye. It is one of three stars that make up the Winter Triangle asterism, and it marks the center of the Winter Hexagon. It can be seen rising in the east at the beginning of January of each year, just after sunset. Between mid-September and mid-March (best in mid-December), it is visible to virtually every inhabited region of the globe, except in Antarctica at latitudes south of 82°. In May (moderate northern latitudes) or June (southern latitudes), the red supergiant can be seen briefly on the western horizon after sunset, reappearing again a few months later on the eastern horizon before sunrise. In the intermediate period (June–July, centered around mid June), it is invisible to the naked eye (visible only with a telescope in daylight), except around midday low in the north in Antarctic regions between 70° and 80° south latitude (during midday twilight in polar night, when the Sun is below the horizon).

Betelgeuse is a variable star whose visual magnitude ranges between 0.0 and +1.6 . There are periods during which it surpasses Rigel to become the sixth brightest star, and occasionally it will become even brighter than Capella. At its faintest, Betelgeuse can fall behind Deneb and Beta Crucis, themselves both slightly variable, to be the twentieth-brightest star.

Betelgeuse has a B–V color index of 1.85 – a figure which points to its pronounced &quot;redness&quot;. The photosphere has an extended atmosphere, which displays strong lines of emission rather than absorption, a phenomenon that occurs when a star is surrounded by a thick gaseous envelope (rather than ionized). This extended gaseous atmosphere has been observed moving toward and away from Betelgeuse, depending on fluctuations in the photosphere. Betelgeuse is the brightest near-infrared source in the sky with a J band magnitude of −2.99; only about 13% of the star&#x27;s radiant energy is emitted as visible light. If human eyes were sensitive to radiation at all wavelengths, Betelgeuse would appear as the brightest star in the night sky.

Catalogues list up to nine faint visual companions to Betelgeuse. They are at distances of about one to four arc-minutes and all are fainter than 10th magnitude.

=== Distance measurements ===
Parallax is the apparent change of the position of an object, measured in seconds of arc, caused by the change of position of the observer of that object. Parallax is used in astronomy to estimate distances to the nearest stars. As the Earth orbits the Sun, every star is seen to shift by a fraction of an arc second, which measure, combined with the baseline provided by the Earth&#x27;s orbit gives the distance to that star. Since the first successful parallax measurement by Friedrich Bessel in 1838, astronomers have been puzzled by Betelgeuse&#x27;s apparent distance. Knowledge of the star&#x27;s distance improves the accuracy of other stellar parameters, such as luminosity that, when combined with an angular diameter, can be used to calculate the physical radius and effective temperature; luminosity and isotopic abundances can also be used to estimate the stellar age and mass.

When the first interferometric studies were performed on the star&#x27;s diameter in 1920, the assumed parallax was . This equated to a distance of or roughly , producing not only an inaccurate radius for the star but every other stellar characteristic. Since then, there has been ongoing work to measure the distance of Betelgeuse, with proposed distances as high as or about .

Before the publication of the Hipparcos Catalogue (1997), there were two slightly conflicting parallax measurements for Betelgeuse. The first, in 1991, gave a parallax of , yielding a distance of roughly or . The second was the Hipparcos Input Catalogue (1993) with a trigonometric parallax of , a distance of or . Given this uncertainty, researchers were adopting a wide range of distance estimates, leading to significant variances in the calculation of the star&#x27;s attributes.

The results from the Hipparcos mission were released in 1997. The measured parallax of Betelgeuse was , which equated to a distance of roughly or , and had a smaller reported error than previous measurements.
However, later evaluation of the Hipparcos parallax measurements for variable stars like Betelgeuse found that the uncertainty of these measurements had been underestimated.
In 2007, an improved figure of was calculated, hence a much tighter error factor yielding a distance of roughly or .

In 2008, measurements using the Very Large Array (VLA) produced a radio solution of , equaling a distance of or . As the researcher, Harper, points out: &quot;The revised Hipparcos parallax leads to a larger distance () than the original; however, the astrometric solution still requires a significant cosmic noise of 2.4 mas. Given these results it is clear that the Hipparcos data still contain systematic errors of unknown origin.&quot; Although the radio data also have systematic errors, the Harper solution combines the datasets in the hope of mitigating such errors. An updated result from further observations with ALMA and e-Merlin gives a parallax of mas and a distance of pc or ly.

In 2020, new observational data from the space-based &quot;Solar Mass Ejection Imager&quot; aboard the Coriolis satellite and three different modeling techniques produced a refined parallax of , a radius of , and a distance of or , which would imply Betelgeuse is nearly 25% smaller and 25% closer to Earth than previously thought.

Another study in 2022 suggest Betelgeuse to be smaller and closer than previously thought based on historical records which revealed Betelgeuse changed in color from yellow to red in the last thousand years. This color change suggest a mass of , considerably less than previous estimates, and the best-fit evolutionary track give a estimate as low as 125 parsecs (410 light-years), consistent with the &quot;Hipparcos&quot; data. 

The European Space Agency&#x27;s current Gaia mission is unable to produce good parallax results for stars like Betelgeuse which are brighter than the approximately V=6 saturation limit of the mission&#x27;s instruments. Because of this limitation, there was no data on Betelgeuse in Gaia Data Release 2, from 2018 or Data Release 3 from 2022.

=== Variability ===

Betelgeuse is classified as a semiregular variable star, indicating that some periodicity is noticeable in the brightness changes, but amplitudes may vary, cycles may have different lengths, and there may be standstills or periods of irregularity. It is placed in subgroup SRc; these are pulsating red supergiants with amplitudes around one magnitude and periods from tens to hundreds of days.

Betelgeuse typically shows only small brightness changes near to magnitude +0.5, although at its extremes it can become as bright as magnitude 0.0 or as faint as magnitude +1.6. Betelgeuse is listed in the General Catalogue of Variable Stars with a possible period of 2,335 days. More detailed analyses have shown a main period near 400 days, a short period of 185 days, and a longer secondary period around 2,100 days. The lowest reliably-recorded V-band magnitude of +1.614 was reported in February 2020.

Radial pulsations of red supergiants are well-modelled and show that periods of a few hundred days are typically due to fundamental and first overtone pulsation. Lines in the spectrum of Betelgeuse show doppler shifts indicating radial velocity changes corresponding, very roughly, to the brightness changes. This demonstrates the nature of the pulsations in size, although corresponding temperature and spectral variations are not clearly seen. Variations in the diameter of Betelgeuse have also been measured directly. First overtone pulsations of 185 days have been observed, and the ratio of the fundamental to overtone periods gives valuable information about the internal structure of the star and its age.

The source of the long secondary periods is unknown, but they cannot be explained by radial pulsations. Interferometric observations of Betelgeuse have shown hotspots that are thought to be created by massive convection cells, a significant fraction of the diameter of the star and each emitting 5–10% of the total light of the star. One theory to explain long secondary periods is that they are caused by the evolution of such cells combined with the rotation of the star. Other theories include close binary interactions, chromospheric magnetic activity influencing mass loss, or non-radial pulsations such as g-modes.

In addition to the discrete dominant periods, small-amplitude stochastic variations are seen. It is proposed that this is due to granulation, similar to the same effect on the sun but on a much larger scale.

=== Diameter ===


On 13 December 1920, Betelgeuse became the first star outside the Solar System to have the angular size of its photosphere measured. Although interferometry was still in its infancy, the experiment proved a success. The researchers, using a uniform disk model, determined that Betelgeuse had a diameter of , although the stellar disk was likely 17% larger due to the limb darkening, resulting in an estimate for its angular diameter of about 0.055&quot;. Since then, other studies have produced angular diameters that range from 0.042 to .
Combining these data with historical distance estimates of 180 to yields a projected radius of the stellar disk of anywhere from 1.2 to . Using the Solar System for comparison, the orbit of Mars is about , Ceres in the asteroid belt , Jupiter —so, assuming Betelgeuse occupying the place of the Sun, its photosphere might extend beyond the Jovian orbit, not quite reaching Saturn at .
The precise diameter has been hard to define for several reasons:

# Betelgeuse is a pulsating star, so its diameter changes with time;
# The star has no definable &quot;edge&quot; as limb darkening causes the optical emissions to vary in color and decrease the farther one extends out from the center;
# Betelgeuse is surrounded by a circumstellar envelope composed of matter ejected from the star—matter which absorbs and emits light—making it difficult to define the photosphere of the star;
# Measurements can be taken at varying wavelengths within the electromagnetic spectrum and the difference in reported diameters can be as much as 30–35%, yet comparing one finding with another is difficult as the star&#x27;s apparent size differs depending on the wavelength used. Studies have shown that the measured angular diameter is considerably larger at ultraviolet wavelengths, decreases through the visible to a minimum in the near-infrared, and increase again in the mid-infrared spectrum;
# Atmospheric twinkling limits the resolution obtainable from ground-based telescopes since turbulence degrades angular resolution.

The generally reported radii of large cool stars are Rosseland radii, defined as the radius of the photosphere at a specific optical depth of two-thirds. This corresponds to the radius calculated from the effective temperature and bolometric luminosity. The Rosseland radius differs from directly measured radii, with corrections for limb darkening and the observation wavelength. For example, a measured angular diameter of 55.6 mas would correspond to a Rosseland mean diameter of 56.2 mas, while further corrections for the existence of surrounding dust and gas shells would give a diameter of .

To overcome these challenges, researchers have employed various solutions. Astronomical interferometry, first conceived by Hippolyte Fizeau in 1868, was the seminal concept that has enabled major improvements in modern telescopy and led to the creation of the Michelson interferometer in the 1880s, and the first successful measurement of Betelgeuse.
Just as human depth perception increases when two eyes instead of one perceive an object, Fizeau proposed the observation of stars through two apertures instead of one to obtain interferences that would furnish information on the star&#x27;s spatial intensity distribution. The science evolved quickly and multiple-aperture interferometers are now used to capture speckled images, which are synthesized using Fourier analysis to produce a portrait of high resolution. It was this methodology that identified the hotspots on Betelgeuse in the 1990s.
Other technological breakthroughs include adaptive optics, space observatories like Hipparcos, Hubble and Spitzer,
and the Astronomical Multi-BEam Recombiner (AMBER), which combines the beams of three telescopes simultaneously, allowing researchers to achieve milliarcsecond spatial resolution.

Observations in different regions of the electromagnetic spectrum—the visible, near-infrared (NIR), mid-infrared (MIR), or radio—produce very different angular measurements. In 1996, Betelgeuse was shown to have a uniform disk of . In 2000, a Space Sciences Laboratory team measured a diameter of , ignoring any possible contribution from hotspots, which are less noticeable in the mid-infrared. Also included was a theoretical allowance for limb darkening, yielding a diameter of . The earlier estimate equates to a radius of roughly or , assuming the 2008 Harper distance of ,
a figure roughly the size of the Jovian orbit of .

In 2004, a team of astronomers working in the near-infrared announced that the more accurate photospheric measurement was . The study also put forth an explanation as to why varying wavelengths from the visible to mid-infrared produce different diameters: The star is seen through a thick, warm extended atmosphere. At short wavelengths (the visible spectrum) the atmosphere scatters light, thus slightly increasing the star&#x27;s diameter. At near-infrared wavelengths (K and L bands), the scattering is negligible, so the classical photosphere can be directly seen; in the mid-infrared the scattering increases once more, causing the thermal emission of the warm atmosphere to increase the apparent diameter.
Studies with the IOTA and VLTI published in 2009 brought strong support to the idea of dust shells and a molecular shell (MOLsphere) around Betelgeuse, and yielded diameters ranging from 42.57 to with comparatively insignificant margins of error. In 2011, a third estimate in the near-infrared corroborating the 2009 numbers, this time showing a limb-darkened disk diameter of . The near-infrared photospheric diameter of at the Hipparcos distance of equates to about or . A 2014 paper derives an angular diameter of (equivalent to a uniform disc) using H and K band observations made with the VLTI AMBER instrument.

In 2009 it was announced that the radius of Betelgeuse had shrunk from 1993 to 2009 by 15%, with the 2008 angular measurement equal to .
Unlike most earlier papers, this study used measurements at one specific wavelength over 15 years. The diminution in Betelgeuse&#x27;s apparent size equates to a range of values between seen in 1993 to seen in 2008— a contraction of almost in . The observed contraction is generally believed to be a variation in just a portion of the extended atmosphere around Betelgeuse, and observations at other wavelengths have shown an increase in diameter over a similar period.

The latest models of Betelgeuse adopt a photospheric angular diameter of around , with multiple shells out to 50–. Assuming a distance of , this means a stellar diameter of .

Once considered as having the largest angular diameter of any star in the sky after the Sun, Betelgeuse lost that distinction in 1997 when a group of astronomers measured R Doradus with a diameter of , although R Doradus, being much closer to Earth at about , has a linear diameter roughly one-third that of Betelgeuse.

===Occultations===

Betelgeuse is too far from the ecliptic to be occulted by the major planets, but occultations by some asteroids (which are more wide-ranging and much more numerous) occur frequently. A partial occultation by the 19th magnitude asteroid occurred on 2 January 2012. It was partial because the angular diameter of the star was larger than that of the asteroid; the brightness of Betelgeuse dropped by only about 0.01 magnitudes.

The 14th magnitude asteroid 319 Leona was predicted to occult on 12 December 2023, 01:12 UTC. Totality was at first uncertain, and the occulation was projected to only last approximately twelve seconds (visible on a narrow path on Earth&#x27;s surface, the exact width and location of which was initially uncertain due to lack of precise knowledge of the size and path of the asteroid). Projections were later refined as more data were analyzed for a totality (&quot;ring of fire&quot;) of approximately five seconds and a 60 km wide path stretching from Tajikistan, Armenia, Turkey, Greece, Italy, Spain, the Atlantic Ocean, Miami, Florida and the Florida Keys to parts of Mexico. (The serendiptous event would also afford detailed observations of 319 Leona itself.) Among other programmes 80 amateur astronomers in Europe alone have been coordinated by astrophysicist Miguel Montargès, et al. of the Paris Observatory for the event.

== Physical characteristics ==
Betelgeuse is a very large, luminous but cool star classified as an M1-2 Ia-ab red supergiant. The letter &quot;M&quot; in this designation means that it is a red star belonging to the M spectral class and therefore has a relatively low photospheric temperature; the &quot;Ia-ab&quot; suffix luminosity class indicates that it is an intermediate-luminosity supergiant, with properties partway between a normal supergiant and a luminous supergiant. Since 1943, the spectrum of Betelgeuse has served as one of the stable anchor points by which other stars are classified.

Uncertainty in the star&#x27;s surface temperature, diameter, and distance make it difficult to achieve a precise measurement of Betelgeuse&#x27;s luminosity, but research from 2012 quotes a luminosity of around , assuming a distance of . Studies since 2001 report effective temperatures ranging from 3,250 to 3,690 K. Values outside this range have previously been reported, and much of the variation is believed to be real, due to pulsations in the atmosphere. The star is also a slow rotator and the most recent velocity recorded was —much slower than Antares which has a rotational velocity of . The rotation period depends on Betelgeuse&#x27;s size and orientation to Earth, but it has been calculated to take to turn on its axis, inclined at an angle of around to Earth.

In 2004, astronomers using computer simulations speculated that even if Betelgeuse is not rotating it might exhibit large-scale magnetic activity in its extended atmosphere, a factor where even moderately strong fields could have a meaningful influence over the star&#x27;s dust, wind and mass-loss properties.
A series of spectropolarimetric observations obtained in 2010 with the Bernard Lyot Telescope at Pic du Midi Observatory revealed the presence of a weak magnetic field at the surface of Betelgeuse, suggesting that the giant convective motions of supergiant stars are able to trigger the onset of a small-scale dynamo effect.

===Mass===
Betelgeuse has no known orbital companions, so its mass cannot be calculated by that direct method. Modern mass estimates from theoretical modelling have produced values of ,
with values of – from older studies.
It has been calculated that Betelgeuse began its life as a star of , based on a solar luminosity of 90,000–150,000 . A novel method of determining the supergiant&#x27;s mass was proposed in 2011, arguing for a current stellar mass of with an upper limit of 16.6 and lower of , based on observations of the star&#x27;s intensity profile from narrow H-band interferometry and using a photospheric measurement of roughly or . A probabilistic age prior analysis give a current mass of and an initial mass of .

Betelgeuse&#x27;s mass can also be estimated based on its position on the colormagnitudediagram (CMD). Betelgeuse&#x27;s color may have changed from yellow (or possibly orange; i.e. a yellow supergiant) to red in the last few thousand years, based on a 2022 review of historical records. This color change combined with the CMD suggest a mass of , an age of 14 million year and a distance from 125 to 150 parsecs (~400 to 500 light years).

=== Motion ===
The kinematics of Betelgeuse are complex. The age of class M supergiants with an initial mass of is roughly 10 million years.
Starting from its present position and motion, a projection back in time would place Betelgeuse around farther from the galactic plane—an implausible location, as there is no star formation region there. Moreover, Betelgeuse&#x27;s projected pathway does not appear to intersect with the 25 Ori subassociation or the far younger Orion Nebula Cluster (ONC, also known as Ori OB1d), particularly since Very Long Baseline Array astrometry yields a distance from Betelgeuse to the ONC of between 389 and . Consequently, it is likely that Betelgeuse has not always had its current motion through space but has changed course at one time or another, possibly the result of a nearby stellar explosion. An observation by the Herschel Space Observatory in January 2013 revealed that the star&#x27;s winds are crashing against the surrounding interstellar medium.

The most likely star-formation scenario for Betelgeuse is that it is a runaway star from the Orion OB1 association. Originally a member of a high-mass multiple system within Ori OB1a, Betelgeuse was probably formed about 10–12 million years ago, but has evolved rapidly due to its high mass. H. Bouy and J. Alves suggested in 2015 that Betelgeuse may instead be a member of the newly discovered Taurion OB association.

=== Circumstellar dynamics ===
In the late phase of stellar evolution, massive stars like Betelgeuse exhibit high rates of mass loss, possibly as much as every , resulting in a complex circumstellar environment that is constantly in flux. In a 2009 paper, stellar mass loss was cited as the &quot;key to understanding the evolution of the universe from the earliest cosmological times to the current epoch, and of planet formation and the formation of life itself&quot;.
However, the physical mechanism is not well understood. When Martin Schwarzschild first proposed his theory of huge convection cells, he argued it was the likely cause of mass loss in evolved supergiants like Betelgeuse. Recent work has corroborated this hypothesis, yet there are still uncertainties about the structure of their convection, the mechanism of their mass loss, the way dust forms in their extended atmosphere, and the conditions which precipitate their dramatic finale as a type II supernova. In 2001, Graham Harper estimated a stellar wind at every , but research since 2009 has provided evidence of episodic mass loss making any total figure for Betelgeuse uncertain. Current observations suggest that a star like Betelgeuse may spend a portion of its lifetime as a red supergiant, but then cross back across the H–R diagram, pass once again through a brief yellow supergiant phase and then explode as a blue supergiant or Wolf–Rayet star.
Astronomers may be close to solving this mystery. They noticed a large plume of gas extending at least six times its stellar radius indicating that Betelgeuse is not shedding matter evenly in all directions. The plume&#x27;s presence implies that the spherical symmetry of the star&#x27;s photosphere, often observed in the infrared, is &quot;not&quot; preserved in its close environment. Asymmetries on the stellar disk had been reported at different wavelengths. However, due to the refined capabilities of the NACO adaptive optics on the VLT, these asymmetries have come into focus. The two mechanisms that could cause such asymmetrical mass loss, were large-scale convection cells or polar mass loss, possibly due to rotation. Probing deeper with ESO&#x27;s AMBER, gas in the supergiant&#x27;s extended atmosphere has been observed vigorously moving up and down, creating bubbles as large as the supergiant itself, leading his team to conclude that such stellar upheaval is behind the massive plume ejection observed by Kervella.

==== Asymmetric shells ====
In addition to the photosphere, six other components of Betelgeuse&#x27;s atmosphere have now been identified. They are a molecular environment otherwise known as the MOLsphere, a gaseous envelope, a chromosphere, a dust environment and two outer shells (S1 and S2) composed of carbon monoxide (CO). Some of these elements are known to be asymmetric while others overlap.

At about 0.45 stellar radii (~2–) above the photosphere, there may lie a molecular layer known as the MOLsphere or molecular environment. Studies show it to be composed of water vapor and carbon monoxide with an effective temperature of about .
Water vapor had been originally detected in the supergiant&#x27;s spectrum in the 1960s with the two Stratoscope projects but had been ignored for decades. The MOLsphere may also contain SiO and Al2O3—molecules which could explain the formation of dust particles.
Another cooler region, the asymmetric gaseous envelope, extends for several radii (~10–) from the photosphere. It is enriched in oxygen and especially in nitrogen relative to carbon. These composition anomalies are likely caused by contamination by CNO-processed material from the inside of Betelgeuse.

Radio-telescope images taken in 1998 confirm that Betelgeuse has a highly complex atmosphere, with a temperature of , similar to that recorded on the star&#x27;s surface but much lower than surrounding gas in the same region. The VLA images also show this lower-temperature gas progressively cools as it extends outward. Although unexpected, it turns out to be the most abundant constituent of Betelgeuse&#x27;s atmosphere. &quot;This alters our basic understanding of red-supergiant star atmospheres&quot;, explained Jeremy Lim, the team&#x27;s leader. &quot;Instead of the star&#x27;s atmosphere expanding uniformly due to gas heated to high temperatures near its surface, it now appears that several giant convection cells propel gas from the star&#x27;s surface into its atmosphere.&quot; This is the same region in which Kervella&#x27;s 2009 finding of a bright plume, possibly containing carbon and nitrogen and extending at least six photospheric radii in the southwest direction of the star, is believed to exist.

The chromosphere was directly imaged by the Faint Object Camera on board the Hubble Space Telescope in ultraviolet wavelengths. The images also revealed a bright area in the southwest quadrant of the disk. The average radius of the chromosphere in 1996 was about 2.2 times the optical disk (~) and was reported to have a temperature no higher than .
However, in 2004 observations with the STIS, Hubble&#x27;s high-precision spectrometer, pointed to the existence of warm chromospheric plasma at least one arcsecond away from the star. At a distance of , the size of the chromosphere could be up to .
The observations have conclusively demonstrated that the warm chromospheric plasma spatially overlaps and co-exists with cool gas in Betelgeuse&#x27;s gaseous envelope as well as with the dust in its circumstellar dust shells.

The first claim of a dust shell surrounding Betelgeuse was put forth in 1977 when it was noted that dust shells around mature stars often emit large amounts of radiation in excess of the photospheric contribution. Using heterodyne interferometry, it was concluded that the red supergiant emits most of its excess radiation from positions beyond 12 stellar radii or roughly the distance of the Kuiper belt at 50 to 60 AU, which depends on the assumed stellar radius. Since then, there have been studies done of this dust envelope at varying wavelengths yielding decidedly different results. Studies from the 1990s have estimated the inner radius of the dust shell anywhere from 0.5 to , or 100 to .
These studies point out that the dust environment surrounding Betelgeuse is not static. In 1994, it was reported that Betelgeuse undergoes sporadic decades-long dust production, followed by inactivity. In 1997, significant changes in the dust shell&#x27;s morphology in one year were noted, suggesting that the shell is asymmetrically illuminated by a stellar radiation field strongly affected by the existence of photospheric hotspots. The 1984 report of a giant asymmetric dust shell () has not been corroborated by recent studies, although another published the same year said that three dust shells were found extending four light-years from one side of the decaying star, suggesting that Betelgeuse sheds its outer layers as it moves.

Although the exact size of the two outer CO shells remains elusive, preliminary estimates suggest that one shell extends from about 1.5 to 4.0 arcseconds and the other expands as far as 7.0 arcseconds.
Assuming the Jovian orbit of as the star radius, the inner shell would extend roughly 50 to 150 stellar radii (~300 to ) with the outer one as far as 250 stellar radii (~). The Sun&#x27;s heliopause is estimated at 100 AU, so the size of this outer shell would be almost fourteen times the size of the Solar System.

==== Supersonic bow shock ====
Betelgeuse is travelling through the interstellar medium at a speed of (i.e. ~) creating a bow shock.
The shock is not created by the star, but by its powerful stellar wind as it ejects vast amounts of gas into the interstellar medium at a speed of , heating the material surrounding the star, thereby making it visible in infrared light. Because Betelgeuse is so bright, it was only in 1997 that the bow shock was first imaged. The cometary structure is estimated to be at least one parsec wide, assuming a distance of 643 light-years.

Hydrodynamic simulations of the bow shock made in 2012 indicate that it is very young—less than 30,000 years old—suggesting two possibilities: That Betelgeuse moved into a region of the interstellar medium with different properties only recently or that Betelgeuse has undergone a significant transformation producing a changed stellar wind.
A 2012 paper, proposed that this phenomenon was caused by Betelgeuse transitioning from a blue supergiant (BSG) to a red supergiant (RSG). There is evidence that in the late evolutionary stage of a star like Betelgeuse, such stars &quot;may undergo rapid transitions from red to blue and vice versa on the Hertzsprung–Russell diagram, with accompanying rapid changes to their stellar winds and bow shocks.&quot; Moreover, if future research bears out this hypothesis, Betelgeuse may prove to have traveled close to 200,000 AU as a red supergiant scattering as much as along its trajectory.

==Life phases==
Betelgeuse is a red supergiant that has evolved from an O-type main-sequence star. After core hydrogen exhaustion, Betelgeuse evolved into a blue supergiant before evolving into its current red supergiant form. Its core will eventually collapse, producing a supernova explosion and leaving behind a compact remnant. The details depend on the exact initial mass and other physical properties of that main sequence star.

===Main sequence===
The initial mass of Betelgeuse can only be estimated by testing different stellar evolutionary models to match its current observed properties. The unknowns of both the models and the current properties mean that there is considerable uncertainty in Betelgeuse&#x27;s initial appearance, but its mass is usually estimated to have been in the range of , with modern models finding values of . Its chemical makeup can be reasonably assumed to have been around 70% hydrogen, 28% helium, and 2.4% heavy elements, slightly more metal-rich than the Sun but otherwise similar. The initial rotation rate is more uncertain, but models with slow to moderate initial rotation rates produce the best matches to Betelgeuse&#x27;s current properties. That main sequence version of Betelgeuse would have been a hot luminous star with a spectral type such as O9V.

A star would take between 11.5 and 15 million years to reach the red supergiant stage, with more rapidly-rotating stars taking the longest. Rapidly-rotating stars take 9.3 million years to reach the red supergiant stage, while stars with slow rotation take only 8.1 million years. These are the best estimates of Betelgeuse&#x27;s current age, as the time since its zero age main sequence stage is estimated to be 8.0–8.5 million years as a star with no rotation.

=== After core hydrogen exhaustion ===
Betelgeuse&#x27;s time spent as a red supergiant can be estimated by comparing mass loss rates to the observed circumstellar material, as well as the abundances of heavy elements at the surface. Estimates range from 10,000 years to a maximum of 140,000 years. Betelgeuse appears to undergo short periods of heavy mass loss and is a runaway star moving rapidly through space, so comparisons of its current mass loss to the total lost mass are difficult.
The surface of Betelgeuse shows enhancement of nitrogen, relatively low levels of carbon, and a high proportion of 13C relative to 12C, all indicative of a star that has experienced the first dredge-up. However, the first dredge-up occurs soon after a star reaches the red supergiant phase and so this only means that Betelgeuse has been a red supergiant for at least a few thousand years. The best prediction is that Betelgeuse has already spent around 40,000 years as a red supergiant, having left the main sequence perhaps one million years ago.

The current mass can be estimated from evolutionary models from the initial mass and the expected mass lost so far. For Betelgeuse, the total mass lost is predicted to be no more than about , giving a current mass of , considerably higher than estimated by other means such as pulsational properties or limb-darkening models.
All stars more massive than about are expected to end their lives when their cores collapse, typically producing a supernova explosion. Up to about , a type II-P supernova is always produced from the red supergiant stage.

More massive stars can lose mass quickly enough that they evolve towards higher temperatures before their cores can collapse, particularly for rotating stars and models with especially high mass loss rates. These stars can produce type II-L or type IIb supernovae from yellow or blue supergiants, or type I b/c supernovae from Wolf–Rayet stars. Models of rotating stars predict a peculiar type II supernova similar to SN 1987A from a blue supergiant progenitor. On the other hand, non-rotating models predict a type II-P supernova from a red supergiant progenitor.

The time until Betelgeuse explodes depends on the predicted initial conditions and on the estimate of the time already spent as a red supergiant. The total lifetime from the start of the red supergiant phase to core collapse varies from about 300,000 years for a rotating star, 550,000 years for a rotating star, and up to a million years for a non-rotating star. Given the estimated time since Betelgeuse became a red supergiant, estimates of its remaining lifetime range from a &quot;best guess&quot; of under 100,000 years for a non-rotating model to far longer for rotating models or lower-mass stars. Betelgeuse&#x27;s suspected birthplace in the Orion OB1 association is the location of several previous supernovae. It is believed that runaway stars may be caused by supernovae, and there is strong evidence that OB stars μ Columbae, AE Aurigae, and 53 Arietis all originated from such explosions in Ori OB1 2.2, 2.7, and 4.9 million years ago.

A typical type II-P supernova emits of neutrinos and produces an explosion with a kinetic energy of . As seen from Earth, Betelgeuse as a type II-P supernova would have a peak apparent magnitude somewhere in the range −8 to −12. This would be easily visible in daylight, with a possible brightness up to a significant fraction of the full moon, though likely not exceeding it. This type of supernova would remain at roughly constant brightness for 2–3 months before rapidly dimming. The visible light is produced mainly by the radioactive decay of cobalt, and sustains its brightness due to the increasing transparency of the cooling hydrogen ejected by the supernova.

====Media reporting====
Due to misunderstandings caused by the 2009 publication of the star&#x27;s 15% contraction, apparently of its outer atmosphere, Betelgeuse has frequently been the subject of scare stories and rumors suggesting that it will explode within a year, and leading to exaggerated claims about the consequences of such an event. The timing and prevalence of these rumors have been linked to broader misconceptions of astronomy, particularly to doomsday predictions relating to the Mayan calendrical apocalypse. Betelgeuse is not likely to produce a gamma-ray burst and is not close enough for its X-rays, ultraviolet radiation, or ejected material to cause significant effects on Earth.

Following the dimming of Betelgeuse in December 2019, reports appeared in the science and mainstream media that again included speculation that the star might be about to explode as a supernova – even in the face of scientific research that a supernova is not expected for perhaps 100,000 years. Some outlets reported the magnitude as faint as +1.3 as an unusual and interesting phenomenon, like &quot;Astronomy&quot; magazine, the &quot;National Geographic&quot;, and the &quot;Smithsonian&quot;.

Some mainstream media, like &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, &quot;ABC News&quot; in Australia, and &quot;Popular Science&quot;, reported that a supernova was possible but unlikely, whilst other outlets falsely portrayed a supernova as an imminent realistic possibility. CNN, for example, chose the headline &quot;A giant red star is acting weird and scientists think it may be about to explode&quot;, while the &quot;New York Post&quot; declared Betelgeuse as &quot;due for explosive supernova&quot;.

Phil Plait, in his &quot;Bad Astronomy&quot; blog, noting that Betelgeuse&#x27;s recent behaviour, &quot;[w]hile unusual . . . isn&#x27;t unprecedented,&quot; argued that the star is not likely to explode &quot;for a long, long time.&quot; Dennis Overbye of &quot;The New York Times&quot; agreed that an explosion was not imminent but added that &quot;astronomers are having fun thinking about it.&quot;

Following the eventual supernova, a small dense remnant will be left behind, either a neutron star or black hole. Betelgeuse does not seem to have a core massive enough for a black hole, so the remnant will probably be a neutron star of approximately .

== Binarity ==
Betelgeuse generally has been considered to be a single isolated star and a runaway star, not currently associated with any cluster or star-forming region, although its birthplace is unclear. However, starting in 1985, three studies have proposed companion stars to Betelgeuse. In 1985, analysis of polarization data from 1968 through 1983 indicated a close companion with a periodic orbit of about 2.1 years, and by using speckle interferometry, the team concluded that the closer of the two companions was located at (≈9 AU) from the main star with a position angle of 273°, an orbit that would potentially place it within the star&#x27;s chromosphere. The more distant companion was at (≈77 AU) with a position angle of 278°. Other studies have found no evidence for these companions or have actively refuted their existence, but the possibility of a close companion contributing to the overall flux has never been fully ruled out. High-resolution interferometry of Betelgeuse and its vicinity, far beyond the technology of the 1980s and 1990s, has not detected any companions.

More recently, in 2024, two studies found evidence for a companion star. One study found that a not yet directly-observed, dust-modulating star or white dwarf of at a distance of  AU would be the most likely solution for Betelgeuse&#x27;s 2170-day secondary periodicity, fluctuating radial velocity, moderate radius and low variation in effective temperature. A second study produced by a different group of researchers examined observational data spanning a century, also suggesting a close-in stellar companion, possibly less massive and luminous than the Sun with an orbital period of 5.78 years. It is expected to be engulfed by Betelgeuse within 10,000 years.

== Ethnological attributes ==

=== Spelling and pronunciation ===
Betelgeuse has also been spelled &quot;Betelgeux&quot; and, in German, &quot;Beteigeuze&quot; (according to Bode). &quot;Betelgeux&quot; and &quot;Betelgeuze&quot; were used until the early 20th century, when the spelling &quot;Betelgeuse&quot; became universal.
Consensus on its pronunciation is weak and is as varied as its spellings:
* Oxford English Dictionary and Royal Astronomical Society of Canada
* Oxford English Dictionary
* Canadian Oxford Dictionary and &quot;Webster&#x27;s Collegiate Dictionary&quot;

=== Etymology ===
Betelgeuse is often mistranslated as &quot;armpit of the central one&quot;. In his 1899 work &quot;Star-Names and Their Meanings&quot;, American amateur naturalist Richard Hinckley Allen stated the derivation was from the &quot;&quot;, which he claimed degenerated into a number of forms, including &quot;Bed Elgueze&quot;, &quot;Beit Algueze&quot;, &quot;Bet El-gueze&quot;, and &quot;Beteigeuze&quot;, to the forms &quot;Betelgeuse&quot;, &quot;Betelguese&quot;, &quot;Betelgueze&quot; and &quot;Betelgeux&quot;. The star was named &quot;Beldengeuze&quot; in the &quot;Alfonsine Tables&quot;, and Italian Jesuit priest and astronomer Giovanni Battista Riccioli had called it &quot;Bectelgeuze&quot; or &quot;Bedalgeuze&quot;.

Paul Kunitzsch, Professor of Arabic Studies at the University of Munich, refuted Allen&#x27;s derivation and instead proposed that the full name is a corruption of the Arabic &#x27;, meaning &quot;the Hand of &quot;al-Jauzā&#x27;&quot;&quot;; &quot;i.e.&quot;, Orion. European mistransliteration into medieval Latin led to the first character &quot;y&quot; (ﻴ, with two dots underneath) being misread as a &quot;b&quot; (ﺒ, with only one dot underneath). During the Renaissance, the star&#x27;s name was written as &#x27; (&quot;house of Orion&quot;) or &quot;&quot;, incorrectly thought to mean &quot;armpit of Orion&quot; (a true translation of &quot;armpit&quot; would be , transliterated as &quot;)&quot;. This led to the modern rendering as &quot;Betelgeuse&quot;. Other writers have since accepted Kunitzsch&#x27;s explanation.

The last part of the name, &quot;-elgeuse&quot;, comes from the Arabic &#x27;, a historical Arabic name of the constellation Orion, a feminine name in old Arabian legend, and of uncertain meaning. Because &#x27;, the root of &#x27;, means &quot;middle&quot;, &#x27; roughly means &quot;the Central One&quot;. The modern Arabic name for Orion is &#x27; (&quot;the Giant&quot;), although the use of &#x27; in the star&#x27;s name has continued. The 17th-century English translator Edmund Chilmead gave it the name &quot;Ied Algeuze&quot; (&quot;Orion&#x27;s Hand&quot;), from Christmannus. Other Arabic names recorded include &#x27; (&quot;the Right Hand&quot;), &#x27; (&quot;the Arm&quot;), and &#x27; (&quot;the Shoulder&quot;), all of al-Jauzā, Orion, as &#x27;.
=== Other names ===
Other names for Betelgeuse included the Persian &#x27; &quot;the Arm&quot;, and Coptic &#x27; &quot;an Armlet&quot;. &quot;&quot; was its Sanskrit name, as part of a Hindu understanding of the constellation as a running antelope or stag. In traditional Chinese astronomy, the name for Betelgeuse is (&quot;, the Fourth Star of the constellation of Three Stars&quot;) as the Chinese constellation originally referred to the three stars in Orion&#x27;s Belt. This constellation was ultimately expanded to ten stars, but the earlier name stuck. In Japan, the Taira, or Heike, clan adopted Betelgeuse and its red color as its symbol, calling the star &quot;Heike-boshi&quot;, (), while the Minamoto, or Genji, clan chose Rigel and its white color. The two powerful families fought a legendary war in Japanese history, the stars seen as facing each other off and only kept apart by the Belt.

In Tahitian lore, Betelgeuse was one of the pillars propping up the sky, known as &quot;Anâ-varu&quot;, the pillar to sit by. It was also called &quot;Ta&#x27;urua-nui-o-Mere&quot; &quot;Great festivity in parental yearnings&quot;. A Hawaiian term for it was &quot;Kaulua-koko&quot; (&quot;brilliant red star&quot;). The Lacandon people of Central America knew it as &quot;chäk tulix&quot; (&quot;red butterfly&quot;).

Astronomy writer Robert Burnham Jr. proposed the term &quot;padparadaschah&quot;, which denotes a rare orange sapphire in India, for the star.

=== Mythology ===
With the history of astronomy intimately associated with mythology and astrology before the scientific revolution, the red star, like the planet Mars that derives its name from a Roman war god, has been closely associated with the martial archetype of conquest for millennia, and by extension, the motif of death and rebirth. Other cultures have produced different myths. Stephen R. Wilk has proposed the constellation of Orion could have represented the Greek mythological figure Pelops, who had an artificial shoulder of ivory made for him, with Betelgeuse as the shoulder, its color reminiscent of the reddish yellow sheen of ivory.

Aboriginal people from the Great Victoria Desert of South Australia incorporated Betelgeuse into their oral traditions as the club of Nyeeruna (Orion), which fills with fire-magic and dissipates before returning. This has been interpreted as showing that early Aboriginal observers were aware of the brightness variations of Betelgeuse. The Wardaman people of northern Australia knew the star as &quot;Ya-jungin&quot; (&quot;Owl Eyes Flicking&quot;), its variable light signifying its intermittent watching of ceremonies led by the Red Kangaroo Leader Rigel. In South African mythology, Betelgeuse was perceived as a lion casting a predatory gaze toward the three zebras represented by Orion&#x27;s Belt.

In the Americas, Betelgeuse signifies a severed limb of a man-figure (Orion)—the Taulipang of Brazil know the constellation as Zililkawai, a hero whose leg was cut off by his wife, with the variable light of Betelgeuse linked to the severing of the limb. Similarly, the Lakota people of North America see it as a chief whose arm has been severed.

A Sanskrit name for Betelgeuse is ārdrā (&quot;the moist one&quot;), eponymous of the Ardra lunar mansion in Hindu astrology. The Rigvedic God of storms Rudra presided over the star; this association was linked by 19th-century star enthusiast Richard Hinckley Allen to Orion&#x27;s stormy nature. The constellations in Macedonian folklore represented agricultural items and animals, reflecting their way of life. To them, Betelgeuse was &quot;Orach&quot; (&quot;the ploughman&quot;), alongside the rest of Orion, which depicted a plough with oxen. The rising of Betelgeuse at around 3 a.m. in late summer and autumn signified the time for village men to go to the fields and plough. To the Inuit, the appearance of Betelgeuse and Bellatrix high in the southern sky after sunset marked the beginning of spring and lengthening days in late February and early March. The two stars were known as &quot;Akuttujuuk&quot; (&quot;those [two] placed far apart&quot;), referring to the distance between them, mainly to people from North Baffin Island and Melville Peninsula.

The opposed locations of Orion and Scorpius, with their corresponding bright red variable stars Betelgeuse and Antares, were noted by ancient cultures around the world. The setting of Orion and rising of Scorpius signify the death of Orion by the scorpion. In China they signify brothers and rivals Shen and Shang. The Batak of Sumatra marked their New Year with the first new moon after the sinking of Orion&#x27;s Belt below the horizon, at which point Betelgeuse remained &quot;like the tail of a rooster&quot;. The positions of Betelgeuse and Antares at opposite ends of the celestial sky were considered significant, and their constellations were seen as a pair of scorpions. Scorpion days marked as nights that both constellations could be seen.

=== In popular culture ===
As one of the brightest and best-known stars, Betelgeuse has featured in many works of fiction. The star&#x27;s unusual name inspired the title of the 1988 film &quot;Beetlejuice&quot;, referring to its titular antagonist, and script writer Michael McDowell was impressed by how many people made the connection. In the popular science fiction series &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot; by Douglas Adams, Ford Prefect was from &quot;a small planet somewhere in the vicinity of Betelgeuse.&quot;

Two American navy ships were named after the star, both of them World War II vessels, the launched in 1939 and launched in 1944. In 1979, the French supertanker &quot;Betelgeuse&quot; was moored off Whiddy Island, discharging oil when it exploded, killing 50 people in one of the worst disasters in Ireland&#x27;s history.

The Dave Matthews Band song &quot;Black and Blue Bird&quot; references the star. The Blur song &quot;Far Out&quot; from their 1994 album Parklife mentions Betelgeuse in its lyrics.

The Philip Larkin poem &quot;The North Ship&quot;, found in the collection of the same name, references the star in the section &quot;Above 80° N&quot;, which reads:
&quot; &#x27;A woman has ten claws,&#x27; 
Sang the drunken boatswain; 
Farther than Betelgeuse, 
More brilliant than Orion 
Or the planets Venus and Mars, 
The star flames on the ocean; 
&#x27;A woman has ten claws,&#x27; 
Sang the drunken boatswain.&quot;
Humbert Wolfe wrote a poem about Betelgeuse, which was set to music by Gustav Holst.

== Table of angular diameter estimates ==
This table provides a non-exhaustive list of angular measurements conducted since 1920. Also included is a column providing a current range of radii for each study based on Betelgeuse&#x27;s most recent distance estimate (Harper &quot;et al.&quot;) of .
== See also ==
* List of stars in Orion
* List of stars that have unusual dimming periods
* Stellar evolution
* List of semiregular variable stars
* List of supernova candidates

==Notes==
== References ==
== External links ==
* Surface imaging of Betelgeuse with COAST and the WHT – interferometric images taken at different wavelengths
* Near, mid and far infrared – Infrared Processing and Analysis Center (IPAC) webpage showing pictures at various wavelengths
* APOD Pictures:
# Mars and Orion over Monument Valley skyscape showing the relative brightness of Betelgeuse and Rigel
# Orion: head to toe breathtaking vista the Orion molecular cloud complex from Rogelio Bernal Andreo
# The spotty surface of Betelgeuse – a reconstructed image showing two hotspots, possibly convection cells
# Simulated Supergiant Star – Freytag&#x27;s &quot;Star in a Box&quot; illustrating the nature of Betelgeuse&#x27;s &quot;monster granules&quot;
# Why stars twinkle – image of Betelgeuse showing the effect of atmospheric twinkling in a telescope
* Red supergiant movie – numerical simulation of a red supergiant star like Betelgeuse</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12124" start="0" end="10" title="Betelgeuse" label="Betelgeuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898" start="16" end="30" title="red supergiant" label="red supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="43" end="56" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8860" start="60" end="65" title="Orion (constellation)" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q184221" start="85" end="100" title="List of brightest stars" label="tenth-brightest"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="101" end="105" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153471" start="113" end="122" title="night sky" label="night sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126" start="134" end="139" title="Rigel" label="Rigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054411" start="212" end="237" title="semiregular variable star" label="semiregular variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="244" end="262" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q13105140" start="333" end="353" title="first-magnitude star" label="first-magnitude star"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="408" end="421" title="near-infrared" label="near-infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q105616" start="439" end="456" title="Bayer designation" label="Bayer designation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="468" end="477" title="Latinisation of names" label="Latinised"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124" start="481" end="494" title="Betelgeuse" label="Alpha Orionis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124" start="511" end="520" title="Betelgeuse" label="Alpha Ori"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="622" end="634" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="669" end="682" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="707" end="712" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="717" end="724" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="726" end="731" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="733" end="738" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="744" end="748" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="861" end="864" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="870" end="885" title="#Distance measurements" label="various reasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="988" end="998" title="light-year" label="light-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="1079" end="1097" title="absolute magnitude" label="absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="1256" end="1265" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q26388" start="1368" end="1377" title="Lunar phase" label="half-Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013244" start="1485" end="1506" title="Orion OB1 association" label="Orion OB1 association"/>
<link wikidata="Q324312" start="1534" end="1551" title="Orion&amp;#x27;s Belt" label="Orion&amp;#x27;s Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6440" start="1556" end="1568" title="runaway star" label="runaway star"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="1612" end="1631" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q48930" start="1659" end="1668" title="Bow shocks in astrophysics" label="bow shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372" start="1748" end="1759" title="photosphere" label="photosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q718647" start="1842" end="1858" title="angular diameter" label="angular diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="1909" end="1919" title="Minute of arc" label="arcseconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q772102" start="1981" end="1995" title="limb darkening" label="limb darkening"/>
<link wikidata="Q353834" start="1997" end="2007" title="Stellar pulsations" label="pulsations"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="2044" end="2055" title="Electromagnetic radiation" label="wavelengths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086143" start="2104" end="2112" title="Circumstellar envelope" label="envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042750" start="2164" end="2173" title="Stellar mass loss" label="mass loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q115379" start="2275" end="2284" title="R Doradus" label="R Doradus"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="2647" end="2657" title="Bolometric luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q943247" start="2733" end="2743" title="Extinction (astronomy)" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="2817" end="2839" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q105616" start="3059" end="3070" title="Bayer designation" label="designation"/>
<link wikidata="Q78427" start="3138" end="3150" title="Johann Bayer" label="Johann Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="3226" end="3232" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17525361" start="3358" end="3361" title="ي" label="yā’"/>
<link wikidata="Q16726185" start="3380" end="3383" title="ب" label="bā’"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3408" end="3413" title="Arabic diacritics#I‘jām (phonetic distinctions of consonants)" label="i‘jām"/>
<link wikidata="Q320384" start="3634" end="3688" title="Beetlejuice" label="popularized for sounding like &amp;quot;beetle juice&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="3704" end="3736" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q27927866" start="3749" end="3776" title="IAU Working Group on Star Names" label="Working Group on Star Names"/>
<link wikidata="Q27927866" start="4039" end="4064" title="IAU Working Group on Star Names" label="IAU Catalog of Star Names"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="4151" end="4160" title="Classical antiquity" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="4187" end="4194" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q486088" start="4303" end="4312" title="Ulugh Beg" label="Ulugh Beg"/>
<link wikidata="Q202813" start="4326" end="4339" title="Zij-i Sultani" label="Zij-i Sultani"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="4351" end="4356" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="4430" end="4452" title="stellar classification" label="stellar classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q312416" start="4454" end="4467" title="Angelo Secchi" label="Angelo Secchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="4521" end="4530" title="Secchi classes" label="Class III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142197" start="4716" end="4733" title="yellow supergiant" label="yellow supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q14278" start="5087" end="5104" title="John Herschel" label="Sir John Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126" start="5231" end="5236" title="Rigel" label="Rigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q845060" start="5445" end="5451" title="Maxima and minima" label="maxima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205564" start="5543" end="5590" title="American Association of Variable Star Observers" label="American Association of Variable Star Observers"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="5614" end="5624" title="apparent magnitude" label="brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q78427" start="5746" end="5758" title="Johann Bayer" label="Johann Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q609895" start="5794" end="5805" title="Uranometria" label="Uranometria"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="6034" end="6039" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q127234" start="6149" end="6168" title="Albert A. Michelson" label="Albert A. Michelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659638" start="6173" end="6189" title="Francis G. Pease" label="Francis G. Pease"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="6210" end="6224" title="Interferometry" label="interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q466863" start="6268" end="6292" title="Mount Wilson Observatory" label="Mount Wilson Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348277" start="6304" end="6324" title="John August Anderson" label="John August Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="6387" end="6388" title="arcsecond" label="″"/>
<link wikidata="Q906561" start="6446" end="6454" title="stellar parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q160329" start="6638" end="6648" title="convection" label="convection"/>
<link wikidata="Q368749" start="6680" end="6691" title="Stratoscope" label="Stratoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q60891" start="6803" end="6823" title="Martin Schwarzschild" label="Martin Schwarzschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="6845" end="6865" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975337" start="7064" end="7074" title="Wave turbulence" label="turbulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q845657" start="7114" end="7127" title="solar granule" label="solar granule"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582994" start="7133" end="7140" title="sunspot" label="sunspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q358800" start="7353" end="7369" title="Antoine Émile Henry Labeyrie" label="Antoine Labeyrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504755" start="7390" end="7412" title="speckle interferometry" label="speckle interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057006" start="7481" end="7500" title="astronomical seeing" label="astronomical seeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424908" start="7519" end="7537" title="optical resolution" label="optical resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="7554" end="7563" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q899970" start="7660" end="7678" title="infrared telescopy" label="infrared telescopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q466863" start="7684" end="7696" title="Mount Wilson Observatory" label="Mount Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536779" start="7698" end="7709" title="McDonald Observatory" label="Mount Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q831790" start="7715" end="7724" title="Mauna Kea Observatories" label="Mauna Kea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634465" start="8018" end="8049" title="aperture masking interferometry" label="aperture masking interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q852632" start="8100" end="8116" title="Infrared photography" label="infrared imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q952538" start="8131" end="8143" title="John E. Baldwin" label="J.E. Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055012" start="8166" end="8194" title="Cavendish Astrophysics Group" label="Cavendish Astrophysics Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434802" start="8300" end="8308" title="aperture" label="aperture"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="8569" end="8572" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q912398" start="8673" end="8688" title="Cambridge Optical Aperture Synthesis Telescope" label="COAST telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q128034" start="8864" end="8874" title="Convection zone" label="convection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="8927" end="8949" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q304932" start="8957" end="8976" title="Faint Object Camera" label="Faint Object Camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413491" start="8989" end="9006" title="Ultraviolet astronomy" label="ultraviolet image"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="9209" end="9220" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="9246" end="9269" title="Atmosphere of Earth" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q148578" start="9327" end="9342" title="space telescope" label="space telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q595163" start="9533" end="9569" title="Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph" label="Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105737" start="9743" end="9757" title="position angle" label="position angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12119" start="9763" end="9778" title="Celestial pole" label="celestial North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539077" start="9902" end="9933" title="Infrared Spatial Interferometer" label="Infrared Spatial Interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q555846" start="10154" end="10163" title="Hipparcos" label="Hipparcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="10721" end="10751" title="life cycle of stars" label="stars are formed and destroyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q151991" start="10979" end="11008" title="European Southern Observatory" label="European Southern Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q265628" start="11049" end="11069" title="Very Large Telescope" label="Very Large Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q332" start="11242" end="11249" title="Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054411" start="11611" end="11636" title="semiregular variable star" label="semiregular variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466001" start="11822" end="11842" title="Villanova University" label="Villanova University"/>
<link wikidata="Q448759" start="11877" end="11890" title="Edward Guinan" label="Edward Guinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413491" start="12272" end="12296" title="Ultraviolet astronomy" label="ultraviolet observations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="12304" end="12326" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205341" start="12962" end="12992" title="The Astronomer&amp;#x27;s Telegram" label="The Astronomer&amp;#x27;s Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232273" start="13189" end="13198" title="Astronomy (magazine)" label="Astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="13331" end="13340" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q184221" start="13389" end="13415" title="List of brightest stars" label="brightest stars in the sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q88540091" start="13480" end="13489" title="Aldebaran" label="Aldebaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012875" start="14273" end="14291" title="circumstellar dust" label="circumstellar dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q193181" start="14380" end="14391" title="observation" label="observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631676" start="14396" end="14409" title="Submillimetre astronomy" label="submillimetre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893536" start="14495" end="14503" title="starspot" label="starspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q191536" start="14823" end="14834" title="Conjunction (astronomy)" label="conjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q182766" start="14917" end="14925" title="STEREO" label="STEREO-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="15857" end="15879" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523788" start="16219" end="16230" title="Leo Goldberg" label="L. Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q505816" start="16516" end="16531" title="Winter Triangle" label="Winter Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9262" start="16532" end="16540" title="asterism (astronomy)" label="asterism"/>
<link wikidata="Q515922" start="16573" end="16587" title="Winter Hexagon" label="Winter Hexagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="16818" end="16828" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q190991" start="17340" end="17351" title="polar night" label="polar night"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="17426" end="17442" title="apparent magnitude" label="visual magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q12970" start="17610" end="17617" title="Capella" label="Capella"/>
<link wikidata="Q12179" start="17663" end="17668" title="Deneb" label="Deneb"/>
<link wikidata="Q13105" start="17673" end="17684" title="Beta Crucis" label="Beta Crucis"/>
<link wikidata="Q271860" start="17779" end="17790" title="color index" label="color index"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311" start="17894" end="17904" title="Stellar atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="17937" end="17945" title="Spectral line" label="emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="17958" end="17968" title="Spectral line" label="absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991308" start="18276" end="18282" title="J band (infrared)" label="J band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028919" start="18283" end="18292" title="Magnitude (astronomy)" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259526" start="18337" end="18351" title="radiant energy" label="radiant energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="18701" end="18709" title="Parallax" label="Parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q116769675" start="18856" end="18885" title="Parallax in astronomy" label="Parallax is used in astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="19156" end="19164" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q75845" start="19180" end="19196" title="Friedrich Bessel" label="Friedrich Bessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="19373" end="19383" title="Stellar luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q854050" start="19479" end="19500" title="effective temperature" label="effective temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q659662" start="19517" end="19536" title="Natural abundance" label="isotopic abundances"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="19570" end="19581" title="Stellar evolution" label="stellar age"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="19586" end="19590" title="Intermediate mass star" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q555846" start="20003" end="20022" title="Hipparcos Catalogue" label="Hipparcos Catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20201" end="20226" title="Hipparcos#Hipparcos Input Catalogue" label="Hipparcos Input Catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352827" start="20909" end="20921" title="Margin of error" label="error factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q461382" start="20991" end="21007" title="Very Large Array" label="Very Large Array"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="21025" end="21030" title="Radio astronomy" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q181505" start="21211" end="21222" title="astrometric" label="astrometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361408" start="21261" end="21273" title="cosmic noise" label="cosmic noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q725364" start="21582" end="21586" title="Atacama Large Millimeter Array" label="ALMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245062" start="21591" end="21599" title="e-Merlin" label="e-Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172421" start="21756" end="21774" title="Coriolis (satellite)" label="Coriolis satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="22292" end="22310" title="stellar evolution" label="evolutionary track"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="22422" end="22443" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q767805" start="22459" end="22471" title="Gaia mission" label="Gaia mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q37859523" start="22702" end="22721" title="Gaia Data Release 2" label="Gaia Data Release 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054411" start="22814" end="22839" title="semiregular variable star" label="semiregular variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q222662" start="23385" end="23420" title="General Catalogue of Variable Stars" label="General Catalogue of Variable Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q129833" start="23628" end="23634" title="UBV photometric system" label="V-band"/>
<link wikidata="Q900488" start="23807" end="23818" title="fundamental mode" label="fundamental"/>
<link wikidata="Q261967" start="23829" end="23837" title="overtone" label="overtone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553575" start="23849" end="23854" title="Absorption line" label="Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q752171" start="23862" end="23870" title="stellar spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="23890" end="23903" title="doppler shift" label="doppler shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q240105" start="23916" end="23931" title="radial velocity" label="radial velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q261967" start="24208" end="24222" title="Overtone" label="First overtone"/>
<link wikidata="Q280157" start="24486" end="24503" title="radial pulsations" label="radial pulsations"/>
<link wikidata="Q190003" start="24925" end="24938" title="Chromosphere" label="chromospheric"/>
<link wikidata="Q599451" start="25013" end="25019" title="G-mode pulsation" label="g-mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071239" start="25085" end="25095" title="stochastic" label="stochastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q845657" start="25152" end="25163" title="Granule (solar physics)" label="granulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q772102" start="25618" end="25632" title="limb darkening" label="limb darkening"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25981" end="25985" title="Solar System#Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25997" end="26002" title="Solar System#Ceres" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="26010" end="26023" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26026" end="26033" title="Solar System#Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26164" end="26170" title="Solar System#Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="26710" end="26721" title="wavelengths" label="wavelengths"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="26733" end="26757" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="electromagnetic spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q538992" start="27173" end="27194" title="Scintillation (astronomy)" label="Atmospheric twinkling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571730" start="27357" end="27372" title="Rosseland optical depth" label="Rosseland radii"/>
<link wikidata="Q772102" start="27638" end="27652" title="limb darkening" label="limb darkening"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="27734" end="27737" title="milliarcsecond" label="mas"/>
<link wikidata="Q216814" start="28027" end="28043" title="Hippolyte Fizeau" label="Hippolyte Fizeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q733088" start="28164" end="28188" title="Michelson interferometer" label="Michelson interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749840" start="28269" end="28285" title="depth perception" label="depth perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434802" start="28398" end="28407" title="apertures" label="apertures"/>
<link wikidata="Q136980" start="28433" end="28446" title="Interference (wave propagation)" label="interferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504755" start="28619" end="28634" title="Speckle imaging" label="speckled images"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365258" start="28664" end="28680" title="Fourier analysis" label="Fourier analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q506922" start="28846" end="28861" title="adaptive optics" label="adaptive optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q148578" start="28863" end="28882" title="Space observatory" label="space observatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="28899" end="28905" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q201953" start="28910" end="28917" title="Spitzer Space Telescope" label="Spitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351557" start="28927" end="28969" title="AMBER (Very Large Telescope)" label="Astronomical Multi-BEam Recombiner (AMBER)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122117" start="29079" end="29097" title="spatial resolution" label="spatial resolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29194" end="29197" title="Infrared#Astronomy division scheme" label="NIR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306371" start="29343" end="29368" title="Space Sciences Laboratory" label="Space Sciences Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520419" start="30203" end="30204" title="K band (infrared)" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135460" start="30209" end="30216" title="L band (infrared)" label="L bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005275" start="30460" end="30464" title="Infrared Optical Telescope Array" label="IOTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q718647" start="31333" end="31346" title="apparent size" label="apparent size"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="31933" end="31936" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q115379" start="32016" end="32025" title="R Doradus" label="R Doradus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="32288" end="32296" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q150993" start="32641" end="32650" title="319 Leona" label="319 Leona"/>
<link wikidata="Q537749" start="33262" end="33274" title="Florida Keys" label="Florida Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093434" start="33407" end="33426" title="citizen science" label="amateur astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33483" end="33499" title="Miguel Montargès" label="Miguel Montargès"/>
<link wikidata="Q461340" start="33515" end="33532" title="Paris Observatory" label="Paris Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898" start="33659" end="33673" title="red supergiant" label="red supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="33765" end="33781" title="Class M star" label="M spectral class"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="33872" end="33888" title="Yerkes spectral classification scheme" label="luminosity class"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="34467" end="34468" title="Kelvin" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q12166" start="34706" end="34713" title="Antares" label="Antares"/>
<link wikidata="Q899381" start="35252" end="35271" title="spectropolarimetry" label="spectropolarimetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743686" start="35311" end="35333" title="Bernard Lyot Telescope" label="Bernard Lyot Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139060" start="35337" end="35360" title="Pic du Midi Observatory" label="Pic du Midi Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269129" start="35550" end="35563" title="dynamo effect" label="dynamo effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270143" start="36370" end="36397" title="Hertzsprung–Russell diagram" label="colormagnitudediagram (CMD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11476" start="36756" end="36766" title="kinematics" label="kinematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239165" start="36998" end="37012" title="galactic plane" label="galactic plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="37053" end="37067" title="star formation" label="star formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="37068" end="37074" title="Molecular cloud" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749313" start="37166" end="37172" title="25 Orionis" label="25 Ori"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013244" start="37173" end="37187" title="Orion OB1 association" label="subassociation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147559" start="37278" end="37302" title="Very Long Baseline Array" label="Very Long Baseline Array"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="37554" end="37571" title="Supernova" label="stellar explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q209630" start="37595" end="37621" title="Herschel Space Observatory" label="Herschel Space Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013244" start="37826" end="37847" title="Orion OB1 association" label="Orion OB1 association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6440" start="38136" end="38150" title="OB association" label="OB association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="38205" end="38222" title="stellar evolution" label="stellar evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042750" start="38276" end="38285" title="stellar mass loss" label="mass loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086143" start="38338" end="38363" title="circumstellar envelope" label="circumstellar environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q60891" start="38685" end="38705" title="Martin Schwarzschild" label="Martin Schwarzschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898" start="39407" end="39421" title="Red supergiant star" label="red supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142197" start="39499" end="39516" title="Yellow supergiant star" label="yellow supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048372" start="39545" end="39560" title="blue supergiant" label="blue supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251" start="39564" end="39579" title="Wolf–Rayet star" label="Wolf–Rayet star"/>
<link wikidata="Q265628" start="40094" end="40098" title="List of instruments at the Very Large Telescope" label="NACO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="40922" end="40937" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q414909" start="41449" end="41452" title="Silicon monoxide" label="SiO"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="41457" end="41462" title="Aluminium oxide" label="Al2O3"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="41680" end="41688" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q222971" start="41775" end="41778" title="CNO cycle" label="CNO"/>
<link wikidata="Q190003" start="42857" end="42869" title="chromosphere" label="chromosphere"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43901" end="43926" title="Interferometry#Heterodyne detection" label="heterodyne interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q427" start="44074" end="44085" title="Kuiper belt" label="Kuiper belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="45161" end="45163" title="carbon monoxide" label="CO"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="45263" end="45273" title="arcseconds" label="arcseconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q131687" start="45510" end="45520" title="heliopause (astronomy)" label="heliopause"/>
<link wikidata="Q48930" start="45761" end="45770" title="Bow shocks in astrophysics" label="bow shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q654396" start="45830" end="45842" title="stellar wind" label="stellar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="46103" end="46108" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="46208" end="46220" title="Fluid dynamics" label="Hydrodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048372" start="46640" end="46655" title="blue supergiant" label="blue supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q911809" start="47213" end="47238" title="O-type main-sequence star" label="O-type main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="47415" end="47424" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q207436" start="47464" end="47471" title="supernova remnant" label="remnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="48812" end="48834" title="Main sequence" label="zero age main sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770822" start="49518" end="49521" title="carbon-13" label="13C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058364" start="49534" end="49537" title="carbon-12" label="12C"/>
<link wikidata="Q129852" start="49589" end="49604" title="dredge-up" label="first dredge-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q584905" start="50920" end="50928" title="SN 1987A" label="SN 1987A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048372" start="50936" end="50951" title="blue supergiant" label="blue supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q193599" start="51044" end="51054" title="supergiant" label="supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013244" start="51720" end="51741" title="Orion OB1 association" label="Orion OB1 association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5886" start="51887" end="51894" title="OB star" label="OB star"/>
<link wikidata="Q798287" start="51896" end="51906" title="Mu Columbae" label="μ Columbae"/>
<link wikidata="Q291545" start="51908" end="51918" title="AE Aurigae" label="AE Aurigae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133939" start="51924" end="51934" title="53 Arietis" label="53 Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="52040" end="52049" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="52059" end="52067" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q104641" start="52354" end="52363" title="full moon" label="full moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="52568" end="52574" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q139274" start="53187" end="53215" title="2012 phenomenon" label="Mayan calendrical apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q22247" start="53255" end="53270" title="gamma-ray burst" label="gamma-ray burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="53303" end="53308" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="53386" end="53391" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="53832" end="53851" title="National Geographic" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487014" start="53867" end="53890" title="Smithsonian (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Smithsonian&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="53927" end="53946" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650197" start="53960" end="53968" title="ABC News (Australia)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q773087" start="53999" end="54014" title="Popular Science" label="Popular Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="54164" end="54167" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q211374" start="54311" end="54324" title="New York Post" label="New York Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701388" start="54396" end="54406" title="Phil Plait" label="Phil Plait"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840153" start="54421" end="54434" title="Bad Astronomy" label="Bad Astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258826" start="54636" end="54650" title="Dennis Overbye" label="Dennis Overbye"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="54660" end="54678" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q368442" start="54835" end="54856" title="Compact star" label="a small dense remnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="54887" end="54899" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="54903" end="54913" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6440" start="55146" end="55158" title="runaway star" label="runaway star"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="55369" end="55381" title="Polarization (waves)" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504755" start="55493" end="55515" title="Speckle imaging" label="speckle interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q190003" start="55711" end="55723" title="chromosphere" label="chromosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="56299" end="56310" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="56332" end="56334" title="Astronomical unit" label="AU"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="56947" end="56953" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q76966" start="56992" end="56996" title="Johann Elert Bode" label="Bode"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="57223" end="57248" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488642" start="57253" end="57289" title="Royal Astronomical Society of Canada" label="Royal Astronomical Society of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="57292" end="57317" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030413" start="57320" end="57346" title="Canadian Oxford Dictionary" label="Canadian Oxford Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17484340" start="57518" end="57547" title="Star Names" label="Star-Names and Their Meanings"/>
<link wikidata="Q622577" start="57990" end="58006" title="Alfonsine tables" label="Alfonsine Tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="58026" end="58032" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q196472" start="58055" end="58081" title="Giovanni Battista Riccioli" label="Giovanni Battista Riccioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="58449" end="58463" title="medieval Latin" label="medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="58614" end="58625" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8860" start="59108" end="59113" title="Orion (constellation)" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q97253422" start="59138" end="59152" title="Arabian legend" label="Arabian legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q111029" start="59200" end="59204" title="Root (linguistics)" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339379" start="59462" end="59477" title="Edmund Chilmead" label="Edmund Chilmead"/>
<link wikidata="Q90297" start="59557" end="59569" title="Jakob Christmann" label="Christmannus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="59848" end="59854" title="Coptic language" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="59906" end="59914" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268276" start="60021" end="60038" title="Chinese astronomy" label="Chinese astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832287" start="60044" end="60048" title="Chinese star names" label="name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192788" start="60116" end="60127" title="Three Stars (Chinese constellation)" label="Three Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102754" start="60142" end="60163" title="Orion in Chinese astronomy" label="Chinese constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q324312" start="60206" end="60223" title="Orion&amp;#x27;s Belt" label="Orion&amp;#x27;s Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079102" start="60324" end="60345" title="Heike clan" label="Taira, or Heike, clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q599881" start="60454" end="60478" title="Minamoto clan" label="Minamoto, or Genji, clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q737542" start="60547" end="60560" title="Genpei War" label="legendary war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355029" start="60977" end="60992" title="Lacandon people" label="Lacandon people"/>
<link wikidata="Q971844" start="61093" end="61111" title="Robert Burnham Jr." label="Robert Burnham Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q50056" start="61247" end="61267" title="history of astronomy" label="history of astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="61330" end="61351" title="scientific revolution" label="scientific revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="61417" end="61430" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Roman war god"/>
<link wikidata="Q131714" start="61477" end="61486" title="archetype" label="archetype"/>
<link wikidata="Q192485" start="61719" end="61725" title="Pelops" label="Pelops"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="61875" end="61885" title="Australian Aborigines" label="Aboriginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q145165" start="61902" end="61923" title="Great Victoria Desert" label="Great Victoria Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969102" start="62216" end="62231" title="Wardaman people" label="Wardaman people"/>
<link wikidata="Q36978" start="62662" end="62671" title="Pemon people" label="Taulipang"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="62851" end="62864" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota people"/>
<link wikidata="Q120682449" start="63015" end="63020" title="Ardra Nakshatra" label="Ardra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125935" start="63021" end="63034" title="nakshatra" label="lunar mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q740253" start="63038" end="63053" title="Hindu astrology" label="Hindu astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394419" start="63059" end="63071" title="Rigvedic deities" label="Rigvedic God"/>
<link wikidata="Q855310" start="63082" end="63087" title="Rudra" label="Rudra"/>
<link wikidata="" start="63172" end="63194" title="Star Names: Their Lore and Meaning" label="Richard Hinckley Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059243" start="63619" end="63624" title="Inuit astronomy" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13066" start="63659" end="63668" title="Bellatrix" label="Bellatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q8865" start="64030" end="64038" title="Scorpius" label="Scorpius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12166" start="64106" end="64113" title="Antares" label="Antares"/>
<link wikidata="Q810714" start="64314" end="64319" title="Batak (Indonesia)" label="Batak"/>
<link wikidata="Q108566" start="64368" end="64376" title="new moon" label="new moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q320384" start="64942" end="64953" title="Beetlejuice" label="Beetlejuice"/>
<link wikidata="Q276817" start="65016" end="65032" title="Michael McDowell (author)" label="Michael McDowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q25169" start="65131" end="65172" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy" label="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42" start="65182" end="65195" title="Douglas Adams" label="Douglas Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q928321" start="65197" end="65209" title="Ford Prefect (character)" label="Ford Prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q110264484" start="65455" end="65465" title="Whiddy Island disaster" label="Betelgeuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038045" start="65487" end="65500" title="Whiddy Island" label="Whiddy Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q832086" start="65616" end="65634" title="Dave Matthews Band" label="Dave Matthews Band"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65646" end="65665" title="Black and Blue Bird (song)" label="Black and Blue Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q485820" start="65697" end="65701" title="Blur (band)" label="Blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q241777" start="65749" end="65757" title="Parklife" label="Parklife"/>
<link wikidata="Q313758" start="65798" end="65811" title="Philip Larkin" label="Philip Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754355" start="65854" end="65885" title="The North Ship" label="the collection of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939939" start="66218" end="66231" title="Humbert Wolfe" label="Humbert Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q200867" start="66289" end="66301" title="Gustav Holst" label="Gustav Holst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064642" start="66617" end="66639" title="List of stars in Orion" label="List of stars in Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q65046232" start="66642" end="66689" title="List of stars that have unusual dimming periods" label="List of stars that have unusual dimming periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="66692" end="66709" title="Stellar evolution" label="Stellar evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508433" start="66712" end="66746" title="List of semiregular variable stars" label="List of semiregular variable stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q133424" start="66749" end="66777" title="List of supernova candidates" label="List of supernova candidates"/>
<link wikidata="Q752071" start="67066" end="67070" title="Astronomy Picture of the Day" label="APOD"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53879" wikidata="Q184554" url="?curid=53879" title="Orogeny">
<text>Orogeny () is a mountain-building process that takes place at a convergent plate margin when plate motion compresses the margin. An or develops as the compressed plate crumples and is uplifted to form one or more mountain ranges. This involves a series of geological processes collectively called orogenesis. These include both structural deformation of existing continental crust and the creation of new continental crust through volcanism. Magma rising in the orogen carries less dense material upwards while leaving more dense material behind, resulting in compositional differentiation of Earth&#x27;s lithosphere (crust and uppermost mantle). A synorogenic (or synkinematic) process or event is one that occurs during an orogeny.

The word &quot;orogeny&quot; comes . Although it was used before him, the American geologist G. K. Gilbert used the term in 1890 to mean the process of mountain-building, as distinguished from epeirogeny.

==Tectonics==

Orogeny takes place on the convergent margins of continents. The convergence may take the form of subduction (where a continent rides forcefully over an oceanic plate to form a noncollisional orogeny) or continental collision (convergence of two or more continents to form a collisional orogeny).

Orogeny typically produces &quot;orogenic belts&quot; or &quot;orogens&quot;, which are elongated regions of deformation bordering continental cratons (the stable interiors of continents). Young orogenic belts, in which subduction is still taking place, are characterized by frequent volcanic activity and earthquakes. Older orogenic belts are typically deeply eroded to expose displaced and deformed strata. These are often highly metamorphosed and include vast bodies of intrusive igneous rock called batholiths.

Subduction zones consume oceanic crust, thicken lithosphere, and produce earthquakes and volcanoes. Not all subduction zones produce orogenic belts; mountain building takes place only when the subduction produces compression in the overriding plate. Whether subduction produces compression depends on such factors as the rate of plate convergence and the degree of coupling between the two plates, while the degree of coupling may in turn rely on such factors as the angle of subduction and rate of sedimentation in the oceanic trench associated with the subduction zone. The Andes Mountains are an example of a noncollisional orogenic belt, and such belts are sometimes called &quot;Andean-type orogens&quot;.

As subduction continues, island arcs, continental fragments, and oceanic material may gradually accrete onto the continental margin. This is one of the main mechanisms by which continents have grown. An orogen built of crustal fragments (&quot;terranes&quot;) accreted over a long period of time, without any indication of a major continent-continent collision, is called an &quot;accretionary orogen.&quot; The North American Cordillera and the Lachlan Orogen of southeast Australia are examples of accretionary orogens.

The orogeny may culminate with continental crust from the opposite side of the subducting oceanic plate arriving at the subduction zone. This ends subduction and transforms the accretional orogen into a Himalayan-type collisional orogen. The collisional orogeny may produce extremely high mountains, as has been taking place in the Himalayas for the last 65 million years.

The processes of orogeny can take tens of millions of years and build mountains from what were once sedimentary basins. Activity along an orogenic belt can be extremely long-lived. For example, much of the basement underlying the United States belongs to the Transcontinental Proterozoic Provinces, which accreted to Laurentia (the ancient heart of North America) over the course of 200 million years in the Paleoproterozoic. The Yavapai and Mazatzal orogenies were peaks of orogenic activity during this time. These were part of an extended period of orogenic activity that included the Picuris orogeny and culminated in the Grenville orogeny, lasting at least 600 million years. A similar sequence of orogenies has taken place on the west coast of North America, beginning in the late Devonian (about 380 million years ago) with the Antler orogeny and continuing with the Sonoma orogeny and Sevier orogeny and culminating with the Laramide orogeny. The Laramide orogeny alone lasted 40 million years, from 75 million to 35 million years ago.

=== Intraplate orogeny ===
Stresses transmitted from plate boundaries can also lead to episodes of intracontinental transpressional orogeny. Examples in Australia include the Neoproterozoic Petermann Orogeny (630–520 Ma), and the Sprigg Orogeny (Miocene – present).

===Orogens===

Orogens show a great range of characteristics,
but they may be broadly divided into collisional orogens and noncollisional orogens (Andean-type orogens). Collisional orogens can be further divided by whether the collision is with a second continent or a continental fragment or island arc. Repeated collisions of the later type, with no evidence of collision with a major continent or closure of an ocean basin, result in an accretionary orogen. Examples of orogens arising from collision of an island arc with a continent include Taiwan and the collision of Australia with the Banda arc. Orogens arising from continent-continent collisions can be divided into those involving ocean closure (Himalayan-type orogens) and those involving glancing collisions with no ocean basin closure (as is taking place today in the Southern Alps of New Zealand).

Orogens have a characteristic structure, though this shows considerable variation. A &quot;foreland basin&quot; forms ahead of the orogen due mainly to loading and resulting flexure of the lithosphere by the developing mountain belt. A typical foreland basin is subdivided into a wedge-top basin above the active orogenic wedge, the foredeep immediately beyond the active front, a forebulge high of flexural origin and a back-bulge area beyond, although not all of these are present in all foreland-basin systems. The basin migrates with the orogenic front and early deposited foreland basin sediments become progressively involved in folding and thrusting. Sediments deposited in the foreland basin are mainly derived from the erosion of the actively uplifting rocks of the mountain range, although some sediments derive from the foreland. The fill of many such basins shows a change in time from deepwater marine (&quot;flysch&quot;-style) through shallow water to continental (&quot;molasse&quot;-style) sediments.

While active orogens are found on the margins of present-day continents, older inactive orogenies, such as the Algoman, Penokean and Antler, are represented by deformed and metamorphosed rocks with sedimentary basins further inland.

==Orogenic cycle==

Long before the acceptance of plate tectonics, geologists had found evidence within many orogens of repeated cycles of deposition, deformation, crustal thickening and mountain building, and crustal thinning to form new depositional basins. These were named &quot;orogenic cycles&quot;, and various theories were proposed to explain them. Canadian geologist Tuzo Wilson first put forward a plate tectonic interpretation of orogenic cycles, now known as Wilson cycles. Wilson proposed that orogenic cycles represented the periodic opening and closing of an ocean basin, with each stage of the process leaving its characteristic record on the rocks of the orogen.

===Continental rifting===

The Wilson cycle begins when previously stable continental crust comes under tension from a shift in mantle convection. Continental rifting takes place, which thins the crust and creates basins in which sediments accumulate. As the basins deepen, the ocean invades the rift zone, and as the continental crust rifts completely apart, shallow marine sedimentation gives way to deep marine sedimentation on the thinned marginal crust of the two continents.

===Seafloor spreading===

As the two continents rift apart, seafloor spreading commences along the axis of a new ocean basin. Deep marine sediments continue to accumulate along the thinned continental margins, which are now passive margins.

===Subduction===

At some point, subduction is initiated along one or both of the continental margins of the ocean basin, producing a volcanic arc and possibly an Andean-type orogen along that continental margin. This produces deformation of the continental margins and possibly crustal thickening and mountain building.

===Mountain building===

Mountain formation in orogens is largely a result of crustal thickening. The compressive forces produced by plate convergence result in pervasive deformation of the crust of the continental margin (thrust tectonics). This takes the form of folding of the ductile deeper crust and thrust faulting in the upper brittle crust.

Crustal thickening raises mountains through the principle of isostasy. Isostacy is the balance of the downward gravitational force upon an upthrust mountain range (composed of light, continental crust material) and the buoyant upward forces exerted by the dense underlying mantle.

Portions of orogens can also experience uplift as a result of delamination of the orogenic lithosphere, in which an unstable portion of cold lithospheric root drips down into the asthenospheric mantle, decreasing the density of the lithosphere and causing buoyant uplift. An example is the Sierra Nevada in California. This range of fault-block mountains experienced renewed uplift and abundant magmatism after a delamination of the orogenic root beneath them.

Mount Rundle on the Trans-Canada Highway between Banff and Canmore provides a classic example of a mountain cut in dipping-layered rocks. Millions of years ago a collision caused an orogeny, forcing horizontal layers of an ancient ocean crust to be thrust up at an angle of 50–60°. That left Rundle with one sweeping, tree-lined smooth face, and one sharp, steep face where the edge of the uplifted layers are exposed.

Although mountain building mostly takes place in orogens, a number of secondary mechanisms are capable of producing substantial mountain ranges. Areas that are rifting apart, such as mid-ocean ridges and the East African Rift, have mountains due to thermal buoyancy related to the hot mantle underneath them; this thermal buoyancy is known as dynamic topography. In strike-slip orogens, such as the San Andreas Fault, restraining bends result in regions of localized crustal shortening and mountain building without a plate-margin-wide orogeny. Hotspot volcanism results in the formation of isolated mountains and mountain chains that look as if they are not necessarily on present tectonic-plate boundaries, but they are essentially the product of plate tectonism. Likewise, uplift and erosion related to epeirogenesis (large-scale vertical motions of portions of continents without much associated folding, metamorphism, or deformation) can create local topographic highs.

===Closure of the ocean basin===
Eventually, seafloor spreading in the ocean basin comes to a halt, and continued subduction begins to close the ocean basin.

===Continental collision and orogeny===

The closure of the ocean basin ends with a continental collision and the associated Himalayan-type orogen.

===Erosion===
Erosion represents the final phase of the orogenic cycle. Erosion of overlying strata in orogenic belts, and isostatic adjustment to the removal of this overlying mass of rock, can bring deeply buried strata to the surface. The erosional process is called &quot;unroofing&quot;. Erosion inevitably removes much of the mountains, exposing the core or &quot;mountain roots&quot; (metamorphic rocks brought to the surface from a depth of several kilometres). Isostatic movements may help such unroofing by balancing out the buoyancy of the evolving orogen. Scholars debate about the extent to which erosion modifies the patterns of tectonic deformation (see erosion and tectonics). Thus, the final form of the majority of old orogenic belts is a long arcuate strip of crystalline metamorphic rocks sequentially below younger sediments which are thrust atop them and which dip away from the orogenic core.

An orogen may be almost completely eroded away, and only recognizable by studying (old) rocks that bear traces of orogenesis. Orogens are usually long, thin, arcuate tracts of rock that have a pronounced linear structure resulting in terranes or blocks of deformed rocks, separated generally by suture zones or dipping thrust faults. These thrust faults carry relatively thin slices of rock (which are called nappes or thrust sheets, and differ from tectonic plates) from the core of the shortening orogen out toward the margins, and are intimately associated with folds and the development of metamorphism.

==History of the concept==
Before the development of geologic concepts during the 19th century, the presence of marine fossils in mountains was explained in Christian contexts as a result of the Biblical Deluge. This was an extension of Neoplatonic thought, which influenced early Christian writers.

The 13th-century Dominican scholar Albert the Great posited that, as erosion was known to occur, there must be some process whereby new mountains and other land-forms were thrust up, or else there would eventually be no land; he suggested that marine fossils in mountainsides must once have been at the sea-floor. Orogeny was used by Amanz Gressly (1840) and Jules Thurmann (1854) as &quot;orogenic&quot; in terms of the creation of mountain elevations, as the term &quot;mountain building&quot; was still used to describe the processes. Elie de Beaumont (1852) used the evocative &quot;Jaws of a Vise&quot; theory to explain orogeny, but was more concerned with the height rather than the implicit structures created by and contained in orogenic belts. His theory essentially held that mountains were created by the squeezing of certain rocks. Eduard Suess (1875) recognised the importance of horizontal movement of rocks. The concept of a &quot;precursor geosyncline&quot; or initial downward warping of the solid earth (Hall, 1859) prompted James Dwight Dana (1873) to include the concept of &quot;compression&quot; in the theories surrounding mountain-building. With hindsight, we can discount Dana&#x27;s conjecture that this contraction was due to the cooling of the Earth (aka the cooling Earth theory). The cooling Earth theory was the chief paradigm for most geologists until the 1960s. It was, in the context of orogeny, fiercely contested by proponents of vertical movements in the crust, or convection within the asthenosphere or mantle.

Gustav Steinmann (1906) recognised different classes of orogenic belts, including the &quot;Alpine type orogenic belt&quot;, typified by a flysch and molasse geometry to the sediments; ophiolite sequences, tholeiitic basalts, and a nappe style fold structure.

In terms of recognising orogeny as an &quot;event&quot;, Leopold von Buch (1855) recognised that orogenies could be placed in time by bracketing between the youngest deformed rock and the oldest undeformed rock, a principle which is still in use today, though commonly investigated by geochronology using radiometric dating.

Based on available observations from the metamorphic differences in orogenic belts of Europe and North America, H. J. Zwart (1967) proposed three types of orogens in relationship to tectonic setting and style: Cordillerotype, Alpinotype, and Hercynotype. His proposal was revised by W. S. Pitcher in 1979 in terms of the relationship to granite occurrences. Cawood et al. (2009) categorized orogenic belts into three types: accretionary, collisional, and intracratonic. Both accretionary and collisional orogens developed in converging plate margins. In contrast, Hercynotype orogens generally show similar features to intracratonic, intracontinental, extensional, and ultrahot orogens, all of which developed in continental detachment systems at converged plate margins.

# Accretionary orogens, which were produced by subduction of one oceanic plate beneath one continental plate for arc volcanism. They are dominated by calc-alkaline igneous rocks and high-T/low-P metamorphic facies series at high thermal gradients of &gt;30 °C/km. There is a general lack of ophiolites, migmatites and abyssal sediments. Typical examples are all circum-Pacific orogens containing continental arcs.
# Collisional orogens, which were produced by subduction of one continental block beneath the other continental block with the absence of arc volcanism. They are typified by the occurrence of blueschist to eclogite facies metamorphic zones, indicating high-P/low-T metamorphism at low thermal gradients of &lt;10 °C/km. Orogenic peridotites are present but volumetrically minor, and syn-collisional granites and migmatites are also rare or of only minor extent. Typical examples are the Alps-Himalaya orogens in the southern margin of Eurasian continent and the Dabie-Sulu orogens in east-central China.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 


==References==
== Further reading ==
* provides a detailed history of a number of orogens, including the Caledonian Orogeny, which lasted from the late Cambrian to the Devonian, with the main collisional events occurring during Ordovician and Silurian times.
* is one of a two-volume exposition of the geology of central Europe with a discussion of major orogens.
* Evolution of the Cordilleras of the Americas from a multidisciplinary perspective from a symposium held in Mendoza, Argentina (2006).

==External links==
* Maps of the Acadian and Taconic orogenies
* Antarctic Geology</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q184554" start="0" end="7" title="Orogeny" label="Orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="16" end="24" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925465" start="25" end="33" title="mountain formation" label="building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255282" start="64" end="87" title="convergent boundary" label="convergent plate margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592877" start="184" end="192" title="tectonic uplift" label="uplifted"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="213" end="227" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q184554" start="297" end="307" title="Orogeny" label="orogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193514" start="339" end="350" title="deformation (physics)" label="deformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q858571" start="363" end="380" title="continental crust" label="continental crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q505748" start="431" end="440" title="volcanism" label="volcanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42278" start="442" end="447" title="Magma" label="Magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q83296" start="606" end="617" title="lithosphere" label="lithosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232578" start="619" end="624" title="crust (geology)" label="crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="639" end="645" title="mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q184554" start="650" end="661" title="Orogeny" label="synorogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184554" start="666" end="678" title="Orogeny" label="synkinematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q463448" start="829" end="842" title="Grove Karl Gilbert" label="G. K. Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076991" start="929" end="939" title="epeirogenic movement" label="epeirogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255282" start="984" end="1002" title="Convergent boundary" label="convergent margins"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="1055" end="1065" title="subduction" label="subduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107" start="1075" end="1084" title="continent" label="continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q238851" start="1110" end="1123" title="oceanic plate" label="oceanic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q191110" start="1398" end="1404" title="craton" label="craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q505748" start="1539" end="1556" title="volcanic activity" label="volcanic activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="1561" end="1571" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="1616" end="1622" title="eroded" label="eroded"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="1656" end="1662" title="strata" label="strata"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="1687" end="1700" title="metamorphosed" label="metamorphosed"/>
<link wikidata="Q354025" start="1728" end="1750" title="intrusive igneous rock" label="intrusive igneous rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q810808" start="1758" end="1767" title="batholith" label="batholith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232578" start="1804" end="1809" title="crust (geology)" label="crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="2347" end="2362" title="Andes Mountains" label="Andes Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515058" start="2508" end="2518" title="island arc" label="island arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094611" start="2521" end="2541" title="continental fragment" label="continental fragment"/>
<link wikidata="Q509037" start="2727" end="2735" title="terranes" label="terranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263948" start="2895" end="2920" title="North American Cordillera" label="North American Cordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215819" start="2929" end="2943" title="Lachlan Orogen" label="Lachlan Orogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="3209" end="3218" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="3338" end="3347" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q785020" start="3480" end="3497" title="sedimentary basin" label="sedimentary basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143968" start="3586" end="3594" title="basement (geology)" label="basement"/>
<link wikidata="Q858071" start="3697" end="3706" title="Laurentia" label="Laurentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193738" start="3788" end="3804" title="Paleoproterozoic" label="Paleoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q85816641" start="3810" end="3817" title="Yavapai orogeny" label="Yavapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q85784505" start="3822" end="3840" title="Mazatzal orogeny" label="Mazatzal orogenies"/>
<link wikidata="Q85793286" start="3968" end="3983" title="Picuris orogeny" label="Picuris orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036937" start="4006" end="4023" title="Grenville orogeny" label="Grenville orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="4162" end="4175" title="late Devonian" label="late Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775375" start="4215" end="4229" title="Antler orogeny" label="Antler orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562204" start="4254" end="4268" title="Sonoma orogeny" label="Sonoma orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391957" start="4273" end="4287" title="Sevier orogeny" label="Sevier orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q206492" start="4313" end="4329" title="Laramide orogeny" label="Laramide orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835340" start="4541" end="4556" title="Transpression" label="transpressional"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178077" start="4615" end="4632" title="Petermann Orogeny" label="Petermann Orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4655" end="4669" title="Sprigg Orogeny" label="Sprigg Orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="4671" end="4678" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="5238" end="5244" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q739411" start="5285" end="5290" title="Banda Islands" label="Banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q206650" start="5524" end="5537" title="Southern Alps" label="Southern Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6648199" start="5730" end="5756" title="lithospheric flexure" label="flexure of the lithosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="6214" end="6222" title="Sediment" label="Sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="6284" end="6291" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q756914" start="6478" end="6484" title="flysch" label="flysch"/>
<link wikidata="Q304080" start="6542" end="6549" title="molasse" label="molasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724310" start="6686" end="6693" title="Algoman orogeny" label="Algoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164527" start="6695" end="6703" title="Penokean orogeny" label="Penokean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775375" start="6708" end="6714" title="Antler Orogeny" label="Antler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="6859" end="6874" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q472056" start="7186" end="7197" title="Tuzo Wilson" label="Tuzo Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q120005" start="7619" end="7636" title="mantle convection" label="mantle convection"/>
<link wikidata="Q473935" start="7638" end="7657" title="Continental rifting" label="Continental rifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q215920" start="8033" end="8051" title="seafloor spreading" label="seafloor spreading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918464" start="8197" end="8211" title="passive margin" label="passive margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426043" start="8349" end="8361" title="volcanic arc" label="volcanic arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925465" start="8562" end="8580" title="Mountain formation" label="Mountain formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078012" start="8760" end="8776" title="thrust tectonics" label="thrust tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q188719" start="8948" end="8956" title="isostasy" label="isostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q134465" start="8998" end="9017" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s law of universal gravitation" label="gravitational force"/>
<link wikidata="Q858571" start="9070" end="9087" title="continental crust" label="continental crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="9160" end="9166" title="mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253111" start="9231" end="9271" title="Delamination (geology)" label="delamination of the orogenic lithosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q83296" start="9310" end="9322" title="lithosphere" label="lithospheric"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="9459" end="9472" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q992062" start="9502" end="9522" title="fault-block mountain" label="fault-block mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322071" start="9631" end="9643" title="Mount Rundle" label="Mount Rundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061576" start="9651" end="9671" title="Trans-Canada Highway" label="Trans-Canada Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q58337" start="9680" end="9685" title="Banff, Alberta" label="Banff"/>
<link wikidata="Q991515" start="9690" end="9697" title="Canmore, Alberta" label="Canmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q104698" start="10234" end="10249" title="mid-ocean ridge" label="mid-ocean ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234397" start="10259" end="10276" title="East African Rift" label="East African Rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319032" start="10394" end="10412" title="dynamic topography" label="dynamic topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="10417" end="10428" title="strike-slip" label="strike-slip"/>
<link wikidata="Q191218" start="10450" end="10467" title="San Andreas Fault" label="San Andreas Fault"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10469" end="10486" title="Thrust tectonics#Restraining bends on strike-slip faults" label="restraining bends"/>
<link wikidata="Q105131" start="10596" end="10603" title="Hotspot (geology)" label="Hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076991" start="10857" end="10870" title="Epeirogenic movement" label="epeirogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="11349" end="11356" title="Erosion" label="Erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="11727" end="11744" title="metamorphic rocks" label="metamorphic rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q188719" start="11805" end="11814" title="isostasy" label="Isostatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777430" start="12004" end="12025" title="erosion and tectonics" label="erosion and tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q509037" start="12486" end="12493" title="terrane" label="terrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509590" start="12547" end="12559" title="Suture (geology)" label="suture zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5988006" start="12563" end="12570" title="Strike and dip" label="dipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q496325" start="12571" end="12583" title="thrust fault" label="thrust fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479638" start="12661" end="12666" title="nappe" label="nappe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="12702" end="12716" title="tectonic plate" label="tectonic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q81659" start="12817" end="12822" title="fold (geology)" label="folds"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="12846" end="12858" title="metamorphism" label="metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="12980" end="12986" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="13018" end="13027" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q134052" start="13065" end="13071" title="Deluge (mythology)" label="Deluge"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="13098" end="13109" title="Neoplatonic" label="Neoplatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894058" start="13136" end="13159" title="List of early Christian writers" label="early Christian writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="13179" end="13188" title="Dominican order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q60059" start="13197" end="13213" title="Albert the Great" label="Albert the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q124220" start="13496" end="13509" title="Amanz Gressly" label="Amanz Gressly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188942" start="13521" end="13535" title="Jules Thurmann" label="Jules Thurmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q55030753" start="13700" end="13716" title="Elie de Beaumont" label="Elie de Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q156941" start="14007" end="14019" title="Eduard Suess" label="Eduard Suess"/>
<link wikidata="Q837307" start="14119" end="14130" title="geosyncline" label="geosyncline"/>
<link wikidata="Q315366" start="14206" end="14223" title="James Dwight Dana" label="James Dwight Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964637" start="14450" end="14463" title="Geophysical global cooling" label="cooling Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q166257" start="14687" end="14700" title="asthenosphere" label="asthenosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="14704" end="14710" title="mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q98707" start="14713" end="14729" title="Gustav Steinmann" label="Gustav Steinmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q756914" start="14852" end="14858" title="flysch" label="flysch"/>
<link wikidata="Q304080" start="14863" end="14870" title="molasse" label="molasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q605396" start="14898" end="14907" title="ophiolite" label="ophiolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106459" start="14919" end="14929" title="tholeiitic" label="tholeiitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479638" start="14945" end="14950" title="nappe" label="nappe"/>
<link wikidata="Q55021352" start="15031" end="15047" title="Leopold von Buch" label="Leopold von Buch"/>
<link wikidata="Q213891" start="15259" end="15272" title="geochronology" label="geochronology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15412" end="15423" title="Hendrik Jan Zwart" label="H. J. Zwart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962898" start="15583" end="15596" title="Wallace Spencer Pitcher" label="W. S. Pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="17271" end="17279" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="17287" end="17295" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="17347" end="17357" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q62412" start="17362" end="17370" title="Silurian" label="Silurian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53883" wikidata="Q3740657" url="?curid=53883" title="Bertoleoni family">
<text>Bertoleoni is the proclaimed ruling family of the styled &quot;Kingdom of Tavolara&quot; (Sardinia, Italy), which claimed to be &quot;the smallest kingdom of the world&quot;. The members of this family were also the only inhabitants of this island (whose land is owned partly by the Marzano family in Rome, and partly by a NATO military base) that had been abandoned in 1962. The island was claimed by Italy, however, it was never officially annexed and therefore this does not abolish any prior royal titles. The people of the island sustained themselves by goat farming and fishing. Currently, the supposed kingdom is a tourist attraction for the 57 or so native inhabitants of the island, where the current king and crown princess run its two restaurants and sell souvenirs to visitors of the Natural Park. The family has more influence over the island than anyone else. 

A Giuseppe Bertoleoni informed that during a hunting trip, Charles Albert, King of Sardinia, verbally appointed him &quot;king of Tavolara&quot; in 1836. According to Giuseppe Bertoleoni, Charles Albert also (verbally) sanctioned the use of the title Prince for the oldest male heir, and the titles &quot;Lord of the Islands&quot; (Signore delle Isole) and &quot;Lady of the Sea&quot; (Signora del Mare) for the younger children of the king. Evidence for this was a scroll written by the prince later that confirmed officiating him as king.

The present claimant to the throne is King Tonino, an Italian citizen who runs &quot;Da Tonino&quot;, a restaurant on the island.

==Giuseppe (1836–1845)==
Born December 20, 1778, on the nearby island of La Maddalena, Giuseppe Celestino Bertoleoni Poli was a shepherd and the only inhabitant of the island before Charles Albert, the King of Sardinia&#x27;s visit. He claimed to have impressed him as an educated man and to have been made king of the island shortly thereafter. He brought his two families from other islands to live with him. The Italian government tried to prosecute him for bigamy, but failed because of his title. Passed kingdom to son Paolo in 1845; died 1849. Giuseppe&#x27;s origins are a mystery. Because he claimed to be more highly educated than the average Sardinian shepherd, some have speculated on no ground that he was a fugitive member of the Carbonari, an exiled French aristocrat, or even the Lost Dauphin.

==Paolo I (1845–1886)==
Son of Giuseppe Bertoleoni and Laura Ornano, born 1815. In 1839 he visited King Charles Albert in Turin and obtained a royal charter to Tavolara. During this period, the Italian patriot Giuseppe Garibaldi was associated with the Bertoleoni family, often visiting Paolo&#x27;s relatives on the islands of La Maddalena and Caprera.

After the creation of the Italian Kingdom in 1861, Paolo pressed and obtained recognition for Tavolara from Victor Emmanuel II. After he fell ill in 1882, his wife Pasqua Favale acted as regent until his death on May 30, 1886. A number of newspapers published the report that on his deathbed he asked that the kingdom die with him, and that his family therefore established a republic. These reports, however, were erroneous.

==Carlo I (1886–1927)==
Son of Paolo I and Pasqua Favale, born 1845. In the summer of 1900 the British naval vessel HMS &quot;Vulcan&quot; visited Tavolara, and the officers took a photograph of King Carlo and his family to hang in Queen Victoria&#x27;s collection of royal portraits in Buckingham Palace. By 1904, however, Carlo was king in name only, having no ambition to rule. He is reported to have said, &quot;I do not care to be a king. It is enough for me to make as fine lobster-pots as did my father.&quot; He was persuaded to reign, however, until his death, which was reported either Nov 6, 1927, at Olbia, or Jan 31, 1928, at Ventimiglia on the Italian Riviera.

==Mariangela (1927–1929)==
Daughter of Paolo I and Pasqua Favale, born 1841, she took up the crown at the request of her nephew Paolo (Carlo&#x27;s son and designated successor) during his absence from the island (he had left the island looking for a job). When Mariangela died April 6, 1934, it was reported that Italy would inherit the kingdom.

==Paolo II (1929–1962)==
Son of Carlo I and Maddalena Favale, born 1897. Married 1930 to Italia Murru and initiated a renaissance of the monarchy. Appointed his cousin Prince Ernesto Carlo Geremia as Lieutenant General of the Kingdom. After Paolo&#x27;s death Dec 2, 1962, the widowed Queen Italia Murru retired to Porto San Paolo on Sardinia, wintering at Capo Testa, until her death in 2003 at age 95. Paolo II was the last to actively rule Tavolara (numbering then about 50 inhabitants). At the end of his reign, half the island was occupied by a NATO military installation.

==Carlo II (1962–1993)==

Eldest son of Paolo II and Italia Murru, born 1931. Married, no issue. Died May 1993 at Capo Testa, Sardinia. During the 1960s and 70s, his cousins Maria Molinas Bertoleoni (1869–1974) and Laura Molinas Bertoleoni (d. 1979), both daughters of Mariangela and Bachisio Molinas, also laid claim to the vacant &quot;throne&quot;.

==Tonino (1993–present)==

Antonio (Tonino) Bertoleoni, second son of Paolo II and Italia Murru, was born in 1933. He is the owner of &quot;Da Tonino&quot; restaurant; his sister Princess Maddalena owns &quot;La Corona&quot; restaurant nearby. Following the return of Vittorio Emanuele of Naples to his native Italy in 2002, Tonino vowed an appeal to him, as heir to the House of Savoy, for recognition of the Tavolaran kingdom. Tonino&#x27;s children by Maria &quot;Pompea&quot; Romano (1932–2010) are Loredana, Paola, and Giuseppe (Tonino&#x27;s heir and current &quot;Lord of the Isles&quot;). Not much is known about him, but what is known is that he runs a family restaurant on the island and they also sell souvenirs. Bertoleoni&#x27;s everyday life consists of simple activities such as fishing, gardening, and taking long walks around Tavolara.


==References==
==Bibliography==
* AA.VV., &quot;Una montagna in mezzo al mare&quot;, ed. Taphros 2005.
* Della Marmora, Alberto. &quot;Viaggio in Sardegna&quot;, Forni, Bologna 1985.
* Finelli, Riccardo. &quot;C&#x27;è di mezzo il mare - Viaggio nelle micro-isole italiane&quot;, Incontri ed., Sassuolo 2008.
* Fioretti, Ovidio. &quot;La corona senza reame,&quot; &quot;Almanacco di Cagliari 1989&quot;.
* Geremia, Ernesto Carlo, and Gino Ragnetti (2005), &quot;Tavolara - l&#x27;Isola dei Re&quot;, Mursia, Milano. .
* Graziani, Graziano. &quot;Stati d&#x27;eccezione&quot;, ed. dell&#x27;Asino, Roma 2012.
* Hale, Walter (Nov 1904). &quot;The Search for a Lost Republic&quot;. &quot;Harper&#x27;s Monthly Magazine&quot;. CIX (DCXLIX): 929–936.
* Manca, Tania. &quot;Viaggiatori europei. Dall&#x27;esplorazione del mondo al viaggio in Sardegna (700 e 800), Carlo Delfino, Sassari 2005.
* Mazzucchelli, Mario. &quot;Gioacchino Murat&quot;, Dall&#x27;Oglio, Milano 1962.
* Murineddu (a cura di), Antonio. &quot;Gallura&quot;, Fossataro, Cagliari 1962.
* Papurello, Alfredina. &quot;Tavolara Signora del Mare&quot;, Carlo Delfino, Sassari 2012.
* Sotgiu, Giovanna. &quot;Arcipelago di La Maddalena - 1839-1843 - La Divisione delle terre - Giuseppe Bertoleoni Re di Tavolara&quot;, Lo Scoglio, La Maddalena 2002.
* Tribuna Araldica, &quot;Famiglie di Genova, estinte e viventi, nobili e popolari&quot;, ed.Europea di Araldica, parte 1, Genova 1983.
* Valery, Antoine Claude. &quot;Viaggio in Sardegna&quot;, Ilisso, Nuoro 1999.

==External links==
*&quot;Isola di Tavolara - La Famiglia Bertoleoni 25/09/1958&quot; - 1958 newsreel on YouTube
*&quot;Incontro con il Re di Tavolara&quot; - 2009 interview with Antonio Bertoleoni on YouTube</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3740657" start="0" end="10" title="Bertoleoni family" label="Bertoleoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q164950" start="29" end="42" title="Dynasty" label="ruling family"/>
<link wikidata="Q947153" start="63" end="82" title="Kingdom of Tavolara" label="Kingdom of Tavolara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="90" end="98" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="323" end="327" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q181261" start="935" end="949" title="Charles Albert of Sardinia" label="Charles Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="959" end="967" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q340757" start="1622" end="1634" title="La Maddalena" label="La Maddalena"/>
<link wikidata="Q720243" start="2010" end="2016" title="bigamy" label="bigamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q749325" start="2292" end="2301" title="Carbonari" label="Carbonari"/>
<link wikidata="Q49765" start="2344" end="2356" title="Lost Dauphin" label="Lost Dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181261" start="2463" end="2477" title="Charles Albert" label="Charles Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="2481" end="2486" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="2569" end="2587" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q340757" start="2687" end="2699" title="La Maddalena" label="La Maddalena"/>
<link wikidata="Q845310" start="2704" end="2711" title="Caprera" label="Caprera"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="2740" end="2755" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="2822" end="2840" title="Victor Emmanuel II" label="Victor Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5634885" start="3257" end="3279" title="HMS Vulcan (1889)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Vulcan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="3373" end="3387" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="3428" end="3445" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q13630" start="3753" end="3758" title="Olbia" label="Olbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191759" start="3780" end="3791" title="Ventimiglia" label="Ventimiglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q340770" start="4480" end="4495" title="Porto San Paolo" label="Porto San Paolo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4522" end="4532" title="Capo Testa" label="Capo Testa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4858" end="4868" title="Capo Testa" label="Capo Testa"/>
<link wikidata="Q367901" start="5365" end="5392" title="Vittorio Emanuele, Prince of Naples" label="Vittorio Emanuele of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="5468" end="5482" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53884" wikidata="Q845769" url="?curid=53884" title="Penalty area">
<text>The penalty area or 18-yard box (also known less formally as the penalty box or simply box) is an area of an association football pitch. It is rectangular and extends to each side of the goal and in front of it. If any part of the ball is over any part of a line demarking the penalty area then the ball is considered to be inside the penalty area.

Within the penalty area is the penalty spot, which is from the goal line, directly in line with the centre of the goal.

A penalty arc (often informally called &quot;the D&quot;) adjoins the penalty area, and encloses the area within of the penalty spot. It does not form part of the penalty area and is only of relevance during the taking of a penalty kick, when any players inside the arc are adjudged to be encroaching.

Within the penalty area is another smaller rectangular area called the &quot;goal area&quot; (colloquially the &quot;six-yard box&quot;), which is delimited by two lines starting on the goal-line from the goalposts and extending into the pitch from the goal-line, and the line joining these. Goal kicks and any free kick by the defending team may be taken from anywhere in this area. Indirect free kicks awarded to the attacking team within the goal area are taken from the point on the line parallel to the goal line (the &quot;six-yard line&quot;) nearest where the infringement occurred; they cannot be taken any closer to the goal line. Similarly drop-balls that would otherwise occur closer to the goal line are taken on this line.

Previously, penalty areas extended across the full width of the field; they were reduced to their current dimensions in 1901.
==Functions==

Fouls punishable by a direct free kick (i.e. handling the ball and most physical fouls), committed by the defensive team within the penalty area, may be penalised by a penalty kick. A penalty kick is taken from the penalty spot. The penalty spot is located away from the goal line.

The penalty area has other functions, including: 
* Goalkeepers: The area delimiting the area in which a goalkeeper may legally handle the ball;
* Goal kicks and defensive free kicks: opponents must remain outside of the area and at least 10 yards away from the ball until the ball is kicked and clearly moves;
* Taking of penalty kicks: players other than the kicker and the goalkeeper must remain outside the area (and also the penalty arc) until the kick has been taken.

==In play==
In a typical game, for the majority of time the penalty area is occupied only by the goalkeeper. The attacking team generally aims to get the ball and their own players into the defending team&#x27;s penalty area, and a high percentage of goals in professional football are scored from within the penalty area. Usually during attacking set pieces, including corners, a large number of both attacking and defending players are in the penalty area and, although illegal, grappling between players is frequently observed.

==References==
==See also==
* Penalty shoot-out (association football)
* Association football pitch</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q845769" start="4" end="16" title="Penalty area" label="penalty area"/>
<link wikidata="Q845769" start="20" end="31" title="Penalty area" label="18-yard box"/>
<link wikidata="Q845769" start="65" end="76" title="Penalty area" label="penalty box"/>
<link wikidata="Q845769" start="87" end="90" title="Penalty area" label="box"/>
<link wikidata="Q8524" start="109" end="135" title="association football pitch" label="association football pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q279532" start="695" end="707" title="Penalty kick (football)" label="penalty kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378798" start="1425" end="1435" title="dropped-ball" label="drop-balls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379266" start="1675" end="1691" title="direct free kick" label="direct free kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q201330" start="1988" end="1998" title="Goalkeeper (association football)" label="Goalkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q333282" start="2083" end="2092" title="Goal kick" label="Goal kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q844888" start="2108" end="2117" title="free kick" label="free kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q767411" start="2759" end="2769" title="set piece (football)" label="set pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q242415" start="2781" end="2788" title="corner kick" label="corners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691960" start="2973" end="3013" title="Penalty shoot-out (association football)" label="Penalty shoot-out (association football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8524" start="3016" end="3042" title="Association football pitch" label="Association football pitch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53885" wikidata="Q5411589" url="?curid=53885" title="EuroWordNet">
<text>EuroWordNet is a system of semantic networks for European languages, based on WordNet. Each language develops its own wordnet but they are interconnected with &quot;interlingual links&quot; stored in the &quot;Interlingual Index&quot; (ILI). 

Unlike the original Princeton WordNet, most of the other wordnets are not freely available.

==Languages==
The original EuroWordNet project dealt with Dutch, Italian, Spanish, German, French, Czech, and Estonian. These wordnets are now frozen, but wordnets for other languages have been developed to varying degrees.

== License ==
Some examples of EuroWordNet are available for free. Access to the full database, however, is charged. In some cases, OpenThesaurus and BabelNet may serve as free alternatives.

== See also ==

* vidby
* Babbel

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5411589" start="0" end="11" title="EuroWordNet" label="EuroWordNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045785" start="27" end="43" title="semantic network" label="semantic network"/>
<link wikidata="Q533822" start="78" end="85" title="WordNet" label="WordNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q533822" start="274" end="281" title="WordNet" label="WordNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q473686" start="694" end="707" title="OpenThesaurus" label="OpenThesaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837690" start="712" end="720" title="BabelNet" label="BabelNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q114741206" start="772" end="777" title="vidby" label="vidby"/>
<link wikidata="Q264351" start="780" end="786" title="Babbel" label="Babbel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53887" wikidata="Q461183" url="?curid=53887" title="Text corpus">
<text>In linguistics and natural language processing, a corpus (: corpora) or text corpus is a dataset, consisting of natively digital and older, digitalized, language resources, either annotated or unannotated.

Annotated, they have been used in corpus linguistics for statistical hypothesis testing, checking occurrences or validating linguistic rules within a specific language territory.

== Overview ==

A corpus may contain texts in a single language (&quot;monolingual corpus&quot;) or text data in multiple languages (&quot;multilingual corpus&quot;).

In order to make the corpora more useful for doing linguistic research, they are often subjected to a process known as annotation. An example of annotating a corpus is part-of-speech tagging, or &quot;POS-tagging&quot;, in which information about each word&#x27;s part of speech (verb, noun, adjective, etc.) is added to the corpus in the form of &quot;tags&quot;. Another example is indicating the lemma (base) form of each word. When the language of the corpus is not a working language of the researchers who use it, interlinear glossing is used to make the annotation bilingual.

Some corpora have further &quot;structured&quot; levels of analysis applied. In particular, smaller corpora may be fully parsed. Such corpora are usually called Treebanks or Parsed Corpora. The difficulty of ensuring that the entire corpus is completely and consistently annotated means that these corpora are usually smaller, containing around one to three million words. Other levels of linguistic structured analysis are possible, including annotations for morphology, semantics and pragmatics.

== Applications ==

Corpora are the main knowledge base in corpus linguistics. Other notable areas of application include:

* Language technology, natural language processing, computational linguistics
** The analysis and processing of various types of corpora are also the subject of much work in computational linguistics, speech recognition and machine translation, where they are often used to create hidden Markov models for part of speech tagging and other purposes. Corpora and frequency lists derived from them are useful for language teaching. Corpora can be considered as a type of foreign language writing aid as the contextualised grammatical knowledge acquired by non-native language users through exposure to authentic texts in corpora allows learners to grasp the manner of sentence formation in the target language, enabling effective writing.

* Machine translation
** Multilingual corpora that have been specially formatted for side-by-side comparison are called &quot;aligned parallel corpora&quot;. There are two main types of parallel corpora which contain texts in two languages. In a &quot;translation corpus&quot;, the texts in one language are translations of texts in the other language. In a &quot;comparable corpus&quot;, the texts are of the same kind and cover the same content, but they are not translations of each other. To exploit a parallel text, some kind of text alignment identifying equivalent text segments (phrases or sentences) is a prerequisite for analysis. Machine translation algorithms for translating between two languages are often trained using parallel fragments comprising a first-language corpus and a second-language corpus, which is an element-for-element translation of the first-language corpus.

* Philologies
** Text corpora are also used in the study of historical documents, for example in attempts to decipher ancient scripts, or in Biblical scholarship. Some archaeological corpora can be of such short duration that they provide a snapshot in time. One of the shortest corpora in time may be the 15–30 year Amarna letters texts (1350 BC). The &quot;corpus&quot; of an ancient city, (for example the &quot;Kültepe Texts&quot; of Turkey), may go through a series of corpora, determined by their find site dates.

== Some notable text corpora ==
== See also ==
* Concordance
* Corpus linguistics
* Culturomics
* Distributional–relational database
* Linguistic Data Consortium
* Natural language processing
* Natural Language Toolkit
* Parallel text
* Speech corpus
* Translation memory
* Treebank
* Zipf&#x27;s law

== References ==
== External links ==

* ACL SIGLEX Resource Links: Text Corpora 
* Developing Linguistic Corpora: a Guide to Good Practice
* Free samples (not free), web-based corpora (45-425 million words each): American (COCA, COHA, TIME), British (BNC), Spanish, Portuguese
* Intercorp Building synchronous parallel corpora of the languages taught at the Faculty of Arts of Charles University.
* Sketch Engine: Open corpora with free access
* TS Corpus – A Turkish Corpus freely available for academic research.
* Turkish National Corpus – A general-purpose corpus for contemporary Turkish
* Corpus of Political Speeches, Free access to political speeches by American and Chinese politicians, developed by Hong Kong Baptist University Library
* Russian National Corpus</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="3" end="14" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642" start="19" end="46" title="natural language processing" label="natural language processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q461183" start="50" end="56" title="Text corpus" label="corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q461183" start="60" end="67" title="Text corpus" label="corpora"/>
<link wikidata="Q461183" start="72" end="83" title="Text corpus" label="text corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q96386893" start="153" end="170" title="language resource" label="language resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q865083" start="241" end="259" title="corpus linguistics" label="corpus linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q210832" start="276" end="294" title="statistical hypothesis testing" label="hypothesis testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q857525" start="674" end="684" title="annotation" label="annotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271424" start="723" end="745" title="part-of-speech tagging" label="part-of-speech tagging"/>
<link wikidata="Q18514" start="954" end="959" title="Lemma (morphology)" label="lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q632346" start="1075" end="1092" title="interlinear gloss" label="interlinear gloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q194152" start="1260" end="1266" title="Parsing" label="parsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q811525" start="1300" end="1308" title="Treebank" label="Treebank"/>
<link wikidata="Q811525" start="1313" end="1327" title="Treebank" label="Parsed Corpora"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="1599" end="1609" title="Morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="1611" end="1620" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181839" start="1625" end="1635" title="pragmatics" label="pragmatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q865083" start="1697" end="1715" title="corpus linguistics" label="corpus linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976109" start="1764" end="1783" title="Language technology" label="Language technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642" start="1785" end="1812" title="natural language processing" label="natural language processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q182557" start="1814" end="1839" title="computational linguistics" label="computational linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q182557" start="1936" end="1961" title="computational linguistics" label="computational linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189436" start="1963" end="1981" title="speech recognition" label="speech recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q79798" start="1986" end="2005" title="machine translation" label="machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q176769" start="2043" end="2062" title="hidden Markov model" label="hidden Markov model"/>
<link wikidata="Q697133" start="2123" end="2137" title="frequency list" label="frequency list"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455196" start="2172" end="2189" title="language teaching" label="language teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468415" start="2230" end="2258" title="foreign language writing aid" label="foreign language writing aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q79798" start="2501" end="2520" title="Machine translation" label="Machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346592" start="2685" end="2701" title="parallel corpora" label="parallel corpora"/>
<link wikidata="Q79798" start="3140" end="3159" title="Machine translation" label="Machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="3394" end="3405" title="Philology" label="Philologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771738" start="3452" end="3471" title="historical document" label="historical document"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345443" start="3501" end="3509" title="decipherment" label="decipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q794605" start="3533" end="3553" title="Biblical scholarship" label="Biblical scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q235502" start="3709" end="3723" title="Amarna letters" label="Amarna letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001203" start="3731" end="3738" title="1350 BC" label="1350 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q538605" start="3807" end="3814" title="Kültepe" label="Kültepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q839018" start="3962" end="3973" title="Concordance (publishing)" label="Concordance"/>
<link wikidata="Q865083" start="3976" end="3994" title="Corpus linguistics" label="Corpus linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241920" start="3997" end="4008" title="Culturomics" label="Culturomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q30672411" start="4011" end="4045" title="Distributional–relational database" label="Distributional–relational database"/>
<link wikidata="Q16964945" start="4048" end="4074" title="Linguistic Data Consortium" label="Linguistic Data Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642" start="4077" end="4104" title="Natural language processing" label="Natural language processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635410" start="4107" end="4131" title="Natural Language Toolkit" label="Natural Language Toolkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346592" start="4134" end="4147" title="Parallel text" label="Parallel text"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349497" start="4150" end="4163" title="Speech corpus" label="Speech corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q333761" start="4166" end="4184" title="Translation memory" label="Translation memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q811525" start="4187" end="4195" title="Treebank" label="Treebank"/>
<link wikidata="Q205472" start="4198" end="4213" title="Zipf&amp;#x27;s law" label="Zipf&amp;#x27;s law"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53888" wikidata="Q19907" url="?curid=53888" title="Death Star">
<text>The Death Star is a fictional space station and superweapon featured in the &quot;Star Wars&quot; space-opera franchise. Constructed by the autocratic Galactic Empire, the Death Star is capable of obliterating entire planets, and serves to enforce the Empire&#x27;s reign of terror. Appearing in the original 1977 film &quot;Star Wars&quot;, the Death Star serves as the central plot point and setting for the film, and is destroyed in an assault by the Rebel Alliance during the climax of the film, with the 2016 prequel film &quot;Rogue One&quot; and the 2022 television series &quot;Andor&quot; exploring its construction. A larger second Death Star is being built in the events of the 1983 film &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot;, featuring substantially improved capabilities compared to its predecessor, before it is destroyed by the Rebel Alliance while under construction.

Since its first appearance, the Death Star has become a cultural icon and a widely recognized element of the &quot;Star Wars&quot; franchise. It inspired numerous similar superweapons in fiction as well as in other &quot;Star Wars&quot; works. The 2015 film &quot;The Force Awakens&quot; introduces Starkiller Base, a planet (Ilum) converted by the First Order into a Death Star-like superweapon. While more powerful and technologically advanced than both Death Stars, it is also destroyed by the Resistance. The 2019 film &quot;The Rise of Skywalker&quot; introduces the Final Order, a massive fleet of &quot;Xyston&quot;-class Star Destroyers built by the Sith Eternal, individual warships each carrying &quot;planet-killing&quot; weapons; the film also features the remains of the second Death Star, on the ocean moon of Kef Bir.

==Origin and design==
According to franchise creator George Lucas, his initial outline for the &quot;Star Wars&quot; saga did not feature the Death Star in the portion that would be adapted as the first film. When he set to creating the first act of this outline as a feature, he borrowed the Death Star concept from the third act.

Although details, such as the superlaser&#x27;s location, shifted between different concept models during the production of &quot;Star Wars&quot; (1977), the notion of the Death Star being a large, spherical space station over in diameter was consistent in all of them. George Lucas gave the original task of designing a &quot;Death Star&quot; to concept artist and spaceship modeler Colin Cantwell, who had collaborated with Stanley Kubrick on the 1968 film &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot;. In &quot;Empire of Dreams&quot;, a documentary about the filming and production of &quot;Star Wars,&quot; Cantwell revealed that the &quot;Death Star&quot; was originally supposed to be a perfect sphere. The model was constructed in two separate pieces, however, and wasn&#x27;t fitting together as planned. It was then decided that there could be a trench going around the equator of the space station. Lucas liked the idea, and the Death Star model was created by John Stears. The buzzing sound counting down to the Death Star firing its superlaser comes from the &quot;Flash Gordon&quot; serials. Portraying an incomplete yet powerful space station posed a problem for Industrial Light &amp; Magic&#x27;s modelmakers for &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot;. Only the front side of the model was completed, and the image was flipped horizontally for the final film. Both Death Stars were depicted by a combination of complete and sectional models and matte paintings.

===Special effects===

The grid plan animation shown during the Rebel briefing before the Death Star attack in &quot;A New Hope&quot; was an actual computer-graphics simulation developed by Larry Cuba at the University of Illinois Chicago alongside computer graphics researcher Tom DeFanti. George Lucas had recruited Cuba for the project after becoming familiar with his and Gary Imhoff&#x27;s work with CalArts at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.

After filming was complete, the original model, as well as one of the surface setpieces, were to be thrown out, but they were eventually salvaged.

The Death Star explosions featured in the Special Edition of &quot;A New Hope&quot; and in &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot; are rendered with a Praxis Effect, wherein a flat ring of matter erupts from the explosion.

==Depiction==
The original Death Star was introduced in the original &quot;Star Wars&quot; film, which later had elements of its backstory explored in the prequel films &quot;Attack of the Clones&quot; and &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot;, the animated series &quot;The Clone Wars&quot;, &quot;Rebels&quot; and &quot;The Bad Batch&quot;, and the 2016 anthology film &quot;Rogue One&quot;. The second Death Star appears in &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot;, and a similar superweapon, Starkiller Base, appears in &quot;The Force Awakens&quot;. Both the original and second Death Star were moon-sized and designed for massive power-projection capabilities, capable of destroying an entire planet with a 6.2×1032 J/s power output blast from their superlasers.

===Original Death Star===
The original Death Star&#x27;s completed form appears in the original &quot;Star Wars&quot; film, known as the &quot;DS-1&quot; Orbital Battle Station, or Project Stardust in &quot;Rogue One&quot;; before learning the true name of the weapon, the Rebel Alliance referred to it as the &quot;Planet Killer&quot;. Commanded by Governor Tarkin, it is the Galactic Empire&#x27;s &quot;ultimate weapon&quot;, a huge spherical battle station in diameter capable of destroying a planet with one shot of its superlaser.
The film opens with Princess Leia transporting the station&#x27;s schematics to the Rebel Alliance to aid them in destroying the Death Star. To mark the Death Star being fully operational, Tarkin orders the Death Star to destroy Leia&#x27;s home world of Alderaan in an attempt to press her into giving him the location of the secret Rebel headquarters; she gives them the location of Dantooine, which housed a now-deserted Rebel base, but Tarkin has Alderaan destroyed anyway as a demonstration of the Empire&#x27;s resolve. Later, Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Chewbacca, Obi-Wan Kenobi, C-3PO, and R2-D2 (who were intended to arrive at Alderaan on board the &quot;Millennium Falcon&quot;) are pulled aboard the station by a tractor beam, where they discover and manage to rescue Princess Leia. As they make their escape, Obi-Wan sacrifices himself whilst dueling Darth Vader, enabling the others to flee the station. Later, Luke returns as part of a fighter force to attack its only weak point: a ray-shielded particle exhaust vent leading straight from the surface directly into its reactor core, discovered previously from the stolen schematics. Luke is able to successfully launch his X-wing fighter&#x27;s torpedoes into the vent, impacting the core and triggering a catastrophic explosion, which destroys the station before it can annihilate the Rebel base on Yavin 4.

The Death Star&#x27;s schematics are visible in the scenes on Geonosis in &quot;Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones&quot;, evidently designed by Geonosians led by Archduke Poggle the Lesser, a member of the Confederacy of Independent Systems, and is shown early in construction at the end of &quot;Episode III – Revenge of the Sith&quot;. &quot;The Clone Wars&quot; Legacy story reel from the unfinished &quot;Crystal Crisis on Utapau&quot; episodes reveals that General Grievous went to Utapau prior to &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot; in order to acquire an enormous kyber crystal to power the Death Star&#x27;s superlaser.

As depicted in &quot;Rogue One&quot; and &quot;&quot; (2016), the Death Star was worked on by a team of scientists sequestered on the rainswept world of Eadu, overseen by Orson Krennic, the Director of Advanced Weapons Research for the Imperial Military. Under Krennic&#x27;s supervision, the project was beset by constant delays, and he forcibly recruited weapons designer Galen Erso (the father of Jyn Erso, the film&#x27;s protagonist) to complete the design. The Death Star scientists sought to fuse kyber crystal shards into larger structures and used those crystals to amplify energy into a stable beam powerful enough to destroy an entire planet. In the Disney+ series, &quot;Andor&quot;, set after the novel but before the film, prisoners of the Imperial Prison Complex in Narkina 5, including Cassian Andor, who got sent to the prison during his time as Keef Girgo, worked on Imperial equipment during their shifts, which was revealed in the post-credits scene of the series&#x27; final episode, &quot;Rix Road&quot;, to be parts built for the superlaser.

The 2014 book &quot;Star Wars: Tarkin&quot; details the life of Grand Moff Tarkin and prominently features the Death Star. &quot;Catalyst: A Rogue One Novel&quot; tells the story of the development of the Death Star&#x27;s superweapon by Galen Erso and Krennic&#x27;s deception of him. It also reveals how Poggle worked with Krennic on the project but then turned on him. In the animated series &quot;Star Wars Rebels&quot;, the two-part episode &quot;Ghosts of Geonosis&quot; hints that the Geonosians were nearly wiped out to extinction out of the Empire&#x27;s need for secrecy. Saw Gerrera, having been sent to Geonosis to investigate, deduces that the Empire possesses a superweapon and resolves to discover the Death Star as depicted in the two-part episode &quot;In the Name of the Rebellion&quot;. Though it is a dead end, Saw learns that the weapon is powered by kyber crystals taken from the Jedha system.

&quot;Rogue One&quot; focuses on a band of Rebels stealing the Death Star plans just prior to the events of &quot;A New Hope&quot;. The Death Star is first used to destroy Jedha City, both as a response to a violent insurgency on the planet and as a display of the Death Star&#x27;s operational status. Tarkin assumes control over the Death Star while Krennic investigates security breaches in the design project. It is subsequently revealed that Galen discreetly sabotaged the design by building a vulnerability into the reactor. After the Death Star plans are stolen from the Scarif vault, Tarkin fires the Death Star&#x27;s superlaser on the base, killing Krennic, as well as Jyn Erso and her small band of rebels. &quot;Rogue One&quot; also reveals that the Death Star&#x27;s superlaser is powered by multiple reactors, allowing it to vary its destructive power depending on the target; both the attack on Jedha City and the Scarif base used a single reactor.

According to &quot;Star Wars&quot; reference books, the population of the Death Star was 1.7 million military personnel, 400,000 maintenance droids, and 250,000 civilians, associated contractors and catering staff.
The Death Star was defended by thousands of turbolasers, ion cannons and laser cannons, plus a complement of seven to nine thousand TIE fighters, along with tens of thousands of support craft. It also had several massive docking bays, including dry docks capable of accommodating Star Destroyers.

A hologram of the original Death Star is briefly visible in a scene at the Resistance base in &quot;The Force Awakens&quot; and used as a means of comparison with one from the First Order&#x27;s own superweapon, Starkiller Base.

===Second Death Star===
The 1983 film &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot; features the DS-2 Orbital Battle Station under construction as it orbits the forest moon Endor, which houses a shield generator protecting the station. The second Death Star is substantially more advanced and more powerful than its predecessor, and the critical weakness found in the first Death Star has been removed—the Rebel Alliance&#x27;s only hope is to destroy it prior to its completion. Darth Sidious and Darth Vader send the Rebels false information that the station&#x27;s weapons systems are not yet complete in order to lure the Alliance fleet into a trap, resulting in the decisive Battle of Endor. In fact, the station&#x27;s superlaser is fully operational, and it begins firing on and destroying Rebel capital ships during the battle.

A ground assault team led by Han Solo with the help of the Endor-native Ewoks successfully manages to disable the shield generator, allowing Rebel pilots Wedge Antilles and Lando Calrissian to fly into the station (using Han&#x27;s &quot;Millennium Falcon&quot;) and fire on its reactor, destroying the station in another catastrophic explosion.

An early draft of &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot; features two Death Stars at various stages of completion. According to the &quot;Star Wars Encyclopedia&quot;, the second Death Star had at its &quot;north pole ... a heavily armored 100-story tower topped by the Emperor&#x27;s private observation chamber.&quot; The size of the second Death Star has not remained consistent among the various writers for the &quot;Star Wars&quot; franchise, with some stating it shared the first Death Star&#x27;s radius and others claiming it was much more massive with a radius. The most recent figure established in 2017 by Ryder Windham gives the second Death Star a radius of .

The second Death Star is featured on the cover of the book &quot;Star Wars: Aftermath&quot; (2015), which also features many flashbacks to the destruction of the second Death Star, as well as the events directly after its destruction. One of the main characters in the story personally escaped the explosion of the Death Star. The destruction of the second Death Star was also shown in holograms in the book. The 2015 comic book &quot;Star Wars: Shattered Empire&quot; also explores the days following the destruction of the second Death Star from the perspective of Poe Dameron&#x27;s parents, who were pilots during the event. The video game &quot;Star Wars: Uprising&quot; also takes place during the aftermath of the second Death Star&#x27;s destruction, and features a hologram of its description on multiple occasions in and out of cutscenes.

Part of the wreckage of the second Death Star appears in &quot;The Rise of Skywalker&quot; (2019), on the ocean moon Kef Bir. Rey visits the wreckage to obtain the Emperor&#x27;s wayfinder, a device that points the way to his hidden lair on Exegol.

===Similar superweapons===
The 2019 comic &quot;Star Wars&quot; #68 reveals that the Rebels considered creating their own version of a Death Star by luring Star Destroyers to a tectonically unstable planet and setting it off with proton detonators.

====Starkiller Base====
&quot;The Force Awakens&quot; features Starkiller Base, a Death Star-like superweapon built by the First Order, an autocratic regime considered to be the successor of the Empire. Significantly larger than both previous Death Stars, the superweapon was constructed out of an existing planet called Ilum instead of being assembled in deep space. The base draws its raw firepower by harnessing energy directly from a nearby star. Unlike its predecessors, Starkiller Base is capable of firing on and destroying multiple planets at once from extreme range—in the film, the First Order obliterates the five planets in the Hosnian Prime system, at that time the capital of the New Republic. Starkiller Base is protected by a defensive shield that blocks all objects traveling at slower-than-light speeds; Han Solo, Chewbacca, and Finn exploit a vulnerability by bypassing the shield at faster-than-light speeds, successfully infiltrating the base and sabotaging its shields. Subsequently, an X-wing assault led by Poe Dameron and Nien Nunb destroys the superweapon by damaging the base&#x27;s thermal oscillator and fuel cells, resulting in a catastrophic release of energy from the planet&#x27;s core. As Resistance forces flee, the planet implodes and forms a star.

The name Starkiller Base pays homage to the early drafts of the original &quot;Star Wars&quot; film, referring to Luke Skywalker&#x27;s original surname. Coincidentally, the name &quot;Starkiller&quot; is an alias given to Galen Marek by Darth Vader in the 2008 game, &quot;Star Wars: The Force Unleashed&quot;. During early concept development, artist Doug Chiang envisioned the superweapon&#x27;s gun as set inside a volcano, which X-wings would have to enter in a maneuver similar to the trench run on the Death Star in the original film.

====Sith Star Destroyers====
In &quot;The Rise of Skywalker&quot;, the ninth installment in the series, the resurrected Darth Sidious is revealed to have constructed the Sith Eternal&#x27;s fleet of &quot;Xyston&quot;-class Star Destroyers, the Final Order, over the Sith planet Exegol. Each warship is armed with an axial superlaser capable of destroying planets; Sidious uses one of the Star Destroyers to destroy the planet Kijimi as a show of force. At the end of the film, the Resistance launches an offensive against the Sith Eternal forces, including the Sith fleet. Aided by reinforcements from across the galaxy, the Resistance defeats the remaining Sith forces by destroying the onboard superlasers, which ignited the ships reactors and destroyed them one by one. The Resistance also destroyed the &quot;Resurgent-&quot;class Star Destroyer &quot;Steadfast&quot; and the navigation signal that the fleet needed to exit the planet due to the unstable nature of the atmosphere.

===Expanded Universe===
Both Death Stars and similar superweapons appear throughout the non-canonical &quot;Star Wars&quot; Legends continuity.
National Public Radio&#x27;s &quot;Star Wars&quot; adaptation (1981) portrays Leia (Ann Sachs) and Bail Organa&#x27;s (Stephen Elliott) discovery of the Death Star&#x27;s existence and how Leia obtained its schematics. The 1983 &quot;Star Wars&quot; arcade game and numerous LucasArts titles recreate the films&#x27; attacks on the Death Stars.

Kevin J. Anderson&#x27;s &quot;Jedi Academy&quot; trilogy (1994) introduces the Maw Cluster of black holes that protect a laboratory where the Death Star prototype was built (consisting of the superstructure, power core, and superlaser). The first level of LucasArts&#x27; &quot;Dark Forces&quot; (1995) gives mercenary Kyle Katarn the role of stealing the plans that are subsequently given to Leia. Steve Perry&#x27;s novel &quot;Shadows of the Empire&quot; (1996) describes a mission that leads to the Rebels learning of the second Death Star&#x27;s existence, and that mission is playable in LucasArts&#x27; &quot;X-Wing Alliance&quot; space flight simulator (1999). The Death Star itself is a controllable weapon for the Empire in the &quot;Rebellion&quot; (1998) and &quot;Empire at War&quot; (2006) strategy game. In &quot;Battlefront II&quot; (2005), the player participates in a mission to secure crystals used in the Death Star&#x27;s superlaser. Another mission in the game tasks the player with acting as a stormtrooper or Darth Vader in an attempt to recover the plans and capture Leia. The first Death Star under construction acts as the final stage in the video game &quot;The Force Unleashed&quot; (2008).

The first Death Star&#x27;s construction is the subject of Michael Reaves and Steve Perry&#x27;s novel &quot;Death Star&quot; (2007), which depicts the many politics and hidden agendas behind the massive project, from its construction up until its final destruction.

The first Death Star&#x27;s hangars contain assault shuttles, blastboats, Strike cruisers, land vehicles, support ships, and 7,293 TIE fighters. It is also protected by 10,000 turbolaser batteries, 2,600 ion cannons, and at least 768 tractor beam projectors. Various sources state that the first Death Star has a diameter of between 140 and 160 kilometers. There is a broader range of figures for the second Death Star&#x27;s diameter, ranging from 160 to 900 kilometers.

====DS-X Prototype Battle Station====
In the &quot;Legends&quot; works &quot;Death Star&quot; (2007), &quot;Dark Empire II&quot;, &quot;Jedi Search&quot; and &quot;Champions of the Force&quot;, an experimental Death Star prototype, DS-X (a durasteel frame surrounding a reactor core, superlaser, engines and a control room) was conceived by Grand Moff Wilhuff Tarkin as a test bed for the first Death Star. It was constructed by Bevel Lemelisk and his engineers at the Empire&#x27;s secret Maw Installation. The prototype measured 120 kilometers in diameter. Its superlaser was only powerful enough to destroy a planet&#x27;s core, rendering it an uninhabitable &quot;dead planet&quot;. The targeting system on the prototype was never calibrated and the superlaser was inefficient, leaving the weapon&#x27;s batteries drained. The prototype had no interior except a slave-linked control room, hyperdrive engines and other components; the station operated with skeleton-crew of 75 personnel.

====Death Star III====
In the Disney attraction &quot;Star Tours – The Adventures Continue&quot;, guests can travel inside an incomplete Death Star during one of the randomized ride sequences. In the original Star Tours, a Death Star III is seen and destroyed during the ride sequence by the New Republic. Leland Chee originally created the third Death Star to explain why a Death Star is present on the &quot;Star Tours&quot; ride when both of the stations in the film were destroyed. The station being built near the Forest Moon of Endor like the second Death Star before. It is similar to an original concept for &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot;, where two Death Stars would have been built near Had Abbadon (then the Imperial capital world). The &quot;Habitation&quot; spheres, based on the Imperials&#x27; suspicious claims that they were designed strictly for peaceful purposes, were suggested by some fans to have been the origin for the Death Star III. This was later revealed to be the case in Part 2 of the StarWars.com Blog series &quot;The Imperial Warlords: Despoilers of an Empire&quot;. In the Expanded Universe game &quot;Star Wars: Tiny Death Star&quot;, a random HoloNet entry states that one of the residents of the Death Star is simply staying there until he can afford to stay at the third Death Star.

====Other superweapons====
A prototype version of the Death Star can be found in Kevin J. Anderson&#x27;s novel &quot;Jedi Search&quot; (1994). It was kept at the Maw Installation, an Imperial research institute in a cluster of black holes, and later deployed by Tol Sivron after the Maw Installation was invaded by the New Republic. The prototype was ineffective, missing its target and instead destroying an Imperial garrison moon the sole time it was fired in combat. After this, the prototype was later destroyed when it was led into the black holes of the cluster.

In the original Marvel &quot;Star Wars&quot; comic series (1977–1986), a superweapon called &quot;The Tarkin&quot; is built. It is described as being similar to the Death Star but with more energy. Darth Vader commands it and Luke, Leia, Chewbacca, , and R2-D2 sabotage it with Lando&#x27;s help. It is finally destroyed by an Imperial officer attempting to use an ionic weapon to both attack the escaping Rebels and assassinate Vader. Later in the series, a nihilistic group attempts to use a weapon to dislodge a planet from its orbit and cause others to do the same in a chain reaction, thereby destroying the entire universe.

In the &quot;Dark Empire&quot; comic series (1991–95), the reborn Emperor Palpatine&#x27;s flagships &quot;Eclipse&quot; and &quot;Eclipse II&quot; Super Star Destroyers (Star Dreadnoughts) have a miniaturized version of the Death Star superlaser. The first &quot;Eclipse&quot; was under construction at the time of the Emperor&#x27;s death at Endor; shortly thereafter, it was briefly captured by pirates, who quickly abandoned it as an obvious target for the Rebels. The vessel was retrieved by remnants of the Empire and completed, and later served as the flagship of the resurrected Palpatine. It was destroyed by a Force storm enhanced by Luke and Leia, who had been brought aboard by the Emperor in hopes that they could be converted to the dark side. The &quot;Eclipse II&quot; was mostly identical to its predecessor save for a handful of visual changes, and fulfilled the same purpose. It was later destroyed when an errant projectile from the destroyed Galaxy Gun, another superweapon developed under the returned Palpatine, fell onto the ship and caused a massive explosion that destroyed not only the ship and its accompanying fleet, but also the nearby Imperial citadel of Byss.

In Kevin J. Anderson&#x27;s novel &quot;Darksaber&quot; (1995), Death Star designer Bevel Lemelisk is recruited by the Hutts to build a superlaser weapon. Due to their refusal to sufficiently fund and supply the project, the resultant &#x27;superweapon&#x27; is quickly destroyed by a combination of the tumultuous Hoth asteroid field in which it was built and the efforts of the New Republic. Lemelisk is captured and incarcerated by the Republic, and is later executed for his hand in the design and construction of Imperial superweapons.

The novel &quot;Children of the Jedi&quot; (1995) involves the return of &quot;Eye of Palpatine&quot;, a &quot;colossal, asteroid-shaped&quot; super dreadnaught constructed at the behest of Emperor Palpatine during the second year of the Galactic Civil War. The Imperials lose control of the &quot;Eye&quot; when a Jedi uses the Force to hijack the main computer with their spirits.

==Cultural influence==

The Death Star placed ninth in a 2008 20th Century Fox poll of the most popular film weapons.

It has been referred to outside of the &quot;Star Wars&quot; context in such examples as:

* AT&amp;T Corporation&#x27;s logo, designed by Saul Bass and introduced in 1982, is informally referred to as the &quot;Death Star&quot;. &quot;Ars Technica&quot; referred to &quot;the AT&amp;T Death Star&quot; in an article criticizing a company data policy. Competitor T-Mobile mocked AT&amp;T&#x27;s &quot;Death Star&quot; logo and &quot;Empire-like reputation&quot; in a press release.
* In Kevin Smith&#x27;s first feature film, &quot;Clerks&quot; (1994), Randal Graves points out that many independent contractors would have been killed in the second Death Star&#x27;s destruction. In the DVD audio commentary for &quot;Attack of the Clones&quot;, George Lucas says that the inclusion of the holographic Death Star in the film implies that the Geonosians were the contractors discussed by &quot;Jay and Silent Bob&quot;.
* KTCK (SportsRadio 1310 The Ticket) in Dallas were the first to use the term &quot;Death Star&quot; to describe the new mammoth Cowboys Stadium, now AT&amp;T Stadium, in Arlington, Texas. The term has since spread to local media and is generally accepted as a nickname for the stadium.
* The Death Star strategy was the name Enron gave to one of their fraudulent business practices for manipulating California&#x27;s energy market.
* In the novels of the Bridge Trilogy, the San Francisco Police Department admonishes its officers to stop referring to their surveillance satellite as the &quot;Death Star&quot;.
* In the 1987 &quot;Star Wars&quot; parody film &quot;Spaceballs&quot;, the Spaceballs use a spacecraft called &quot;Spaceball I&quot;, which can change shape into &quot;Mega Maid&quot;, resembling a woman with a vacuum cleaner. A reference to the Death Star destroying Alderaan, the Mega Maid is used to drain Druidia&#x27;s atmosphere of fresh air.
* While mostly ground based, the Technodrome from the 1987 &quot;Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles&quot; cartoon and 1988 &quot;Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Adventures&quot; comics is based on the Death Star.
* The &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&quot; video game series features a parody of the Death Star known as the &quot;Death Egg&quot;, a battle station created by Dr. Eggman that serves as a level in multiple games, as well as in the web series &quot;Super Mario Bros. Z&quot;.
* Donald Trump&#x27;s 2020 presidential campaign was nicknamed the &quot;Death Star&quot; by some of its members.
* Las Vegas Raiders owner Mark Davis dubbed the nickname of the team&#x27;s new Allegiant Stadium in Paradise, Nevada as the &quot;Death Star&quot;.
* The Social Sciences and Humanities Building at the University of California, Davis is referred to by students as the &quot;Death Star&quot;, due to its shiny metallic exterior and maze-like architecture.
* Because of its resemblance to the Death Star, the logo for the Illinois Central Railroad that was adopted in 1988 is commonly referred to by railfans as the “Death Star”; this term also applies to the all-black paint scheme of the locomotives which the logo was found on. Some IC locomotives still use this logo, although they are slowly being repainted into Canadian National Railway colors following CN’s acquisition of the IC in 1998.

===Astronomy===
In 1981, following the &quot;Voyager&quot; spacecraft&#x27;s flight past Saturn, scientists noticed a resemblance between one of the planet&#x27;s moons, Mimas, and the Death Star. Additionally, some media outlets used the term &quot;Death Star&quot; to describe Nemesis, a hypothetical star postulated in 1984 to be responsible for gravitationally forcing comets and asteroids from the Oort cloud toward the inner Solar System.

===Merchandise===
Kenner and AMT created a playset and a model, respectively, of the first Death Star. In 2005 and 2008, Lego released models of Death Star II and Death Star I, respectively.
In 1979, Palitoy created a heavy card version of the Death Star as a playset for the vintage range of action figures in the UK, Australia and Canada. Both Death Stars are part of different Micro Machines three-packs. The Death Stars and locations in them are cards in Decipher, Inc.&#x27;s and Wizards of the Coast&#x27;s &quot;Star Wars Customizable Card Game&quot; and &quot;Star Wars Trading Card Game&quot;, respectively. Hasbro released a Death Star model that transforms into a Darth Vader mech. Estes Industries released a flying model rocket version.

A Death Star trinket box was also released by Royal Selangor in 2015, in conjunction with the December screening of &quot;Star Wars: The Force Awakens&quot; that year, and in 2016, Plox released the official levitating Death Star Speaker in anticipation of that year&#x27;s screening of &quot;Rogue One&quot;.

&quot;Lego&quot; released a gift with purchase for &quot;Star Wars Day&quot; 2023 of a mini Death Star II.

=== Political campaigns ===
In 2012–13, a (satirical) proposal on the White House&#x27;s website urging the United States government to build a real Death Star as an economic stimulus and job creation measure gained more than 30,000 signatures, enough to qualify for an official response. The official (tongue-in-cheek) response was released in January 2013: the cost of building a real Death Star has been estimated in 2012 by a Centives economics blog of Lehigh University to $850 quadrillion, or about 13,000 times the worldwide gross domestic product, as well as at current rates of steel production, the Death Star would not be ready for more than 833,000 years. The White House response also stated that &quot;the Administration does not support blowing up planets,&quot; and questioned funding a weapon &quot;with a fundamental flaw that can be exploited by a one-man starship&quot; as reasons for denying the petition.

The Luxembourgish magician Christian Lavey (born as Christian Kies) submitted a petition for the construction of a Death Star to the Luxembourgish parliament. In an interview with a local radio station, however Lavey admitted that this petition was just a joke and some kind of protest against the space plans of the government.

==References==
Footnotes
Citations
==External links==
* 
*NASA Engineer Says It Would Be Easier To Build A Death Star On Asteroid</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19907" start="4" end="14" title="Death Star" label="Death Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253" start="20" end="27" title="fiction" label="fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q25956" start="30" end="43" title="space station" label="space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="48" end="59" title="Weapon of mass destruction" label="superweapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="82" end="91" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="98" end="109" title="Space opera" label="space-opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q196600" start="110" end="119" title="Media franchise" label="franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q52347" start="151" end="166" title="Galactic Empire (Star Wars)" label="Galactic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q623179" start="266" end="281" title="State terrorism" label="reign of terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="319" end="340" title="Star Wars (film)" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q52316" start="454" end="468" title="Rebel Alliance" label="Rebel Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q19590955" start="533" end="542" title="Rogue One" label="Rogue One"/>
<link wikidata="Q60462338" start="586" end="591" title="Andor (TV series)" label="Andor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19907" start="635" end="652" title="second Death Star" label="second Death Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q181803" start="705" end="723" title="Return of the Jedi" label="Return of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139104" start="934" end="947" title="cultural icon" label="cultural icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6074" start="1142" end="1159" title="The Force Awakens" label="The Force Awakens"/>
<link wikidata="Q19907" start="1177" end="1192" title="Starkiller Base" label="Starkiller Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="1204" end="1208" title="Ilum (Star Wars)" label="Ilum"/>
<link wikidata="Q20501234" start="1227" end="1238" title="First Order (Star Wars)" label="First Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q24576853" start="1375" end="1385" title="Resistance (Star Wars)" label="Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q20977110" start="1407" end="1428" title="The Rise of Skywalker" label="The Rise of Skywalker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1536" end="1548" title="Sith#Sith Eternal" label="Sith Eternal"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="1765" end="1777" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="1813" end="1822" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="2175" end="2184" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q107301100" start="2429" end="2443" title="Colin Cantwell" label="Colin Cantwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="2471" end="2486" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2510" end="2531" title="2001: A Space Odyssey" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735964" start="3005" end="3016" title="John Stears" label="John Stears"/>
<link wikidata="Q92566" start="3111" end="3123" title="Flash Gordon" label="Flash Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q746676" start="3211" end="3239" title="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic" label="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181803" start="3269" end="3287" title="Return of the Jedi" label="Return of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753854" start="3487" end="3501" title="matte painting" label="matte painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490159" start="3695" end="3705" title="Larry Cuba" label="Larry Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q955764" start="3713" end="3743" title="University of Illinois Chicago" label="University of Illinois Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q841127" start="3783" end="3794" title="Tom DeFanti" label="Tom DeFanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525287" start="3881" end="3892" title="Gary Imhoff" label="Gary Imhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026827" start="3910" end="3917" title="CalArts" label="CalArts"/>
<link wikidata="Q189325" start="3925" end="3950" title="Jet Propulsion Laboratory" label="Jet Propulsion Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q579757" start="4243" end="4256" title="Praxis Effect" label="Praxis Effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q181069" start="4491" end="4511" title="Attack of the Clones" label="Attack of the Clones"/>
<link wikidata="Q42051" start="4528" end="4547" title="Revenge of the Sith" label="Revenge of the Sith"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4581" end="4595" title="Star Wars: The Clone Wars (2008 TV series)" label="The Clone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q28787" start="4609" end="4615" title="Star Wars Rebels" label="Rebels"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4632" end="4645" title="Star Wars: The Bad Batch" label="The Bad Batch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4666" end="4680" title="Star Wars#Anthology films" label="anthology film"/>
<link wikidata="Q19590955" start="4687" end="4696" title="Rogue One" label="Rogue One"/>
<link wikidata="Q6074" start="4830" end="4847" title="The Force Awakens" label="The Force Awakens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="4900" end="4904" title="Natural satellite" label="moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509344" start="4936" end="4952" title="Power projection" label="power-projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q51800" start="5420" end="5435" title="Grand Moff Tarkin" label="Governor Tarkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q52347" start="5447" end="5462" title="Galactic Empire (Star Wars)" label="Galactic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q51797" start="5627" end="5640" title="Princess Leia" label="Princess Leia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4514647" start="5673" end="5683" title="schematics" label="schematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q52316" start="5691" end="5705" title="Rebel Alliance" label="Rebel Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q752192" start="5862" end="5870" title="Alderaan" label="Alderaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="5992" end="6001" title="Dantooine" label="Dantooine"/>
<link wikidata="Q51746" start="6140" end="6154" title="Luke Skywalker" label="Luke Skywalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q51802" start="6156" end="6164" title="Han Solo" label="Han Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q51803" start="6166" end="6175" title="Chewbacca" label="Chewbacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q51740" start="6177" end="6191" title="Obi-Wan Kenobi" label="Obi-Wan Kenobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q51787" start="6193" end="6198" title="C-3PO" label="C-3PO"/>
<link wikidata="Q51788" start="6204" end="6209" title="R2-D2" label="R2-D2"/>
<link wikidata="Q19901" start="6270" end="6287" title="Millennium Falcon" label="Millennium Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20147" start="6330" end="6342" title="tractor beam" label="tractor beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206942" start="6469" end="6480" title="Darth Vader" label="Darth Vader"/>
<link wikidata="Q842127" start="6794" end="6808" title="X-wing fighter" label="X-wing fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q837921" start="6971" end="6978" title="Yavin 4" label="Yavin 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="7043" end="7051" title="Geonosis" label="Geonosis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7061" end="7105" title="Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones" label="Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077018" start="7135" end="7144" title="Geonosian" label="Geonosian"/>
<link wikidata="Q51805" start="7162" end="7179" title="Poggle the Lesser" label="Poggle the Lesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133061" start="7197" end="7231" title="Confederacy of Independent Systems" label="Confederacy of Independent Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q51792" start="7453" end="7469" title="General Grievous" label="General Grievous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187552" start="7478" end="7484" title="Utapau (Star Wars)" label="Utapau"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873" start="7558" end="7571" title="kyber crystal" label="kyber crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19590955" start="7637" end="7646" title="Rogue One" label="Rogue One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="7769" end="7773" title="Eadu" label="Eadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q28039497" start="7787" end="7800" title="Orson Krennic" label="Orson Krennic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51805" start="7990" end="8000" title="Galen Erso" label="Galen Erso"/>
<link wikidata="Q24951125" start="8016" end="8024" title="Jyn Erso" label="Jyn Erso"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873" start="8120" end="8133" title="kyber crystal" label="kyber crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958752" start="8277" end="8284" title="Disney+" label="Disney+"/>
<link wikidata="Q60462338" start="8293" end="8310" title="Andor (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Andor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q27970919" start="8418" end="8431" title="Cassian Andor" label="Cassian Andor"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8702" end="8719" title="Star Wars: Tarkin" label="Star Wars: Tarkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24734909" start="9264" end="9275" title="Saw Gerrera" label="Saw Gerrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="9584" end="9589" title="Jedha" label="Jedha"/>
<link wikidata="Q19913" start="11059" end="11073" title="Star Destroyer" label="Star Destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q20501234" start="11253" end="11264" title="First Order (Star Wars)" label="First Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q181803" start="11351" end="11369" title="Return of the Jedi" label="Return of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12180673" start="11465" end="11470" title="Endor (Star Wars)" label="Endor"/>
<link wikidata="Q51770" start="11772" end="11785" title="Palpatine" label="Darth Sidious"/>
<link wikidata="Q501700" start="11802" end="11835" title="Counterintelligence" label="send the Rebels false information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194368" start="12095" end="12107" title="capital ship" label="capital ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q51802" start="12158" end="12166" title="Han Solo" label="Han Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409501" start="12201" end="12205" title="Ewok" label="Ewok"/>
<link wikidata="Q52310" start="12283" end="12297" title="Wedge Antilles" label="Wedge Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q51799" start="12302" end="12318" title="Lando Calrissian" label="Lando Calrissian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19901" start="12367" end="12384" title="Millennium Falcon" label="Millennium Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968342" start="12606" end="12628" title="Star Wars Encyclopedia" label="Star Wars Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13208" end="13228" title="Star Wars: Aftermath" label="Star Wars: Aftermath"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13578" end="13605" title="Star Wars: Shattered Empire" label="Star Wars: Shattered Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21782656" start="13710" end="13721" title="Poe Dameron" label="Poe Dameron"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13793" end="13812" title="Star Wars: Uprising" label="Star Wars: Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q20977110" start="14056" end="14077" title="The Rise of Skywalker" label="The Rise of Skywalker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14110" end="14117" title="Kef Bir" label="Kef Bir"/>
<link wikidata="Q21772117" start="14119" end="14122" title="Rey (Star Wars)" label="Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="14234" end="14240" title="Exegol" label="Exegol"/>
<link wikidata="Q60315766" start="14291" end="14300" title="Star Wars (2015 comic book)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="14420" end="14432" title="Plate tectonics" label="tectonically"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14523" end="14540" title="Star Wars: The Force Awakens" label="The Force Awakens"/>
<link wikidata="Q20501234" start="14616" end="14627" title="First Order (Star Wars)" label="First Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="14814" end="14818" title="Ilum (Star Wars)" label="Ilum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601227" start="14897" end="14942" title="Star lifting" label="harnessing energy directly from a nearby star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="15133" end="15146" title="Hosnian Prime" label="Hosnian Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="15172" end="15179" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q733195" start="15187" end="15199" title="New Republic (Star Wars)" label="New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341441" start="15245" end="15251" title="Force field (technology)" label="shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q51802" start="15315" end="15323" title="Han Solo" label="Han Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q51803" start="15325" end="15334" title="Chewbacca" label="Chewbacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q21772120" start="15340" end="15344" title="Finn (Star Wars)" label="Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15882680" start="15396" end="15413" title="Hyperdrive (Star Wars)" label="faster-than-light"/>
<link wikidata="Q842127" start="15502" end="15508" title="X-wing fighter" label="X-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q21782656" start="15524" end="15535" title="Poe Dameron" label="Poe Dameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q51805" start="15540" end="15549" title="Nien Nunb" label="Nien Nunb"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16053" end="16083" title="Star Wars: The Force Unleashed" label="Star Wars: The Force Unleashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804067" start="16132" end="16143" title="Doug Chiang" label="Doug Chiang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16492" end="16504" title="Sith#Sith Eternal" label="Sith Eternal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="16601" end="16607" title="Exegol" label="Exegol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="16749" end="16755" title="Kijimi" label="Kijimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280140" start="16761" end="16774" title="show of force" label="show of force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551295" start="17411" end="17440" title="Star Wars expanded to other media" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; Legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="17453" end="17474" title="National Public Radio" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601116" start="17482" end="17514" title="Star Wars (radio series)" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q51805" start="17552" end="17563" title="Bail Organa" label="Bail Organa"/>
<link wikidata="Q322509" start="17572" end="17587" title="Stephen Elliott (actor)" label="Stephen Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q54317" start="17676" end="17714" title="Star Wars (1983 video game)" label="1983 &amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; arcade game"/>
<link wikidata="Q216611" start="17728" end="17737" title="LucasArts" label="LucasArts"/>
<link wikidata="Q339577" start="17799" end="17816" title="Kevin J. Anderson" label="Kevin J. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743075" start="17824" end="17856" title="Jedi Academy trilogy" label="&amp;quot;Jedi Academy&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="17894" end="17904" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q55287" start="18078" end="18089" title="Dark Forces" label="Dark Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q55305" start="18119" end="18130" title="Kyle Katarn" label="Kyle Katarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368134" start="18199" end="18210" title="Steve Perry (author)" label="Steve Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905019" start="18230" end="18251" title="Shadows of the Empire (novel)" label="Shadows of the Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q55313" start="18416" end="18431" title="X-Wing Alliance" label="X-Wing Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892535" start="18438" end="18460" title="Space flight simulation game" label="space flight simulator"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18544" end="18553" title="Star Wars: Rebellion (video game)" label="Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q55315" start="18577" end="18590" title="Empire at War" label="Empire at War"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18628" end="18642" title="Star Wars: Battlefront II (2005 video game)" label="Battlefront II"/>
<link wikidata="Q51785" start="18817" end="18829" title="Imperial stormtrooper" label="stormtrooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q840167" start="18986" end="19005" title="The Force Unleashed" label="The Force Unleashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191315" start="19080" end="19094" title="Michael Reaves" label="Michael Reaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q19884" start="19420" end="19431" title="TIE fighter" label="TIE fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611823" start="19493" end="19503" title="ion cannon" label="ion cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37221" start="19602" end="19610" title="diameter" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968324" start="19870" end="19884" title="Dark Empire II" label="Dark Empire II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743075" start="19926" end="19948" title="Champions of the Force" label="Champions of the Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496988" start="20808" end="20844" title="Star Tours – The Adventures Continue" label="Star Tours – The Adventures Continue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551295" start="21060" end="21071" title="Leland Chee" label="Leland Chee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251688" start="21164" end="21174" title="Star Tours" label="Star Tours"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21890" end="21916" title="Star Wars: Tiny Death Star" label="Star Wars: Tiny Death Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q27563322" start="22670" end="22704" title="Star Wars (1977 comic book)" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; comic series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968324" start="23291" end="23302" title="Dark Empire" label="Dark Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="24464" end="24468" title="Byss" label="Byss"/>
<link wikidata="Q111730768" start="24511" end="24520" title="Darksaber (novel)" label="Darksaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q111730768" start="25029" end="25049" title="Children of the Jedi" label="Children of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="25459" end="25475" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="25609" end="25629" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q536884" start="25655" end="25664" title="Saul Bass" label="Saul Bass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25692" end="25744" title="AT&amp;amp;T Information Systems#Logo" label="informally referred to as the &amp;quot;Death Star&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q584152" start="25752" end="25764" title="Ars Technica" label="Ars Technica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511885" start="25879" end="25887" title="T-Mobile US" label="T-Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q489831" start="26003" end="26014" title="Kevin Smith" label="Kevin Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q747877" start="26048" end="26054" title="Clerks (1994 film)" label="Clerks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26069" end="26082" title="List of View Askewniverse characters#Randal Graves" label="Randal Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q440991" start="26207" end="26223" title="audio commentary" label="audio commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q369860" start="26409" end="26427" title="Jay and Silent Bob" label="Jay and Silent Bob"/>
<link wikidata="Q15231714" start="26437" end="26441" title="KTCK (AM)" label="KTCK"/>
<link wikidata="Q838284" start="26585" end="26601" title="AT&amp;amp;T Stadium" label="AT&amp;amp;T Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17943" start="26606" end="26622" title="Arlington, Texas" label="Arlington, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247215" start="26728" end="26747" title="Death Star (business)" label="Death Star strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q327646" start="26761" end="26766" title="Enron" label="Enron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239166" start="26853" end="26866" title="energy market" label="energy market"/>
<link wikidata="Q630048" start="26891" end="26905" title="Bridge Trilogy" label="Bridge Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320247" start="26911" end="26942" title="San Francisco Police Department" label="San Francisco Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q498442" start="27102" end="27112" title="Spaceballs" label="Spaceballs"/>
<link wikidata="Q431626" start="27432" end="27443" title="Technodrome" label="Technodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q249056" start="27453" end="27506" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (1987 TV series)" label="1987 &amp;quot;Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles&amp;quot; cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342463" start="27522" end="27561" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Adventures" label="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046812" start="27615" end="27633" title="Sonic the Hedgehog" label="Sonic the Hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996763" start="27758" end="27768" title="Dr. Eggman" label="Dr. Eggman"/>
<link wikidata="Q55620844" start="27846" end="27865" title="Super Mario Bros. Z" label="Super Mario Bros. Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q28805633" start="27875" end="27921" title="Donald Trump 2020 presidential campaign" label="Donald Trump&amp;#x27;s 2020 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q324523" start="27989" end="28006" title="Las Vegas Raiders" label="Las Vegas Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767288" start="28013" end="28023" title="Mark Davis (American football)" label="Mark Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27768421" start="28067" end="28084" title="Allegiant Stadium" label="Allegiant Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q984542" start="28088" end="28104" title="Paradise, Nevada" label="Paradise, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q129421" start="28189" end="28220" title="University of California, Davis" label="University of California, Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093332" start="28407" end="28432" title="Illinois Central Railroad" label="Illinois Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q624798" start="28703" end="28728" title="Canadian National Railway" label="Canadian National Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q155311" start="28828" end="28835" title="Voyager program" label="Voyager"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="28872" end="28878" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15034" start="28953" end="28958" title="Mimas (moon)" label="Mimas"/>
<link wikidata="Q308803" start="29062" end="29069" title="Nemesis (hypothetical star)" label="Nemesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="29086" end="29090" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="29132" end="29143" title="gravitation" label="gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="29156" end="29161" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="29167" end="29175" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q40864" start="29186" end="29196" title="Oort cloud" label="Oort cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="29214" end="29226" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738830" start="29247" end="29253" title="Kenner Products" label="Kenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737417" start="29258" end="29261" title="Aluminum Metal Toys" label="AMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q170484" start="29350" end="29354" title="Lego" label="Lego"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29374" end="29387" title="List of Lego Star Wars sets#Episode VI: Return of the Jedi" label="Death Star II"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29392" end="29404" title="List of Lego Star Wars sets#Episode IV: A New Hope" label="Death Star I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127632" start="29429" end="29436" title="Palitoy" label="Palitoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931494" start="29609" end="29623" title="Micro Machines" label="Micro Machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704527" start="29688" end="29702" title="Decipher, Inc." label="Decipher, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1135204" start="29714" end="29734" title="Wizards of the Coast" label="Wizards of the Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497053" start="29748" end="29780" title="Star Wars Customizable Card Game" label="Star Wars Customizable Card Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601169" start="29797" end="29824" title="Star Wars Trading Card Game" label="Star Wars Trading Card Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q501476" start="29846" end="29852" title="Hasbro" label="Hasbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278919" start="29886" end="29896" title="Transformers (toy line)" label="transforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q858784" start="29916" end="29920" title="mecha" label="mech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369970" start="29922" end="29938" title="Estes Industries" label="Estes Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150863" start="30026" end="30040" title="Royal Selangor" label="Royal Selangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q170484" start="30297" end="30301" title="Lego" label="Lego"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603175" start="30348" end="30361" title="Star Wars Day" label="Star Wars Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="30442" end="30451" title="satirical" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="30469" end="30480" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993049" start="30702" end="30717" title="tongue-in-cheek" label="tongue-in-cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q622137" start="30856" end="30873" title="Lehigh University" label="Lehigh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="30931" end="30953" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53889" wikidata="Q178065" url="?curid=53889" title="Centre Pompidou">
<text>The Centre Pompidou (), more fully the  (), also known as the Pompidou Centre in English and colloquially as Beaubourg, is a building complex in Paris, France. It was designed in the style of high-tech architecture by the architectural team of Richard Rogers, Su Rogers and Renzo Piano, along with Gianfranco Franchini. It is named after Georges Pompidou, the President of France from 1969 to 1974 who commissioned the building, and was officially opened on 31 January 1977 by President Valéry Giscard d&#x27;Estaing.

Centre Pompidou is located in the Beaubourg area of the 4th arrondissement of Paris. It houses the (BPI; Public Information Library), a vast public library; the , the largest museum for modern art in Europe; and IRCAM, a centre for music and acoustic research. The Place Georges Pompidou is an open plaza in front of the museum.

The Centre Pompidou will be closed for renovation from 2 March 2025 until 2030. The BPI will be temporarily relocated to its Lumière building.
==History==
===Foundation===
The idea for a multicultural complex, bringing together different forms of art and literature in one place, developed, in part, from the ideas of France&#x27;s first Minister of Cultural Affairs, André Malraux, a proponent of the decentralisation of art and culture by impulse of the political power. In the 1960s, city planners decided to move the food markets of Les Halles, historically significant structures long prized by Parisians, with the idea that some of the cultural institutes be built in the former market area. Hoping to renew the idea of Paris as a leading city of culture and art, it was proposed to move the Musée d&#x27;Art Moderne to this new location. Paris also needed a large, free public library, as one did not exist at this time. At first the debate concerned Les Halles, but as the controversy settled, in 1968, President Charles de Gaulle announced the Plateau Beaubourg as the new site for the library. 

In 1969, Georges Pompidou, the new president, adopted the Beaubourg project and decided it to be the location of both the new library and a centre for the contemporary arts. In the process of developing the project, the IRCAM (Institut de Recherche et Coordination Acoustique/Musique) was also housed in the complex.
===Design selection===
The Rogers and Piano design was chosen among 681 competition entries. World-renowned architects Oscar Niemeyer, Jean Prouvé, and Philip Johnson made up the jury. It was the first time in France that international architects were allowed to participate. The selection was announced in 1971 at a press conference, where the contrast between the sharply-dressed Pompidou and &quot;hairy young crew&quot; of architects represented a &quot;grand bargain between radical architecture and establishment politics.&quot;

===2025–2030 closure===
A major renovation is due to take place between 2025 and 2030. The Centre Pompidou will be closed from 2 March 2025 until 2030. The BPI will be temporarily relocated to its Lumière building at 40 avenue des Terroirs de France on 25 August 2025.

==Architecture==
=== Design ===

Richard Rogers and Renzo Piano, two emerging architects in their thirties, designed the first major example of an &quot;inside-out&quot; building with its structural system, mechanical systems, and circulation exposed on the exterior of the building, reflecting their belief that they had no chance of winning the commission. Gianfranco Franchini was also involved in the design.

The daring design increased the efficiency of interior space utilization. Initially, all of the functional structural elements of the building were colour-coded: green pipes are plumbing, blue ducts are for climate control, electrical wires are encased in yellow, and circulation elements and devices for safety (e.g., fire extinguishers) are red. According to Piano, the design was meant to be &quot;not a building but a town where you find everything – lunch, great art, a library, great music&quot;.

The Centre Pompidou, initially met with dismay akin to the Eiffel Tower&#x27;s reception in its time, is now widely regarded as an artwork in its own merit. &quot;National Geographic&quot; described the reaction to the design as &quot;love at second sight.&quot; An article in &quot;Le Figaro&quot; declared: &quot;Paris has its own monster, just like the one in Loch Ness.&quot; But two decades later, while reporting on Rogers&#x27; winning the Pritzker Prize in 2007, &quot;The New York Times&quot; noted that the design of the Centre &quot;turned the architecture world upside down&quot; and that &quot;Mr. Rogers earned a reputation as a high-tech iconoclast with the completion of the 1977 Pompidou Centre, with its exposed skeleton of brightly coloured tubes for mechanical systems&quot;. The Pritzker jury said the Pompidou &quot;revolutionised museums, transforming what had once been elite monuments into popular places of social and cultural exchange, woven into the heart of the city.&quot;

=== Construction ===
The centre was built by GTM and completed in 1977. The building cost 993 million French francs. Renovation work conducted from October 1996 to January 2000 was completed on a budget of 576 million francs. The principal engineer was the renowned Peter Rice, responsible for, amongst other things, the Gerberette. During the renovation, the centre was closed to the public for 27 months, re-opening on 1 January 2000.

In September 2020, it was announced that the Centre Pompidou would begin renovations in 2023, which will require either a partial closure for seven years or a full closure for three years. The projected cost for the upcoming renovations is $235 million. In January 2021 Roselyne Bachelot, France&#x27;s culture minister, announced that the centre would close completely in 2023 for four years.

==Description and components==
Because of its location (in the Beaubourg area of the 4th arrondissement of Paris, near Les Halles, rue Montorgueil, and the Marais), the centre is known locally as Beaubourg ()

===Indoors===
Centre Pompidou houses three major institutions:
* Bibliothèque publique d&#x27;information (Bpi; Public Information Library), a vast public library
* , the largest museum for modern and contemporary art in Europe
*IRCAM, a centre for music and acoustic research

The BPI holds around 367,000 books, as well as specialist periodicals, audio-visual materials, photographs, and a wealth of other material. The collections are open to the public, but it is not a lending library. It also hosts cultural events and screens documentary films, as well as hosting the Cinéma du Réel documentary film festival.

During the major renovation of the Centre Pompidou from March 2025 until 2030, the BPI will be temporarily relocated to its Lumière building at 40 Avenue des Terroirs de France on 25 August 2025.

===Outdoors===
The sculpture &quot;Horizontal&quot; by Alexander Calder, a free-standing mobile that is tall, was placed in front of the Centre Pompidou in 2012.
====Stravinsky Fountain====
The nearby Stravinsky Fountain (also called the &quot;Fontaine des automates&quot;), on Place Stravinsky, features 16 whimsical moving and water-spraying sculptures by Jean Tinguely and Niki de Saint-Phalle, which represent themes and works by composer Igor Stravinsky. The black-painted mechanical sculptures are by Tinguely, the coloured works by de Saint-Phalle. The fountain opened in 1983.

====Place Georges Pompidou====
The Place Georges Pompidou in front of the museum is noted for the presence of street performers, such as mimes and jugglers. In the spring, miniature carnivals are installed temporarily into the place in front with a wide variety of attractions: bands, caricature and sketch artists, tables set up for evening dining, and even skateboarding competitions.

In 2021 the artists Arotin &amp; Serghei realised for the re-inauguration of the Place Georges Pompidou after years of works, and in the context of IRCAM&#x27;s festival &quot;Manifeste&quot; the intermedial large-scale installation &quot;Infinite Light Columns / Constellations of The Future&quot; 1–4, &quot;Tribute to Constantin Brancusi,&quot; installed along Piano&#x27;s IRCAM Tower, on the opposite site of Brancusi&#x27;s studio, visible from both, the Place Igor Stravinsky and Place Georges Pompidou. Then president of the Centre Pompidou, Serge Lasvignes, said in his 2015 inauguration speech: &quot;The installation symbolises what the Centre Pompidou wants to be... a multidisciplinary ensemble... it is the resurrection of the initial spirit of the Centre Pompidou with the Piazza, the living heart of creation&quot;.

==Attendance==
By the mid-1980s, the Centre Pompidou was becoming the victim of its huge and unexpected popularity, its many activities, and a complex administrative structure. When Dominique Bozo returned to the Centre in 1981 as Director of the Musée National d&#x27;Art Moderne, he re-installed the museum, bringing out the full range of its collections and displaying the many major acquisitions that had been made. 

By 1992, the Centre de Création Industrielle was incorporated into the Musée National d&#x27;Art Moderne, henceforth called &quot;MNAM/CCI&quot;. The CCI, as an organisation with its own design-oriented programme, ceased to exist, while the MNAM started to develop a design and architecture collection in addition to its modern and contemporary art collection.
The Centre Pompidou was intended to handle 8,000 visitors a day. In its first two decades it attracted more than 145 million visitors, more than five times the number first predicted. , more than 180 million people have visited the centre since its opening in 1977. However, until the 1997–2000 renovation, 20 percent of the centre&#x27;s eight million annual visitors—predominantly foreign tourists—rode the escalators up the outside of the building to the platform for the sights.

During a three-year renovation ending in its 2000 reopening, the Centre Pompidou improved accessibility for visitors

Between 1977 and 2006, the centre had 180 million visitors. Since 2006, the global attendance of the centre is no longer calculated at the main entrance, but only the one of the Musée National d&#x27;Art Moderne and of the public library (5,209,678 visitors for both in 2013), but without the other visitors of the building (929,431 in 2004 or 928,380 in 2006, for only the &quot;panorama&quot; tickets or cinemas, festivals, lectures, bookshops, workshops, restaurants, etc.). In 2017, the museum had 3.37 million visitors. The public library had 1.37 million.

The Musée National d&#x27;Art Moderne saw an increase in attendance from 3.1 million (2010) to 3.6 million visitors in 2011, and 3.75 million in 2013. The 2013 retrospective &quot;Dalí&quot; broke the museum&#x27;s daily attendance record: 7,364 people a day went to see the artist&#x27;s work (790,000 in total). 

Visitors to the centre totalled more than 5,209,678 in 2013, including 3,746,899 for the museum.

The centre had 3.1 million visitors in 2022, a large increase from 2021 but still below 2019 levels, due to closures caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in France. 

== Expansion ==
=== Regional branches ===
In 2010, the Centre Georges Pompidou opened a regional branch, the Centre Pompidou-Metz, in Metz a city 250 kilometres east of Paris. The new museum is part of an effort to expand the display of contemporary arts beyond Paris&#x27;s large museums. The new museum&#x27;s building was designed by the architect Shigeru Ban with a curving and asymmetrical pagoda-like roof topped by a spire and punctured by upper galleries. The 77-metre central spire is a nod to the year the Centre Georges Pompidou of Paris was built – 1977. The Centre Pompidou-Metz displays unique, temporary exhibitions from the collection of the Musée National d&#x27;Art Moderne, which is not on display at the main Parisian museum.
Since its inauguration, the institution has become the most visited cultural venue in France outside Paris, accommodating 550,000 visitors/year.

Launched in 2011 in Chaumont, the museum for the first time went on the road to the French regions with a selection of works from the permanent collection. To do this, it designed and constructed a mobile gallery, which, in the spirit of a circus, will make camp for a few months at a time in towns throughout the country. However, in 2013, the Centre Pompidou halted its mobile-museum project because of the cost.

In 2014, plans were released for a temporary satellite of the Centre Pompidou in the northern French town of Maubeuge close to the Belgian border. The 3,000-square-metre outpost, to be designed by the architects Pierre Hebbelinck and Pierre de Wit, is said to be located at the 17th-century Maubeuge Arsenal for four years. The cost of the project is €5.8 million.

In 2015, the city authorities in Libourne, a town in south-western France, proposed a Pompidou branch housed in a former military base called Esog.

In 2019, the Centre Pompidou announced plans to open a conservation, exhibition and storage space in Massy (Essonne) by 2025. Project backers include the Région Ile-de-France and the French state.

=== International expansion ===
==== Europe ====

=====Málaga=====

In 2015, approximately 70 works from the Centre Pompidou&#x27;s collection went on show in a subterranean glass-and-steel structure called &quot;The Cube&quot; (&quot;El Cubo&quot;) in Málaga. According to the Spanish newspaper &quot;El País&quot;, the annual €1 million cost of the five-year project were funded by the city council. The partnership with Málaga was announced by the city&#x27;s mayor but was not confirmed by Pompidou Centre president Alain Seban until 24 April 2014.

Under the agreement, approximately 100 works from the Pompidou&#x27;s 20th and 21st century collection were put on display, while a smaller area is being used for temporary exhibitions. Portraiture and the influence of Picasso will be among the subjects explored in the permanent display, organised by the Pompidou&#x27;s deputy director Brigitte Leal. Highlights will include works by Alberto Giacometti, René Magritte, Alexander Calder and Constantin Brâncuși, and contemporary works by Sophie Calle, Bruce Nauman and Orlan. The city of Málaga also commissioned Daniel Buren to create a large-scale installation within &quot;El Cubo&quot;.

Following the original five-year agreement that was signed in September 2014, the terms were renewed early 2018 and again in 2024. Under the most recent renewal, Málaga city council agreed to pay the Centre Pompidou an annual fee of €2.7 million over five years (2025–29), rising to €3.1 million in the latter period (2030–34).
=====Brussels=====

In March 2018, the Centre Pompidou announced plans to open an offshoot branch in Brussels, under the name KANAL - Centre Pompidou. Housed in a former Citroën garage which was transformed by a team comprising ces noAarchitecten (Brussels), EM2N (Zurich) and Sergison Bates architects (London), the new centre brings together the Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art, an architecture centre (CIVA Foundation) and public spaces devoted to culture, education and leisure. The Brussels-Capital region — which acquired the Art Deco-style building in October 2015 — is the main funder project, with the conversion costing €122 million.

==== Asia ====
In a joint proposal with the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum presented in 2005, the Centre Pompidou planned to build a museum of modern and contemporary art, design and the media arts in Hong Kong&#x27;s West Kowloon Cultural District.

In 2007, the then president Bruno Racine announced plans to open a museum carrying the Pompidou&#x27;s name in Shanghai, with its programming to be determined by the Pompidou. The location chosen for the new museum was a former fire station in the Luwan district&#x27;s Huaihai Park. However, the scheme did not materialize for several years, reportedly due to the lack of a legal framework for a non-profit foreign institution to operate in China. In 2019, the Centre Pompidou x West Bund Museum opened to the public, based in a wing of the West Bund Art Museum designed by David Chipperfield. The inaugural exhibitions &quot;The Shape of Time, Highlights of the Centre Pompidou Collection&quot; and &quot;Observations, Highlights of the New Media Collection&quot; were curated by Marcella Lista.

Other projects include the Pompidou&#x27;s joint venture with the King Abdulaziz Centre for World Culture, an arts complex incorporating a museum in Dhahran, the building of which has stalled.

==== North America ====
In April 2014, Pompidou president Alain Seban confirmed that after Malaga (Spain), Mexico will be the next site for a pop-up Pompidou Centre. A 58,000-square-foot satellite museum Centre Pompidou x Jersey City in Jersey City, New Jersey, was scheduled to open in 2024, which would have made it the Pompidou&#x27;s first satellite museum in North America; however, in 2024, city and state funding for the museum was withdrawn. The Jersey City City Council voted in September 2024 to approve a tax abatement, allowing Centre Pompidou x Jersey City to open at an alternative location.

==== South America ====
There have been rumours of a pop-up Pompidou satellite museum in Brazil since Alain Seban announced the plan for these temporary locations back in 2012. At a talk on satellite museums at the Guggenheim on 24 April 2014, Alain Seban suggested that Brazil may be the third country to host a temporary satellite museum, after Spain and Mexico.

== Management ==
=== Presidents ===
* 2021 – present: Laurent Le Bon
* 2015 – 2021: Serge Lasvignes
* 2007 – 2015: Alain Seban
* 2002 – 2007: Bruno Racine
* 1996 – 2002: Jean-Jacques Aillagon
* 1993 – 1996: François Barré
* 1991 – 1993: Dominique Bozo
* 1989 – 1991: Hélène Ahrweiler
* 1983 – 1989: Jean Maheu
* 1980 – 1983: Jean-Claude Groshens
* 1977 – 1980: Jean Millier
* 1976 – 1977: Robert Bordaz
* 1969 – 1977: Georges Pompidou

=== Funding ===

As a national museum, the Centre Pompidou is government-owned and subsidised by the Ministry of Culture (64.2% of its budget in 2012 : 82.8 on 129 million €), essentially for its staff. The Culture Ministry appoints its directors and controls its gestion, which is nevertheless independent, as &quot;Etablissement public à caractère administratif&quot; since its creation. In 2011, the museum earned $1.9 million from travelling exhibitions.

Established in 1977 as the institution&#x27;s US philanthropic arm, the Georges Pompidou Art and Culture Foundation acquires and encourages major gifts of art and design for exhibition at the museum. Since 2006, the non-profit support group has brought in donations of 28 works, collectively valued at more than $14 million, and purchased many others. In 2013, New York-based art collectors Thea Westreich Wagner and Ethan Wagner announced their intention to donate about 300 works by 27 European and international artists to the Centre Pompidou, thereby making one of the largest gifts in the institution&#x27;s history.

=== Nazi-looted art ===
In 1999, the heirs of Alphonse Kann requested the return of Georges Braque&#x27;s &quot;The Guitar Player&quot;, which the Centre Pompidou had acquired from Heinz Berggruen in 1981.

In 2011, Centre Pompidou admitted that it held three paintings, &quot;Les Peupliers (Poplars)&quot;, &quot;Arbres (Trees)&quot;, and &quot;Composition&quot; by the artist Fédor Löwenstein that had been looted during the Nazi occupation of France.

In 2021, after the French government restituted a looted Max Pechtstein painting to the heirs of Hugo Simon, the Centre Pompidou held an exhibition in a tribute to the persecuted art collector.

==In popular culture==

===Film and TV===
* Gordon Matta-Clark &quot;Conical Intersect&quot;, 1975. Matta-Clark&#x27;s contribution to the Paris Biennale 1975.
* Roberto Rossellini, &quot;Beaubourg, centre d&#x27;art et de culture&quot;, 1977. A documentary about the Centre which explores the building and its surroundings on its opening day; Rossellini&#x27;s final film.
* Lewis Gilbert, &quot;Moonraker&quot;, 1979. A fifth-floor room of the building featured as the office of Holly Goodhead (played by Lois Chiles), in the 1979 James Bond film &quot;Moonraker&quot;, which in the film was scripted as being part of the space complex of the villainous Hugo Drax (Michael Lonsdale).
* Claude Pinoteau, &quot;L&#x27;Étudiante&quot;, 1988.
* Richard Berry, &quot;L&#x27;Art (délicat) de la séduction&quot;, 2001.
* James Ivory, &quot;Le Divorce&quot;, 2003.
* Laurent Tirard, &quot;Mensonges et trahisons&quot;, 2004.
* Éric et Ramzy, &quot;Seuls Two&quot;, 2008.

===Other===
* Electric Light Orchestra, &quot;Calling America&quot; music video, 1986. ELO is shown performing the song in front of the centre.
* JJ Burnel &quot;Euroman Cometh&quot;, 1979. The album cover shows JJ Burnel standing in front of the centre.

==Public transport==
* Nearby Métro stations: Rambuteau, Les Halles
* RER: Châtelet – Les Halles
==Exhibitions==
Several major exhibitions are organised each year on either the first or sixth floors, including both monographs and group exhibitions.
Group exhibitions have included:
* &quot;Photography as a weapon of class&quot; (2018)
* &quot;Coder le monde&quot; (2018)
* &quot;La Fabrique Du Vivant&quot; (2019)
* &quot;Jo-Ey Tang &amp; Thomas Fougeirol – Dust. The Plates Of The Present&quot; (2020 Group Exhibition)
* &quot;Les Moyens Du Bord&quot; (2020)
* &quot;Global(e) Resistance – Pour une histoire engagée de la collection contemporaine de Jonathas de Andrade à Billie Zangewa&quot; (2020)
* &quot;NEURONS Simulated intelligence&quot; (2020)
* &quot;L&#x27;écologie des images&quot; (2021)

== See also ==

* List of museums in Paris
* List of tourist attractions in Paris

==Footnotes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q178065" start="4" end="19" title="Centre Pompidou" label="Centre Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q178065" start="39" end="39" title="Centre Pompidou" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q178065" start="62" end="77" title="Centre Pompidou" label="Pompidou Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q178065" start="109" end="118" title="Centre Pompidou" label="Beaubourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="145" end="150" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q845318" start="192" end="214" title="high-tech architecture" label="high-tech architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q237412" start="244" end="258" title="Richard Rogers" label="Richard Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q39171828" start="260" end="269" title="Su Rogers" label="Su Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q190148" start="274" end="285" title="Renzo Piano" label="Renzo Piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208915" start="298" end="318" title="Gianfranco Franchini" label="Gianfranco Franchini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185" start="338" end="354" title="Georges Pompidou" label="Georges Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="360" end="379" title="President of France" label="President of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124" start="487" end="516" title="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing" label="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q230127" start="575" end="602" title="4th arrondissement of Paris" label="4th arrondissement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="705" end="715" title="modern art" label="modern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q579314" start="731" end="736" title="IRCAM" label="IRCAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q174782" start="818" end="823" title="plaza" label="plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q151164" start="1217" end="1230" title="André Malraux" label="André Malraux"/>
<link wikidata="Q913434" start="1386" end="1396" title="Les Halles" label="Les Halles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="1870" end="1887" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q579314" start="2175" end="2180" title="IRCAM" label="IRCAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q134165" start="2391" end="2405" title="Oscar Niemeyer" label="Oscar Niemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q381924" start="2407" end="2418" title="Jean Prouvé" label="Jean Prouvé"/>
<link wikidata="Q183528" start="2424" end="2438" title="Philip Johnson" label="Philip Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q237412" start="3111" end="3125" title="Richard Rogers" label="Richard Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q190148" start="3130" end="3141" title="Renzo Piano" label="Renzo Piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208915" start="3437" end="3457" title="Gianfranco Franchini" label="Gianfranco Franchini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241671" start="3670" end="3678" title="plumbing" label="plumbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798773" start="3699" end="3714" title="climate control" label="climate control"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="3716" end="3726" title="electrical" label="electrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121687" start="3760" end="3780" title="Circulation (architecture)" label="circulation elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q190672" start="3811" end="3829" title="fire extinguishers" label="fire extinguishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q243" start="4055" end="4067" title="Eiffel Tower" label="Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="4159" end="4178" title="National Geographic (magazine)" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q216047" start="4279" end="4288" title="Le Figaro" label="Le Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q49650" start="4359" end="4368" title="Loch Ness" label="Loch Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q133160" start="4443" end="4457" title="Pritzker Prize" label="Pritzker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="4473" end="4491" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475312" start="5045" end="5048" title="Vinci (construction)" label="GTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="5102" end="5114" title="French franc" label="French franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393663" start="5266" end="5276" title="Peter Rice (structural engineer)" label="Peter Rice"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5321" end="5331" title=":fr:Gerberette" label="Gerberette"/>
<link wikidata="Q436173" start="5708" end="5725" title="Roselyne Bachelot" label="Roselyne Bachelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q230127" start="5918" end="5945" title="4th arrondissement of Paris" label="4th arrondissement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q913434" start="5952" end="5962" title="Les Halles" label="Les Halles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449239" start="5964" end="5979" title="rue Montorgueil" label="rue Montorgueil"/>
<link wikidata="Q749573" start="5989" end="5995" title="Le Marais" label="Marais"/>
<link wikidata="Q186030" start="6244" end="6260" title="contemporary art" label="contemporary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q579314" start="6272" end="6277" title="IRCAM" label="IRCAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q779419" start="6517" end="6532" title="lending library" label="lending library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973176" start="6618" end="6632" title="Cinéma du Réel" label="Cinéma du Réel"/>
<link wikidata="Q151580" start="6913" end="6929" title="Alexander Calder" label="Alexander Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q281309" start="7059" end="7078" title="Stravinsky Fountain" label="Stravinsky Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q163938" start="7216" end="7229" title="Jean Tinguely" label="Jean Tinguely"/>
<link wikidata="Q168704" start="7234" end="7254" title="Niki de Saint-Phalle" label="Niki de Saint-Phalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="7301" end="7316" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q823571" start="7554" end="7571" title="busking" label="street performers"/>
<link wikidata="Q674067" start="7581" end="7585" title="mime artist" label="mime"/>
<link wikidata="Q194326" start="7591" end="7598" title="juggler" label="juggler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618" start="7626" end="7635" title="carnivals" label="carnivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q482919" start="7729" end="7739" title="caricature" label="caricature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078274" start="7744" end="7758" title="sketch (drawing)" label="sketch artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q15783" start="7803" end="7816" title="skate board" label="skateboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q153048" start="8153" end="8172" title="Constantin Brancusi" label="Constantin Brancusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479398" start="8382" end="8397" title="Serge Lasvignes" label="Serge Lasvignes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895953" start="8912" end="8945" title="Musée National d&amp;#x27;Art Moderne" label="Musée National d&amp;#x27;Art Moderne"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873593" start="11158" end="11185" title="COVID-19 pandemic in France" label="COVID-19 pandemic in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054169" start="11298" end="11318" title="Centre Pompidou-Metz" label="Centre Pompidou-Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="11323" end="11327" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="11358" end="11363" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q526725" start="11540" end="11551" title="Shigeru Ban" label="Shigeru Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054169" start="11760" end="11780" title="Centre Pompidou-Metz" label="Centre Pompidou-Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895953" start="11847" end="11880" title="Musée National d&amp;#x27;Art Moderne" label="Musée National d&amp;#x27;Art Moderne"/>
<link wikidata="Q193880" start="12101" end="12109" title="Chaumont, Haute-Marne" label="Chaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q138648" start="12606" end="12614" title="Maubeuge" label="Maubeuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544" start="12896" end="12904" title="Libourne" label="Libourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q274249" start="13113" end="13128" title="Massy, Essonne" label="Massy (Essonne)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13917" start="13166" end="13186" title="Île-de-France" label="Région Ile-de-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q8851" start="13463" end="13469" title="Málaga" label="Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q50009" start="13512" end="13519" title="El País" label="El País"/>
<link wikidata="Q157194" start="14150" end="14168" title="Alberto Giacometti" label="Alberto Giacometti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836" start="14170" end="14183" title="René Magritte" label="René Magritte"/>
<link wikidata="Q151580" start="14185" end="14201" title="Alexander Calder" label="Alexander Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q153048" start="14206" end="14225" title="Constantin Brâncuși" label="Constantin Brâncuși"/>
<link wikidata="Q258630" start="14253" end="14265" title="Sophie Calle" label="Sophie Calle"/>
<link wikidata="Q168665" start="14267" end="14279" title="Bruce Nauman" label="Bruce Nauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q265732" start="14284" end="14289" title="Orlan" label="Orlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q593621" start="14328" end="14340" title="Daniel Buren" label="Daniel Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q52676370" start="14861" end="14884" title="KANAL - Centre Pompidou" label="KANAL - Centre Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746" start="14905" end="14912" title="Citroën" label="Citroën"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324404" start="15012" end="15037" title="Sergison Bates architects" label="Sergison Bates architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="15273" end="15281" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q201469" start="15430" end="15458" title="Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum" label="Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985661" start="15602" end="15632" title="West Kowloon Cultural District" label="West Kowloon Cultural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q784043" start="15663" end="15675" title="Bruno Racine" label="Bruno Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015832" start="15883" end="15888" title="Luwan" label="Luwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q707020" start="16210" end="16228" title="David Chipperfield" label="David Chipperfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q101437324" start="16417" end="16431" title="Marcella Lista" label="Marcella Lista"/>
<link wikidata="Q268915" start="16583" end="16590" title="Dhahran" label="Dhahran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184792" start="16832" end="16861" title="Centre Pompidou x Jersey City" label="Centre Pompidou x Jersey City"/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="16865" end="16888" title="Jersey City, New Jersey" label="Jersey City, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219338" start="17655" end="17669" title="Laurent Le Bon" label="Laurent Le Bon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479398" start="17685" end="17700" title="Serge Lasvignes" label="Serge Lasvignes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830278" start="17716" end="17727" title="Alain Seban" label="Alain Seban"/>
<link wikidata="Q784043" start="17743" end="17755" title="Bruno Racine" label="Bruno Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q439594" start="17771" end="17792" title="Jean-Jacques Aillagon" label="Jean-Jacques Aillagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81500" start="17868" end="17884" title="Hélène Ahrweiler" label="Hélène Ahrweiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173319" start="17900" end="17910" title="Jean Maheu" label="Jean Maheu"/>
<link wikidata="Q64748224" start="18888" end="18909" title="Thea Westreich Wagner" label="Thea Westreich Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735374" start="19166" end="19179" title="Alphonse Kann" label="Alphonse Kann"/>
<link wikidata="Q153793" start="19204" end="19225" title="Georges Braque" label="Georges Braque&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q66992" start="19301" end="19316" title="Heinz Berggruen" label="Heinz Berggruen"/>
<link wikidata="Q162105" start="19632" end="19646" title="Max Pechstein" label="Max Pechtstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635718" start="19672" end="19682" title="Hugo Simon (art collector)" label="Hugo Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q953717" start="19814" end="19832" title="Gordon Matta-Clark" label="Gordon Matta-Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q591736" start="19909" end="19923" title="Paris Biennale" label="Paris Biennale"/>
<link wikidata="Q53003" start="19932" end="19950" title="Roberto Rossellini" label="Roberto Rossellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q303891" start="20146" end="20159" title="Lewis Gilbert" label="Lewis Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q334780" start="20167" end="20176" title="Moonraker (film)" label="Moonraker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301206" start="20251" end="20265" title="Holly Goodhead" label="Holly Goodhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q238327" start="20277" end="20288" title="Lois Chiles" label="Lois Chiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="20303" end="20313" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q334780" start="20325" end="20334" title="Moonraker (film)" label="Moonraker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079238" start="20426" end="20435" title="Hugo Drax" label="Hugo Drax"/>
<link wikidata="Q346540" start="20437" end="20453" title="Michael Lonsdale" label="Michael Lonsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q44515" start="20458" end="20473" title="Claude Pinoteau" label="Claude Pinoteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216559" start="20481" end="20497" title="L&amp;#x27;Étudiante (film)" label="L&amp;#x27;Étudiante"/>
<link wikidata="Q958109" start="20513" end="20526" title="Richard Berry (actor)" label="Richard Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202366" start="20534" end="20570" title="L&amp;#x27;Art (délicat) de la séduction" label="L&amp;#x27;Art (délicat) de la séduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q51577" start="20586" end="20597" title="James Ivory" label="James Ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306265" start="20605" end="20615" title="Le Divorce" label="Le Divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219542" start="20631" end="20645" title="Laurent Tirard" label="Laurent Tirard"/>
<link wikidata="Q218255" start="20750" end="20774" title="Electric Light Orchestra" label="Electric Light Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934205" start="20782" end="20797" title="Calling America" label="Calling America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638818" start="20882" end="20891" title="JJ Burnel" label="JJ Burnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060663" start="20898" end="20912" title="Euroman Cometh" label="Euroman Cometh"/>
<link wikidata="Q50716" start="21022" end="21027" title="Paris Métro" label="Métro"/>
<link wikidata="Q646376" start="21038" end="21047" title="Rambuteau (Paris Métro)" label="Rambuteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576810" start="21049" end="21059" title="Les Halles (Paris Métro)" label="Les Halles"/>
<link wikidata="Q216125" start="21062" end="21065" title="Réseau Express Régional" label="RER"/>
<link wikidata="Q800627" start="21067" end="21088" title="Châtelet – Les Halles (Paris RER)" label="Châtelet – Les Halles"/>
<link wikidata="Q193495" start="21207" end="21216" title="monograph" label="monograph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21644" end="21663" title="Jonathas de Andrade" label="Jonathas de Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423272" start="21813" end="21837" title="List of museums in Paris" label="List of museums in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403319" start="21840" end="21876" title="List of tourist attractions in Paris" label="List of tourist attractions in Paris"/>
</links>
</doc>
