<doc id="54808" wikidata="Q546583" url="?curid=54808" title="Termite">
<text>Termites are a group of detritophagous eusocial insects which consume a variety of decaying plant material, generally in the form of wood, leaf litter, and soil humus. They are distinguished by their moniliform antennae and the soft-bodied and often unpigmented worker caste for which they have been commonly termed &quot;white ants&quot;; however, they are not ants, being more closely related to cockroaches. About 2,972 extant species are currently described, 2,105 of which are members of the family Termitidae.

Termites comprise the infraorder Isoptera, or alternatively the epifamily Termitoidae, within the order Blattodea (along with cockroaches). Termites were once classified in a separate order from cockroaches, but recent phylogenetic studies indicate that they evolved from cockroaches, as they are deeply nested within the group, and the sister group to wood-eating cockroaches of the genus &quot;Cryptocercus&quot;. Previous estimates suggested the divergence took place during the Jurassic or Triassic. More recent estimates suggest that they have an origin during the Late Jurassic, with the first fossil records in the Early Cretaceous.

Similarly to ants and some bees and wasps from the separate order Hymenoptera, most termites have an analogous &quot;worker&quot; and &quot;soldier&quot; caste system consisting of mostly sterile individuals which are physically and behaviorally distinct. Unlike ants, most colonies begin from sexually mature individuals known as the &quot;king&quot; and &quot;queen&quot; that together form a lifelong monogamous pair. Also unlike ants, which undergo a complete metamorphosis, termites undergo an incomplete metamorphosis that proceeds through egg, nymph, and adult stages. Termite colonies are commonly described as superorganisms due to the collective behaviors of the individuals which form a self-governing entity: the colony itself. Their colonies range in size from a few hundred individuals to enormous societies with several million individuals. Most species are rarely seen, having a cryptic life-history where they remain hidden within the galleries and tunnels of their nests for most of their lives.

Termites&#x27; success as a group has led to them colonizing almost every global landmass, with the highest diversity occurring in the tropics where they are estimated to constitute 10% of the animal biomass, particularly in Africa which has the richest diversity with more than 1000 described species. They are important decomposers of decaying plant matter in the subtropical and tropical regions of the world, and their recycling of wood and plant matter is of considerable ecological importance. Many species are ecosystem engineers capable of altering soil characteristics such as hydrology, decomposition, nutrient cycling, vegetative growth, and consequently surrounding biodiversity through the large mounds constructed by certain species.

Termites have several impacts on humans. They are a delicacy in the diet of some human cultures such as the Makiritare in the Alto Orinoco province of Venezuela, where they are commonly used as a spice. They are also used in traditional medicinal treatments of various diseases and ailments, such as influenza, asthma, bronchitis, etc. Termites are most famous for being structural pests; however, the vast majority of termite species are innocuous, with the regional numbers of economically significant species being: North America, 9; Australia, 16; Indian subcontinent, 26; tropical Africa, 24; Central America and the West Indies, 17. Of known pest species, 28 of the most invasive and structurally damaging belong to the genus &quot;Coptotermes&quot;. The distribution of most known pest species is expected to increase over time as a consequence of climate change. Increased urbanization and connectivity is also predicted to expand the range of some pest termites.

==Etymology==
The infraorder name Isoptera is derived from the Greek words &quot;iso&quot; (equal) and &quot;ptera&quot; (winged), which refers to the nearly equal size of the fore and hind wings. &quot;Termite&quot; derives from the Latin and Late Latin word &quot;termes&quot; (&quot;woodworm, white ant&quot;), altered by the influence of Latin &quot;terere&quot; (&quot;to rub, wear, erode&quot;) from the earlier word &quot;tarmes&quot;. A termite nest is also known as a &quot;termitary&quot; or &quot;termitarium&quot; (plural &quot;termitaria&quot; or &quot;termitariums&quot;). The word was first used in English in 1781. Earlier attested designations were &quot;wood ants&quot; or &quot;white ants&quot;, though these may never have been in wide use as termites do not exist in the British Isles.

==Taxonomy and evolution==

Termites were formerly placed in the order Isoptera. As early as 1934 suggestions were made that they were closely related to wood-eating cockroaches (genus &quot;Cryptocercus&quot;, the woodroach) based on the similarity of their symbiotic gut flagellates. In the 1960s additional evidence supporting that hypothesis emerged when F. A. McKittrick noted similar morphological characteristics between some termites and &quot;Cryptocercus&quot; nymphs. In 2008 DNA analysis from 16S rRNA sequences supported the position of termites being nested within the evolutionary tree containing the order Blattodea, which included the cockroaches. The cockroach genus &quot;Cryptocercus&quot; shares the strongest phylogenetic relationship, and is considered to be the sister-group to termites. Termites and &quot;Cryptocercus&quot; share similar morphological and social features: for example, most cockroaches do not exhibit social characteristics, but &quot;Cryptocercus&quot; takes care of its young and exhibits other social behaviour such as trophallaxis and allogrooming. It had been proposed that the Isoptera and Cryptocercidae be grouped in the clade &quot;Xylophagodea&quot;, but subsequent researchers have suggested a more conservative measure of retaining the termites as the Termitoidae, an epifamily within the cockroach order, which preserves the classification of termites at family level and below. Termites have long been accepted to be closely related to cockroaches and mantids, and they are classified in the same superorder (Dictyoptera).

The oldest unambiguous termite fossils date to the early Cretaceous, but given the diversity of Cretaceous termites and early fossil records showing mutualism between microorganisms and these insects, they possibly originated earlier in the Jurassic or Triassic. Possible evidence of a Jurassic origin is the assumption that the extinct mammaliaform &quot;Fruitafossor&quot; from Morrison Formation consumed termites, judging from its morphological similarity to modern termite-eating mammals. Morrison Formation also yields social insect nest fossils close to that of termites. The oldest termite nest discovered is believed to be from the Upper Cretaceous in West Texas, where the oldest known faecal pellets were also discovered. Claims that termites emerged earlier have faced controversy. For example, F. M. Weesner indicated that the Mastotermitidae termites may go back to the Late Permian, 251 million years ago, and fossil wings that have a close resemblance to the wings of &quot;Mastotermes&quot; of the Mastotermitidae, the most primitive living termite, have been discovered in the Permian layers in Kansas. It is even possible that the first termites emerged during the Carboniferous. The folded wings of the fossil wood roach &quot;Pycnoblattina&quot;, arranged in a convex pattern between segments 1a and 2a, resemble those seen in &quot;Mastotermes&quot;, the only living insect with the same pattern. Kumar Krishna &quot;et al.&quot;, though, consider that all of the Paleozoic and Triassic insects tentatively classified as termites are in fact unrelated to termites and should be excluded from the Isoptera. Other studies suggest that the origin of termites is more recent, having diverged from &quot;Cryptocercus&quot; sometime during the Early Cretaceous. The primitive giant northern termite (&quot;Mastotermes darwiniensis&quot;) exhibits numerous cockroach-like characteristics that are not shared with other termites, such as laying its eggs in rafts and having anal lobes on the wings. Termites are sometimes called &quot;white ants&quot;, but the only resemblance to the ants is due to their sociality which is due to convergent evolution with termites being the first social insects to evolve a caste system more than 100 million years ago. Termite genomes are generally relatively large compared to those of other insects; the first fully sequenced termite genome, of &quot;Zootermopsis nevadensis&quot;, which was published in the journal &quot;Nature Communications&quot;, consists of roughly 500Mb, while two subsequently published genomes, &quot;Macrotermes natalensis&quot; and &quot;Cryptotermes secundus&quot;, are considerably larger at around 1.3Gb.

External phylogeny showing relationship of termites with other insect groups:

Internal phylogeny showing relationship of extant termite families:

There are currently 3,173 living and fossil termite species recognised, classified in 12 families; reproductive and/or soldier castes are usually required for identification. The infraorder Isoptera is divided into the following clade and family groups, showing the subfamilies in their respective classification:

===Early-diverging termite families===

: Infraorder Isoptera 
:::::: Family Cratomastotermitidae 
:::::: Family Mastotermitidae 
:: Parvorder Euisoptera 
:::::: Family Melqartitermitidae 
:::::: Family Mylacrotermitidae 
:::::: Family Krishnatermitidae 
:::::: Family Termopsidae 
:::::: Family Carinatermitidae 
::: Minorder Teletisoptera 
:::::: Family Archotermopsidae 
:::::: Family Hodotermitidae 
:::::: Family Hodotermopsidae 
::::::: subfamily Hodotermopsellinae 
::::::: subfamily Hodotermopsinae 
:::::: Family Arceotermitidae 
::::::: subfamily Arceotermitinae 
::::::: subfamily Cosmotermitinae 
:::::: Family Stolotermitidae 
::::::: subfamily Stolotermitinae 
::::::: subfamily Porotermitinae 
::: Minorder Artisoptera 
:::::: Family Tanytermitidae 
:::: Microrder Icoisoptera 
:::::: Family Kalotermitidae 
::::: Nanorder Neoisoptera 
:::::: see below for families and subfamilies

===Neoisoptera===
The Neoisoptera, literally meaning &quot;newer termites&quot; (in an evolutionary sense), are a recently coined clade that include families such as the Heterotermitidae, Rhinotermitidae and Termitidae. &quot;Neoisopterans&quot; have a bifurcated caste development with true workers, and so notably lack pseudergates (except in some basal taxa such as &quot;Serritermitidae&quot;: see below). All &quot;Neoisopterans&quot; have a fontanelle, which appears as a circular pore or series of pores in a depressed region within the middle of the head. The fontanelle connects to the frontal gland, a novel organ unique to Neoisopteran termites which evolved to excrete an array of defensive chemicals and secretions, and so is typically most developed in the soldier caste. Cellulose digestion in the family &quot;Termitidae&quot; has co-evolved with bacterial gut microbiota and many taxa have evolved additional symbiotic relationships such as with the fungus &quot;Termitomyces&quot;; in contrast, basal &quot;Neoisopterans&quot; and all other &quot;Euisoptera&quot; have flagellates and prokaryotes in their hindguts. Extant families and subfamilies are organized as follows:

: Early-Diverging Neoisoptera (Non-Geoisoptera)
:: Family Archeorhinotermitidae 
:: Family Stylotermitidae 
:: Family Serritermitidae 
:: Family Rhinotermitidae 
:: Family Termitogetonidae 
:: Family Psammotermitidae 
::: Subfamily Prorhinotermitinae 
::: Subfamily Psammotermitinae 

: Clade Geoisoptera 
:: Family Heterotermitidae ()

:: Family Termitidae 
::: Subfamily Sphaerotermitinae 
::: Subfamily Macrotermitinae 
::: Subfamily Foraminitermitinae 
::: Subfamily Apicotermitinae 
::: Subfamily Microcerotermitinae 
::: Subfamily Syntermitinae 
::: Subfamily Forficulitermitinae 
::: Subfamily Engelitermitinae 
::: Subfamily Crepititermitinae 
::: Subfamily Protohamitermitinae 
::: Subfamily Cylindrotermitinae 
::: Subfamily Neocapritermitinae 
::: Subfamily Nasutitermitinae 
::: Subfamily Promirotermitinae 
::: Subfamily Mirocapritermitinae 
::: Subfamily Amitermitinae 
::: Subfamily Cubitermitinae 
::: Subfamily Termitinae 

==Distribution and diversity==
Termites are found on all continents except Antarctica. The diversity of termite species is low in North America and Europe (10 species known in Europe and 50 in North America), but is high in South America, where over 400 species are known. Of the 2,972 extant termite species currently classified, 1,000 are found in Africa, where mounds are extremely abundant in certain regions. Approximately 1.1 million active termite mounds can be found in the northern Kruger National Park alone. In Asia, there are 435 species of termites, which are mainly distributed in China. Within China, termite species are restricted to mild tropical and subtropical habitats south of the Yangtze River. In Australia, all ecological groups of termites (dampwood, drywood, subterranean) are endemic to the country, with over 360 classified species. Because termites are highly social and abundant, they represent a disproportionate amount of the world&#x27;s insect biomass. Termites and ants comprise about 1% of insect species, but represent more than 50% of insect biomass.

Due to their soft cuticles, termites do not inhabit cool or cold habitats. There are three ecological groups of termites: dampwood, drywood and subterranean. Dampwood termites are found only in coniferous forests, and drywood termites are found in hardwood forests; subterranean termites live in widely diverse areas. One species in the drywood group is the West Indian drywood termite &quot;(Cryptotermes brevis)&quot;, which is an invasive species in Australia.

==Description==

Termites are usually small, measuring between in length. The largest of all extant termites are the queens of the species &quot;Macrotermes bellicosus&quot;, measuring up to over 10 centimetres (4 in) in length. Another giant termite, the extinct &quot;Gyatermes styriensis&quot;, flourished in Austria during the Miocene and had a wingspan of and a body length of .

Most worker and soldier termites are completely blind as they do not have a pair of eyes. However, some species, such as &quot;Hodotermes mossambicus&quot;, have compound eyes which they use for orientation and to distinguish sunlight from moonlight. The alates (winged males and females) have eyes along with lateral ocelli. Lateral ocelli, however, are not found in all termites, absent in the families Hodotermitidae, Termopsidae, and Archotermopsidae. Like other insects, termites have a small tongue-shaped labrum and a clypeus; the clypeus is divided into a postclypeus and anteclypeus. Termite antennae have a number of functions such as the sensing of touch, taste, odours (including pheromones), heat and vibration. The three basic segments of a termite antenna include a scape, a pedicel (typically shorter than the scape), and the flagellum (all segments beyond the scape and pedicel). The mouth parts contain a maxillae, a labium, and a set of mandibles. The maxillae and labium have palps that help termites sense food and handling. The cuticle of most castes is soft and flexible due to a resulting lack of sclerotization, particularly of the abdomen which often appears translucent. Pigmentation and sclerotization of the cuticle correlates with life history, with species that spend more time in the surface in the open tending to have a more sclerotized and pigmented exoskeleton.

Consistent with all insects, the anatomy of the termite thorax consists of three segments: the prothorax, the mesothorax and the metathorax. Each segment contains a pair of legs. On alates, the wings are located at the mesothorax and metathorax, which is consistent with all four-winged insects. The mesothorax and metathorax have well-developed exoskeletal plates; the prothorax has smaller plates.
Termites have a ten-segmented abdomen with two plates, the tergites and the sternites. The tenth abdominal segment has a pair of short cerci. There are ten tergites, of which nine are wide and one is elongated. The reproductive organs are similar to those in cockroaches but are more simplified. For example, the intromittent organ is not present in male alates, and the sperm is either immotile or aflagellate. However, Mastotermitidae termites have multiflagellate sperm with limited motility. The genitals in females are also simplified. Unlike in other termites, Mastotermitidae females have an ovipositor, a feature strikingly similar to that in female cockroaches.

The non-reproductive castes of termites are wingless and rely exclusively on their six legs for locomotion. The alates fly only for a brief amount of time, so they also rely on their legs. The appearance of the legs is similar in each caste, but the soldiers have larger and heavier legs. The structure of the legs is consistent with other insects: the parts of a leg include a coxa, trochanter, femur, tibia and the tarsus. The number of tibial spurs on an individual&#x27;s leg varies. Some species of termite have an arolium, located between the claws, which is present in species that climb on smooth surfaces but is absent in most termites.

Unlike in ants, the hind-wings and fore-wings are of equal length. Most of the time, the alates are poor flyers; their technique is to launch themselves in the air and fly in a random direction. Studies show that in comparison to larger termites, smaller termites cannot fly long distances. When a termite is in flight, its wings remain at a right angle, and when the termite is at rest, its wings remain parallel to the body.

===Caste system===
Due to termites being hemimetabolous insects, where the young go through multiple and gradual molts before becoming an adult, the advent of eusociality has significantly altered the developmental patterns of this group of insects of which, although similar, is not homologous to that of the eusocial Hymenoptera. Unlike ants, bees, and wasps which undergo a complete metamorphosis and as a result only exhibit developmental plasticity at the immobile larval stage, the mobile adultoid instars of termites remain developmentally flexible throughout all life stages up to the final molt, which has uniquely allowed for the evolution of distinct yet flexible castes amongst the immatures. As a result the caste system of termites consists mostly of neotenous or juvenile individuals that undertake the most labor in the colony, which is in contrast to the eusocial Hymenoptera where work is strictly undertaken by the adults.

The developmental plasticity in termites can be described similarly to cell potency, where each molt offers a varying level of phenotypic potency. Early instars typically exhibit the highest phenotypic potency and can be described as &quot;totipotent&quot; (&quot;able to molt into all alternative phenotypes&quot;), whereas following instars can be &quot;pluripotent&quot; (&quot;able to molt into reproductives and non-reproductives but cannot molt into at least one phenotype&quot;), to &quot;multipotent&quot; (&quot;able to molt into either reproductive or non-reproductive phenotypes&quot;), to &quot;unipotent&quot; (&quot;able to molt into developmentally close phenotypes&quot;), and then finally &quot;committed&quot; (&quot;no longer able to change phenotype, functionally an adult.)&quot; In most termites, phenotypic potency decreases with every successive molt. Notable exceptions are basal taxa such as the Archotermopsidae, which are able to retain high developmental plasticity even up to the late instars. In these basal taxa, the immatures are able to go through &quot;progressive&quot; (&quot;nymph-to-imago&quot;), &quot;regressive&quot; (&quot;winged-to-wingless&quot;) and &quot;stationary&quot; (&quot;size increase, remains wingless&quot;) molts, which typically indicates the developmental trajectory an individual follows.

There is significant variation of the developmental patterns in termites even across closely related taxa, but can typically be generalized into the following two patterns: The first is the &quot;linear developmental pathway&quot;, where all immatures are capable of developing into winged adults (&quot;Alates&quot;), exhibit high phenotypic potency, and where there exists no true sterile caste other than the soldier. The second is the &quot;bifurcated developmental pathway&quot;, where immatures diverge into two distinct developmental lineages known as the &quot;nymphal&quot; (winged) and &quot;apterous&quot; (wingless) lines. The bifurcation occurs early, either at the egg or the first two instars, and represents an irreversible and committed development to either the reproductive or non-reproductive lifestyles. As such, the apterous lineage consists mostly of wingless and truly altruistic sterile individuals (true workers, soldiers), whereas the nymphal lineage consists mainly of fertile individuals destined to become winged reproductives. The bifurcated developmental pathway is found mainly in the derived taxa (i.e. Neoisoptera), and is believed to have evolved in tandem with the sterile worker caste as species moved to foraging for food beyond their nests, as opposed to the nest also being the food (such as in obligate wood-dwellers).

There are three main castes which are discussed below:

&quot;Worker&quot; termites undertake the most labor within the colony, being responsible for foraging, food storage, and brood and nest maintenance. Workers are tasked with the digestion of cellulose in food and are thus the most likely caste to be found in infested wood. The process of worker termites feeding other nestmates is known as trophallaxis. Trophallaxis is an effective nutritional tactic to convert and recycle nitrogenous components. It frees the parents from feeding all but the first generation of offspring, allowing for the group to grow much larger and ensuring that the necessary gut symbionts are transferred from one generation to another. Workers are believed to have evolved from older wingless immatures (&quot;Larvae&quot;) that evolved cooperative behaviors; and indeed in some basal taxa the late instar larvae are known to undertake the role of workers without differentiating as a true separate caste. Workers can either be male or female, although in some species with polymorphic workers either sex may be restricted to a certain developmental path. Workers may also be fertile or sterile, however the term &quot;worker&quot; is normally reserved for the latter, having evolved in taxa that exhibit a bifurcated developmental pathway. As a result, sterile workers like in the family Termitidae are termed &quot;true workers&quot; and are the most derived, while those that are undifferentiated and fertile as in the wood-nesting Archotermopsidae are termed &quot;pseudergates&quot;, which are the most basal. &quot;True workers&quot; are individuals which irreversibly develop from the &quot;apterous lineage and&quot; have completely forgo development into a winged adult. They display altruistic behaviors and either have terminal molts or exhibit a low level of phenotypical potency. True workers across different termite taxa (&quot;Mastotermitidae&quot;, &quot;Hodotermitidae&quot;, &quot;Rhinotermitidae&quot; &amp; &quot;Termitidae)&quot; can widely vary in the level of developmental plasticity even between closely related taxa, with many species having true workers that can molt into the other apterous castes such as &quot;ergatoids&quot; (worker reproductive; apterous neotenics), soldiers, or the other worker castes. &quot;Pseudergates sensu stricto&quot; are individuals which arise from the linear developmental pathway that have regressively molted and lost their wing buds, and are regarded as totipotent immatures. They are capable of performing work but are overall less involved in labor and considered more cooperative than truly altruistic. &quot;Pseudergates sensu lato&quot;, otherwise known as &quot;false workers&quot;, are most represented in basal lineages (&quot;Kalotermitidae&quot;, &quot;Archotermopsidae&quot;, &quot;Hodotermopsidae&quot;, &quot;Serritermitidae&quot;) and closely resemble true workers in which they also perform most of the work and are similarly altruistic, however differ in developing from the linear developmental pathway where they exist in a stationary molt; i.e they have halted development before the growth of wing buds, and are regarded as pluripotent immatures.

The &quot;soldier&quot; caste is the most anatomically and behaviorally specialized, and their sole purpose is to defend the colony. Many soldiers have large heads with highly modified powerful jaws so enlarged that they cannot feed themselves. Instead, like juveniles, they are fed by workers. Fontanelles, simple holes in the forehead that lead to a gland which exudes defensive secretions, are a feature of the clade Neoisoptera and are present in all extant taxa such as Rhinotermitidae. The majority of termite species have mandibulate soldiers which are easily identified by the disproportionately large sclerotized head and mandibles. Among certain termites, the soldier caste has evolved globular (phragmotic) heads to block their narrow tunnels such as seen in Cryptotermes. Amongst mandibulate soldiers, the mandibles have been adapted for a variety of defensive strategies: Biting/crushing (&quot;Incisitermes&quot;), slashing (&quot;Cubitermes&quot;), slashing/snapping (&quot;Dentispicotermes&quot;), symmetrical snapping (&quot;Termes&quot;), asymmetrical snapping (&quot;Neocapritermes&quot;), and piercing (&quot;Armitermes&quot;). In the more derived termite taxa, the soldier caste can be polymorphic and include minor and major forms. Other morphologically specialized soldiers includes the Nasutes, which have a horn-like nozzle projection (nasus) on the head. These unique soldiers are able to spray noxious, sticky secretions containing diterpenes at their enemies. Nitrogen fixation plays an important role in Nasute nutrition. Soldiers are normally a committed sterile caste and so do not molt into anything else, but in certain basal taxa like the Archotermopsidae they are known to rarely molt into neotenic forms that develop functional sexual organs. In species with the linear developmental pathway, soldiers develop from apterous immatures and constitute the only true sterile caste in these taxa.

The primary reproductive caste of a colony consists of the fertile adult (&quot;imago&quot;) female and male individuals, colloquially known as the queen and king. The queen of the colony is responsible for egg production of the colony. Unlike in ants, the male and female reproductives form lifelong pairs where the king will continue to mate with the queen throughout their lives. In some species, the abdomen of the queen swells up dramatically to increase fecundity, a characteristic known as physogastrism. Depending on the species, the queen starts producing reproductive alates at a certain time of the year, and huge swarms emerge from the colony when nuptial flight begins. These swarms attract a wide variety of predators. The queens can be particularly long-lived for insects, with some reportedly living as long as 30 or 50 years. In both the linear and bifurcated developmental pathways, the primary reproductives only develop from winged immatures (nymphs). These winged immatures are capable of regressively molting into a form known as &quot;brachypterous neotenics&quot; (&quot;nymphoids&quot;), which retain juvenile and adult characteristics. &quot;BN&quot;&#x27;s can be found in both the derived and basal termite taxa, and generally serve as supplementary reproductives.

==Life cycle==
Termites are often compared with the social Hymenoptera (ants and various species of bees and wasps), but their differing evolutionary origins result in major differences in life cycle. In the eusocial Hymenoptera, the workers are exclusively female. Males (drones) are haploid and develop from unfertilised eggs, while females (both workers and the queen) are diploid and develop from fertilised eggs. In contrast, worker termites, which constitute the majority in a colony, are diploid individuals of both sexes and develop from fertilised eggs. Depending on species, male and female workers may have different roles in a termite colony.

The life cycle of a termite begins with an egg, but is different from that of a bee or ant in that it goes through a developmental process called incomplete metamorphosis, going through multiple gradual pre-adult molts that are highly developmentally plastic before becoming an adult. Unlike in other hemimetabolous insects, &quot;nymphs&quot; are more strictly defined in termites as immature young with visible wing buds, which often invariably go through a series of moults to become winged adults. &quot;Larvae&quot;, which are defined as early nymph instars with absent wing buds, exhibit the highest developmental potentiality and are able to molt into &quot;Alates&quot;, &quot;Soldiers&quot;, &quot;Neotenics&quot;, or &quot;Workers&quot;. Workers are believed to have evolved from larvae, sharing many similarities to the extent that workers can be regarded as &quot;larval&quot;, in that both lack wings, eyes, and functional reproductive organs while maintaining varying levels of developmental flexibility, although usually to a much lesser extent in workers. The main distinction being that while larvae are wholly dependent on other nestmates to survive, workers are independent and are able to feed themselves and contribute to the colony. Workers remain wingless and across many taxa become developmentally arrested, appearing to not change into any other caste until death. In some basal taxa, there is no distinction, with the &quot;workers&quot; (pseudergates) essentially being late instar larvae that retain the ability to change into all other castes.

The development of larvae into adults can take months; the time period depends on food availability and nutrition, temperature, and the size of the colony. Since larvae and nymphs are unable to feed themselves, workers must feed them, but workers also take part in the social life of the colony and have certain other tasks to accomplish such as foraging, building or maintaining the nest or tending to the queen. Pheromones regulate the caste system in termite colonies, preventing all but a very few of the termites from becoming fertile queens.

Queens of the eusocial termite &quot;Reticulitermes speratus&quot; are capable of a long lifespan without sacrificing fecundity. These long-lived queens have a significantly lower level of oxidative damage, including oxidative DNA damage, than workers, soldiers and nymphs. The lower levels of damage appear to be due to increased catalase, an enzyme that protects against oxidative stress.

===Reproduction===

Termite alates (winged virgin queens and kings) only leave the colony when a nuptial flight takes place. Alate males and females pair up together and then land in search of a suitable place for a colony. A termite king and queen do not mate until they find such a spot. When they do, they excavate a chamber big enough for both, close up the entrance and proceed to mate. After mating, the pair may never surface again, spending the rest of their lives in the nest. Nuptial flight time varies in each species. For example, alates in certain species emerge during the day in summer while others emerge during the winter. The nuptial flight may also begin at dusk, when the alates swarm around areas with many lights. The time when nuptial flight begins depends on the environmental conditions, the time of day, moisture, wind speed and precipitation. The number of termites in a colony also varies, with the larger species typically having 100–1,000 individuals. However, some termite colonies, including those with many individuals, can number in the millions.

The queen only lays 10–20 eggs in the very early stages of the colony, but lays as many as 1,000 a day when the colony is several years old. At maturity, a primary queen has a great capacity to lay eggs. In some species, the mature queen has a greatly distended abdomen and may produce 40,000 eggs a day. The two mature ovaries may have some 2,000 ovarioles each. The abdomen increases the queen&#x27;s body length to several times more than before mating and reduces her ability to move freely; attendant workers provide assistance.

The king grows only slightly larger after initial mating and continues to mate with the queen for life (a termite queen can live between 30 and 50 years); this is very different from ant colonies, in which a queen mates once with the males and stores the gametes for life, as the male ants die shortly after mating. If a queen is absent, a termite king produces pheromones which encourage the development of replacement termite queens. As the queen and king are monogamous, sperm competition does not occur.

Termites going through incomplete metamorphosis on the path to becoming alates form a subcaste in certain species of termite, functioning as potential supplementary reproductives. These supplementary reproductives only mature into primary reproductives upon the death of a king or queen, or when the primary reproductives are separated from the colony. Supplementaries have the ability to replace a dead primary reproductive, and there may also be more than a single supplementary within a colony. Some queens have the ability to switch from sexual reproduction to asexual reproduction. Studies show that while termite queens mate with the king to produce colony workers, the queens reproduce their replacements (neotenic queens) parthenogenetically.

The neotropical termite &quot;Embiratermes neotenicus&quot; and several other related species produce colonies that contain a primary king accompanied by a primary queen or by up to 200 neotenic queens that had originated through thelytokous parthenogenesis of a founding primary queen. The form of parthenogenesis likely employed maintains heterozygosity in the passage of the genome from mother to daughter, thus avoiding inbreeding depression.

==Behaviour and ecology==

===Diet===

Termites are primarily detritivores, consuming dead plants at any level of decomposition. They also play a vital role in the ecosystem by recycling waste material such as dead wood, faeces and plants. Many species eat cellulose, having a specialised midgut that breaks down the fibre. Termites are considered to be a major source (11%) of atmospheric methane, one of the prime greenhouse gases, produced from the breakdown of cellulose. Termites rely primarily upon a symbiotic microbial community that includes bacteria, flagellate protists such as metamonads and hypermastigids. This community provides the enzymes that digests the cellulose, allowing the insects to absorb the end products for their own use. 

The microbial ecosystem present in the termite gut contains many species found nowhere else on Earth. Termites hatch without these symbionts present in their guts, and develop them after fed a culture from other termites. Gut protozoa, such as &quot;Trichonympha&quot;, in turn, rely on symbiotic bacteria embedded on their surfaces to produce some of the necessary digestive enzymes. Most higher termites, especially in the family Termitidae, can produce their own cellulase enzymes, but they rely primarily upon the bacteria. The flagellates have been lost in Termitidae. Researchers have found species of spirochetes living in termite guts capable of fixing atmospheric nitrogen to a form usable by the insect. Scientists&#x27; understanding of the relationship between the termite digestive tract and the microbial endosymbionts is still rudimentary; what is true in all termite species, however, is that the workers feed the other members of the colony with substances derived from the digestion of plant material, either from the mouth or anus. Judging from closely related bacterial species, it is strongly presumed that the termites&#x27; and cockroach&#x27;s gut microbiota derives from their dictyopteran ancestors. Despite primarily consuming decaying plant material as a group, many termite species have been observed to opportunistically feed on dead animals to supplement their dietary needs. Termites are also known to harbor bacteriophages in their gut. Some of these bacteriophages likely infect the symbiotic bacteria which play a key role in termite biology. The exact role and function of bacteriophages in the termite gut microbiome is not clearly understood. Termite gut bacteriophages also show similarity to bacteriophages (CrAssphage) found in the human gut. 

Certain species such as &quot;Gnathamitermes tubiformans&quot; have seasonal food habits. For example, they may preferentially consume Red three-awn (&quot;Aristida longiseta&quot;) during the summer, Buffalograss (&quot;Buchloe dactyloides&quot;) from May to August, and blue grama &quot;Bouteloua gracilis&quot; during spring, summer and autumn. Colonies of &quot;G. tubiformans&quot; consume less food in spring than they do during autumn when their feeding activity is high.

Various woods differ in their susceptibility to termite attack; the differences are attributed to such factors as moisture content, hardness, and resin and lignin content. In one study, the drywood termite &quot;Cryptotermes brevis&quot; strongly preferred poplar and maple woods to other woods that were generally rejected by the termite colony. These preferences may in part have represented conditioned or learned behaviour.

Some species of termite practice fungiculture. They maintain a &quot;garden&quot; of specialised fungi of genus &quot;Termitomyces&quot;, which are nourished by the excrement of the insects. When the fungi are eaten, their spores pass undamaged through the intestines of the termites to complete the cycle by germinating in the fresh faecal pellets. Molecular evidence suggests that the family Macrotermitinae developed agriculture about 31 million years ago. It is assumed that more than 90 per cent of dry wood in the semiarid savannah ecosystems of Africa and Asia are reprocessed by these termites. Originally living in the rainforest, fungus farming allowed them to colonise the African savannah and other new environments, eventually expanding into Asia.

Depending on their feeding habits, termites are placed into two groups: the lower termites and higher termites. The lower termites predominately feed on wood. As wood is difficult to digest, termites prefer to consume fungus-infected wood because it is easier to digest and the fungi are high in protein. Meanwhile, the higher termites consume a wide variety of materials, including faeces, humus, grass, leaves and roots. The gut of the lower termites contains many species of bacteria along with protozoa and &quot;Holomastigotoides&quot;, while the higher termites only have a few species of bacteria with no protozoa.

===Predators===

Termites are consumed by a wide variety of predators. One termite species alone, &quot;Hodotermes mossambicus&quot;, was reported (1990) in the stomach contents of 65 birds and 19 mammals. Arthropods such as ants, centipedes, cockroaches, crickets, dragonflies, scorpions and spiders, reptiles such as lizards, and amphibians such as frogs and toads consume termites, with two spiders in the family Ammoxenidae being specialist termite predators. Other predators include aardvarks, aardwolves, anteaters, bats, bears, bilbies, many birds, echidnas, foxes, galagos, numbats, mice and pangolins. The aardwolf is an insectivorous mammal that primarily feeds on termites; it locates its food by sound and also by detecting the scent secreted by the soldiers; a single aardwolf is capable of consuming thousands of termites in a single night by using its long, sticky tongue. Sloth bears break open mounds to consume the nestmates, while chimpanzees have developed tools to &quot;fish&quot; termites from their nest. Wear pattern analysis of bone tools used by the early hominin &quot;Paranthropus robustus&quot; suggests that they used these tools to dig into termite mounds.
Among all predators, ants are the greatest enemy to termites. Some ant genera are specialist predators of termites. For example, &quot;Megaponera&quot; is a strictly termite-eating (termitophagous) genus that perform raiding activities, some lasting several hours. &quot;Paltothyreus tarsatus&quot; is another termite-raiding species, with each individual stacking as many termites as possible in its mandibles before returning home, all the while recruiting additional nestmates to the raiding site through chemical trails. The Malaysian basicerotine ants &quot;Eurhopalothrix heliscata&quot; uses a different strategy of termite hunting by pressing themselves into tight spaces, as they hunt through rotting wood housing termite colonies. Once inside, the ants seize their prey by using their short but sharp mandibles. &quot;Tetramorium uelense&quot; is a specialised predator species that feeds on small termites. A scout recruits 10–30 workers to an area where termites are present, killing them by immobilising them with their stinger. &quot;Centromyrmex&quot; and &quot;Iridomyrmex&quot; colonies sometimes nest in termite mounds, and so the termites are preyed on by these ants. No evidence for any kind of relationship (other than a predatory one) is known. Other ants, including &quot;Acanthostichus&quot;, &quot;Camponotus&quot;, &quot;Crematogaster&quot;, &quot;Cylindromyrmex&quot;, &quot;Leptogenys&quot;, &quot;Odontomachus&quot;, &quot;Ophthalmopone&quot;, &quot;Pachycondyla&quot;, &quot;Rhytidoponera&quot;, &quot;Solenopsis&quot; and &quot;Wasmannia&quot;, also prey on termites. Specialized subterranean species of army ants such as ones in the genus &quot;Dorylus&quot; are known to commonly predate on young &quot;Macrotermes&quot; colonies.

Ants are not the only invertebrates that perform raids. Many sphecoid wasps and several species including &quot;Polybia&quot; and &quot;Angiopolybia&quot; are known to raid termite mounds during the termites&#x27; nuptial flight.

===Parasites, pathogens and viruses===
Termites are less likely to be attacked by parasites than bees, wasps and ants, as they are usually well protected in their mounds. Nevertheless, termites are infected by a variety of parasites. Some of these include dipteran flies, &quot;Pyemotes&quot; mites, and a large number of nematode parasites. Most nematode parasites are in the order Rhabditida; others are in the genus &quot;Mermis&quot;, &quot;Diplogaster aerivora&quot; and &quot;Harteria gallinarum&quot;. Under imminent threat of an attack by parasites, a colony may migrate to a new location. Certain fungal pathogens such as &quot;Aspergillus nomius&quot; and &quot;Metarhizium anisopliae&quot; are, however, major threats to a termite colony as they are not host-specific and may infect large portions of the colony; transmission usually occurs via direct physical contact. &quot;M. anisopliae&quot; is known to weaken the termite immune system. Infection with &quot;A. nomius&quot; only occurs when a colony is under great stress. Over 34 fungal species are known to live as parasites on the exoskeleton of termites, with many being host-specific and only causing indirect harm to their host.

Termites are infected by viruses including Entomopoxvirinae and the Nuclear Polyhedrosis Virus.

===Locomotion and foraging===
Because the worker and soldier castes lack wings and thus never fly, and the reproductives use their wings for just a brief amount of time, termites predominantly rely upon their legs to move about.

Foraging behaviour depends on the type of termite. For example, certain species feed on the wood structures they inhabit, and others harvest food that is near the nest. Most workers are rarely found out in the open, and do not forage unprotected; they rely on sheeting and runways to protect them from predators. Subterranean termites construct tunnels and galleries to look for food, and workers who manage to find food sources recruit additional nestmates by depositing a phagostimulant pheromone that attracts workers. Foraging workers use semiochemicals to communicate with each other, and workers who begin to forage outside of their nest release trail pheromones from their sternal glands. In one species, &quot;Nasutitermes costalis&quot;, there are three phases in a foraging expedition: first, soldiers scout an area. When they find a food source, they communicate to other soldiers and a small force of workers starts to emerge. In the second phase, workers appear in large numbers at the site. The third phase is marked by a decrease in the number of soldiers present and an increase in the number of workers. Isolated termite workers may engage in Lévy flight behaviour as an optimised strategy for finding their nestmates or foraging for food.

===Competition===
Competition between two colonies always results in agonistic behaviour towards each other, resulting in fights. These fights can cause mortality on both sides and, in some cases, the gain or loss of territory. &quot;Cemetery pits&quot; may be present, where the bodies of dead termites are buried.

Studies show that when termites encounter each other in foraging areas, some of the termites deliberately block passages to prevent other termites from entering. Dead termites from other colonies found in exploratory tunnels leads to the isolation of the area and thus the need to construct new tunnels. Conflict between two competitors does not always occur. For example, though they might block each other&#x27;s passages, colonies of &quot;Macrotermes bellicosus&quot; and &quot;Macrotermes subhyalinus&quot; are not always aggressive towards each other. Suicide cramming is known in &quot;Coptotermes formosanus&quot;. Since &quot;C. formosanus&quot; colonies may get into physical conflict, some termites squeeze tightly into foraging tunnels and die, successfully blocking the tunnel and ending all agonistic activities.

Among the reproductive caste, neotenic queens may compete with each other to become the dominant queen when there are no primary reproductives. This struggle among the queens leads to the elimination of all but a single queen, which, with the king, takes over the colony.

Ants and termites may compete with each other for nesting space. In particular, ants that prey on termites usually have a negative impact on arboreal nesting species.

===Communication===

Most termites are blind, so communication primarily occurs through chemical, mechanical and pheromonal cues. These methods of communication are used in a variety of activities, including foraging, locating reproductives, construction of nests, recognition of nestmates, nuptial flight, locating and fighting enemies, and defending the nests. The most common way of communicating is through antennation. A number of pheromones are known, including contact pheromones (which are transmitted when workers are engaged in trophallaxis or grooming) and alarm, trail and sex pheromones. The alarm pheromone and other defensive chemicals are secreted from the frontal gland. Trail pheromones are secreted from the sternal gland, and sex pheromones derive from two glandular sources: the sternal and tergal glands. When termites go out to look for food, they forage in columns along the ground through vegetation. A trail can be identified by the faecal deposits or runways that are covered by objects. Workers leave pheromones on these trails, which are detected by other nestmates through olfactory receptors. Termites can also communicate through mechanical cues, vibrations, and physical contact. These signals are frequently used for alarm communication or for evaluating a food source.

When termites construct their nests, they use predominantly indirect communication. No single termite would be in charge of any particular construction project. Individual termites react rather than think, but at a group level, they exhibit a sort of collective cognition. Specific structures or other objects such as pellets of soil or pillars cause termites to start building. The termite adds these objects onto existing structures, and such behaviour encourages building behaviour in other workers. The result is a self-organised process whereby the information that directs termite activity results from changes in the environment rather than from direct contact among individuals.

Termites can distinguish nestmates and non-nestmates through chemical communication and gut symbionts: chemicals consisting of hydrocarbons released from the cuticle allow the recognition of alien termite species. Each colony has its own distinct odour. This odour is a result of genetic and environmental factors such as the termites&#x27; diet and the composition of the bacteria within the termites&#x27; intestines.

===Defence===
Termites rely on alarm communication to defend a colony. Alarm pheromones can be released when the nest has been breached or is being attacked by enemies or potential pathogens. Termites always avoid nestmates infected with &quot;Metarhizium anisopliae&quot; spores, through vibrational signals released by infected nestmates. Other methods of defence include headbanging and secretion of fluids from the frontal gland and defecating faeces containing alarm pheromones.

In some species, some soldiers block tunnels to prevent their enemies from entering the nest, and they may deliberately rupture themselves as an act of defence. In cases where the intrusion is coming from a breach that is larger than the soldier&#x27;s head, soldiers form a phalanx-like formation around the breach and bite at intruders. If an invasion carried out by &quot;Megaponera analis&quot; is successful, an entire colony may be destroyed, although this scenario is rare.

To termites, any breach of their tunnels or nests is a cause for alarm. When termites detect a potential breach, the soldiers usually bang their heads, apparently to attract other soldiers for defence and to recruit additional workers to repair any breach. Additionally, an alarmed termite bumps into other termites which causes them to be alarmed and to leave pheromone trails to the disturbed area, which is also a way to recruit extra workers.
The pantropical subfamily Nasutitermitinae has a specialised caste of soldiers, known as nasutes, that have the ability to exude noxious liquids through a horn-like frontal projection that they use for defence. Nasutes have lost their mandibles through the course of evolution and must be fed by workers. A wide variety of monoterpene hydrocarbon solvents have been identified in the liquids that nasutes secrete. Similarly, Formosan subterranean termites have been known to secrete naphthalene to protect their nests.

Soldiers of the species &quot;Globitermes sulphureus&quot; commit suicide by autothysis – rupturing a large gland just beneath the surface of their cuticles. The thick, yellow fluid in the gland becomes very sticky on contact with the air, entangling ants or other insects that are trying to invade the nest. Another termite, &quot;Neocapriterme taracua&quot;, also engages in suicidal defence. Workers physically unable to use their mandibles while in a fight form a pouch full of chemicals, then deliberately rupture themselves, releasing toxic chemicals that paralyse and kill their enemies. The soldiers of the neotropical termite family Serritermitidae have a defence strategy which involves front gland autothysis, with the body rupturing between the head and abdomen. When soldiers guarding nest entrances are attacked by intruders, they engage in autothysis, creating a block that denies entry to any attacker.

Workers use several different strategies to deal with their dead, including burying, cannibalism, and avoiding a corpse altogether. To avoid pathogens, termites occasionally engage in necrophoresis, in which a nestmate carries away a corpse from the colony to dispose of it elsewhere. Which strategy is used depends on the nature of the corpse a worker is dealing with (i.e. the age of the carcass).

===Relationship with other organisms===

A species of fungus is known to mimic termite eggs, successfully avoiding its natural predators. These small brown balls, known as &quot;termite balls&quot;, rarely kill the eggs, and in some cases the workers tend to them. This fungus mimics these eggs by producing cellulose-digesting enzymes known as glucosidases. A unique mimicking behaviour exists between various species of &quot;Trichopsenius&quot; beetles and certain termite species within &quot;Reticulitermes&quot;. The beetles share the same cuticle hydrocarbons as the termites and even biosynthesize them. This chemical mimicry allows the beetles to integrate themselves within the termite colonies. The developed appendages on the physogastric abdomen of &quot;Austrospirachtha mimetes&quot; allows the beetle to mimic a termite worker.

Some species of ant are known to capture termites to use as a fresh food source later on, rather than killing them. For example, &quot;Formica nigra&quot; captures termites, and those that try to escape are immediately seized and driven underground. Certain species of ants in the subfamily Ponerinae conduct these raids although other ant species go in alone to steal the eggs or nymphs. Ants such as &quot;Megaponera analis&quot; attack the outside of mounds and Dorylinae ants attack underground. Despite this, some termites and ants can coexist peacefully. Some species of termite, including &quot;Nasutitermes corniger&quot;, form associations with certain ant species to keep away predatory ant species. The earliest known association between &quot;Azteca&quot; ants and &quot;Nasutitermes&quot; termites date back to the Oligocene to Miocene period.
54 species of ants are known to inhabit &quot;Nasutitermes&quot; mounds, both occupied and abandoned ones. One reason many ants live in &quot;Nasutitermes&quot; mounds is due to the termites&#x27; frequent occurrence in their geographical range; another is to protect themselves from floods. &quot;Iridomyrmex&quot; also inhabits termite mounds although no evidence for any kind of relationship (other than a predatory one) is known. In rare cases, certain species of termites live inside active ant colonies. Some invertebrate organisms such as beetles, caterpillars, flies and millipedes are termitophiles and dwell inside termite colonies (they are unable to survive independently). As a result, certain beetles and flies have evolved with their hosts. They have developed a gland that secrete a substance that attracts the workers by licking them. Mounds may also provide shelter and warmth to birds, lizards, snakes and scorpions.

Termites are known to carry pollen and regularly visit flowers, so are regarded as potential pollinators for a number of flowering plants. One flower in particular, &quot;Rhizanthella gardneri&quot;, is regularly pollinated by foraging workers, and it is perhaps the only Orchidaceae flower in the world to be pollinated by termites.

Many plants have developed effective defences against termites. However, seedlings are vulnerable to termite attacks and need additional protection, as their defence mechanisms only develop when they have passed the seedling stage. Defence is typically achieved by secreting antifeedant chemicals into the woody cell walls. This reduces the ability of termites to efficiently digest the cellulose. A commercial product, &quot;Blockaid&quot;, has been developed in Australia that uses a range of plant extracts to create a paint-on nontoxic termite barrier for buildings. An extract of a species of Australian figwort, &quot;Eremophila&quot;, has been shown to repel termites; tests have shown that termites are strongly repelled by the toxic material to the extent that they will starve rather than consume the food. When kept close to the extract, they become disoriented and eventually die.

===Relationship with the environment===
Termite populations can be substantially impacted by environmental changes including those caused by human intervention. A Brazilian study investigated the termite assemblages of three sites of Caatinga under different levels of anthropogenic disturbance in the semi-arid region of northeastern Brazil were sampled using 65 x 2 m transects. A total of 26 species of termites were present in the three sites, and 196 encounters were recorded in the transects. The termite assemblages were considerably different among sites, with a conspicuous reduction in both diversity and abundance with increased disturbance, related to the reduction of tree density and soil cover, and with the intensity of trampling by cattle and goats. The wood-feeders were the most severely affected feeding group.

==Nests==

A termite nest can be considered as being composed of two parts, the inanimate and the animate. The animate is all of the termites living inside the colony, and the inanimate part is the structure itself, which is constructed by the termites. Nests can be broadly separated into three main categories: hypogeal, i.e subterranean (completely below ground), epigeal (protruding above the soil surface), and arboreal (built above ground, but always connected to the ground via shelter tubes). Epigeal nests (mounds) protrude from the earth with ground contact and are made out of earth and mud. A nest has many functions such as providing a protected living space and providing shelter against predators. Most termites construct underground colonies rather than multifunctional nests and mounds. Primitive termites of today nest in wooden structures such as logs, stumps and the dead parts of trees, as did termites millions of years ago.

To build their nests, termites use a variety of resources such as faeces which have many desirable properties as a construction material. Other building materials include partly digested plant material, used in carton nests (arboreal nests built from faecal elements and wood), and soil, used in subterranean nest and mound construction. Not all nests are visible, as many nests in tropical forests are located underground. Species in the subfamily Apicotermitinae are good examples of subterranean nest builders, as they only dwell inside tunnels. Other termites live in wood, and tunnels are constructed as they feed on the wood. Nests and mounds protect the termites&#x27; soft bodies against desiccation, light, pathogens and parasites, as well as providing a fortification against predators. Nests made out of carton are particularly weak, and so the inhabitants use counter-attack strategies against invading predators.

Arboreal carton nests of mangrove swamp-dwelling &quot;Nasutitermes&quot; are enriched in lignin and depleted in cellulose and xylans. This change is caused by bacterial decay in the gut of the termites: they use their faeces as a carton building material. Arboreal termites nests can account for as much as 2% of above ground carbon storage in Puerto Rican mangrove swamps. These &quot;Nasutitermes&quot; nests are mainly composed of partially biodegraded wood material from the stems and branches of mangrove trees, namely, &quot;Rhizophora mangle&quot; (red mangrove), &quot;Avicennia germinans&quot; (black mangrove) and &quot;Laguncularia racemosa&quot; (white mangrove).

Some species build complex nests called polycalic nests; this habitat is called polycalism. Polycalic species of termites form multiple nests, or calies, connected by subterranean chambers. The termite genera &quot;Apicotermes&quot; and &quot;Trinervitermes&quot; are known to have polycalic species. Polycalic nests appear to be less frequent in mound-building species although polycalic arboreal nests have been observed in a few species of &quot;Nasutitermes&quot;.

===Mounds===
Nests are considered mounds if they protrude from the earth&#x27;s surface. A mound provides termites the same protection as a nest but is stronger. Mounds located in areas with torrential and continuous rainfall are at risk of mound erosion due to their clay-rich construction. Those made from carton can provide protection from the rain, and in fact can withstand high precipitation. Certain areas in mounds are used as strong points in case of a breach. For example, &quot;Cubitermes&quot; colonies build narrow tunnels used as strong points, as the diameter of the tunnels is small enough for soldiers to block. A highly protected chamber, known as the &quot;queen&#x27;s cell&quot;, houses the queen and king and is used as a last line of defence.

Species in the genus &quot;Macrotermes&quot; arguably build the most complex structures in the insect world, constructing enormous mounds. These mounds are among the largest in the world, reaching a height of 8 to 9 metres (26 to 29 feet), and consist of chimneys, pinnacles and ridges. Another termite species, &quot;Amitermes meridionalis&quot;, can build nests 3 to 4 metres (9 to 13 feet) high and 2.5 metres (8 feet) wide. The tallest mound ever recorded was 12.8 metres (42 ft) long found in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The sculptured mounds sometimes have elaborate and distinctive forms, such as those of the compass termite (&quot;Amitermes meridionalis&quot; and &quot;A. laurensis&quot;), which builds tall, wedge-shaped mounds with the long axis oriented approximately north–south, which gives them their common name. This orientation has been experimentally shown to assist thermoregulation. The north–south orientation causes the internal temperature of a mound to increase rapidly during the morning while avoiding overheating from the midday sun. The temperature then remains at a plateau for the rest of the day until the evening.

===Shelter tubes===
Termites construct shelter tubes, also known as earthen tubes or mud tubes, that start from the ground. These shelter tubes can be found on walls and other structures. Constructed by termites during the night, a time of higher humidity, these tubes provide protection to termites from potential predators, especially ants. Shelter tubes also provide high humidity and darkness and allow workers to collect food sources that cannot be accessed in any other way. These passageways are made from soil and faeces and are normally brown in colour. The size of these shelter tubes depends on the number of food sources that are available. They range from less than 1 cm to several cm in width, but may be dozens of metres in length.

== Relationship with humans ==

=== As pests ===
Owing to their wood-eating habits, many termite species can do significant damage to unprotected buildings and other wooden structures. Termites play an important role as decomposers of wood and vegetative material, and the conflict with humans occurs where structures and landscapes containing structural wood components, cellulose derived structural materials and ornamental vegetation provide termites with a reliable source of food and moisture. Their habit of remaining concealed often results in their presence being undetected until the timbers are severely damaged, with only a thin exterior layer of wood remaining, which protects them from the environment. Of the 3,106 species known, only 183 species cause damage; 83 species cause significant damage to wooden structures. In North America, 18 subterranean species are pests; in Australia, 16 species have an economic impact; in the Indian subcontinent 26 species are considered pests, and in tropical Africa, 24. In Central America and the West Indies, there are 17 pest species. Among the termite genera, &quot;Coptotermes&quot; has the highest number of pest species of any genus, with 28 species known to cause damage. Less than 10% of drywood termites are pests, but they infect wooden structures and furniture in tropical, subtropical and other regions. Dampwood termites only attack lumber material exposed to rainfall or soil.

Drywood termites thrive in warm climates, and human activities can enable them to invade homes since they can be transported through contaminated goods, containers and ships. Colonies of termites have been seen thriving in warm buildings located in cold regions. Some termites are considered invasive species. &quot;Cryptotermes brevis&quot;, the most widely introduced invasive termite species in the world, has been introduced to all the islands in the West Indies and to Australia.
In addition to causing damage to buildings, termites can also damage food crops. Termites may attack trees whose resistance to damage is low but generally ignore fast-growing plants. Most attacks occur at harvest time; crops and trees are attacked during the dry season.

In Australia, at a cost of more than per year, termites cause more damage to houses than fire, floods and storms combined. In Malaysia, it is estimated that termites caused about RM400 million of damages to properties and buildings. The damage caused by termites costs the southwestern United States approximately $1.5 billion each year in wood structure damage, but the true cost of damage worldwide cannot be determined. Drywood termites are responsible for a large proportion of the damage caused by termites. The goal of termite control is to keep structures and susceptible ornamental plants free from termites.; Structures may be homes or business, or elements such as wooden fence posts and telephone poles. Regular and thorough inspections by a trained professional may be necessary to detect termite activity in the absence of more obvious signs like termite swarmers or alates inside or adjacent to a structure. Termite monitors made of wood or cellulose adjacent to a structure may also provide indication of termite foraging activity where it will be in conflict with humans. Termites can be controlled by application of Bordeaux mixture or other substances that contain copper such as chromated copper arsenate. In the United states, application of a soil termiticide with the active ingredient Fipronil, such as Termidor SC or Taurus SC, by a licensed professional, is a common remedy approved by the Environmental Protection Agency for economically significant subterranean termites. A growing demand for alternative, green, and &quot;more natural&quot; extermination methods has increased demand for mechanical and biological control methods such as orange oil.

To better control the population of termites, various methods have been developed to track termite movements. One early method involved distributing termite bait laced with immunoglobulin G (IgG) marker proteins from rabbits or chickens. Termites collected from the field could be tested for the rabbit-IgG markers using a rabbit-IgG-specific assay. More recently developed, less expensive alternatives include tracking the termites using egg white, cow milk, or soy milk proteins, which can be sprayed on termites in the field. Termites bearing these proteins can be traced using a protein-specific ELISA test. RNAi insecticides specific to termites are in development. One factor reducing investment in its research and development is concern about high potential for resistance evolution.

In 1994, termites, of the species &quot;Reticulitermes grassei&quot;, were identified in two bungalows in Saunton, Devon. Anecdotal evidence suggests the infestation could date back 70 years before the official identification. There are reports that gardeners had seen white ants and that a greenhouse had had to be replaced in the past. The Saunton infestation was the first and only colony ever recorded in the UK. In 1998, Termite Eradication Programme was set-up, with the intention of containing and eradicating the colony. The TEP was managed by the Ministry of Housing, Communities &amp; Local Government (now the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities.) The TEP used &quot;insect growth regulators&quot; to prevent the termites from reaching maturity and reproducing. In 2021, the UK&#x27;s Termite Eradication Programme announced the eradication of the colony, the first time a country has eradicated termites.

===As food===

43 termite species are used as food by humans or are fed to livestock. These insects are particularly important in impoverished countries where malnutrition is common, as the protein from termites can help improve the human diet. Termites are consumed in many regions globally, but this practice has only become popular in developed nations in recent years.

Termites are consumed by people in many different cultures around the world. In many parts of Africa, the alates are an important factor in the diets of native populations. Groups have different ways of collecting or cultivating insects; sometimes collecting soldiers from several species. Though harder to acquire, queens are regarded as a delicacy. Termite alates are high in nutrition with adequate levels of fat and protein. They are regarded as pleasant in taste, having a nut-like flavour after they are cooked.

Alates are collected when the rainy season begins. During a nuptial flight, they are typically seen around lights to which they are attracted, and so nets are set up on lamps and captured alates are later collected. The wings are removed through a technique that is similar to winnowing. The best result comes when they are lightly roasted on a hot plate or fried until crisp. Oil is not required as their bodies usually contain sufficient amounts of oil. Termites are typically eaten when livestock is lean and tribal crops have not yet developed or produced any food, or if food stocks from a previous growing season are limited.

In addition to Africa, termites are consumed in local or tribal areas in Asia and North and South America. In Australia, Indigenous Australians are aware that termites are edible but do not consume them even in times of scarcity; there are few explanations as to why. Termite mounds are the main sources of soil consumption (geophagy) in many countries including Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe and South Africa. Researchers have suggested that termites are suitable candidates for human consumption and space agriculture, as they are high in protein and can be used to convert inedible waste to consumable products for humans.

===In agriculture===

Termites can be major agricultural pests, particularly in East Africa and North Asia, where crop losses can be severe (3–100% in crop loss in Africa). Counterbalancing this is the greatly improved water infiltration where termite tunnels in the soil allow rainwater to soak in deeply, which helps reduce runoff and consequent soil erosion through bioturbation. In South America, cultivated plants such as eucalyptus, upland rice and sugarcane can be severely damaged by termite infestations, with attacks on leaves, roots and woody tissue. Termites can also attack other plants, including cassava, coffee, cotton, fruit trees, maize, peanuts, soybeans and vegetables. Mounds can disrupt farming activities, making it difficult for farmers to operate farming machinery; however, despite farmers&#x27; dislike of the mounds, it is often the case that no net loss of production occurs. Termites can be beneficial to agriculture, such as by boosting crop yields and enriching the soil. Termites and ants can re-colonise untilled land that contains crop stubble, which colonies use for nourishment when they establish their nests. The presence of nests in fields enables larger amounts of rainwater to soak into the ground and increases the amount of nitrogen in the soil, both essential for the growth of crops.

===In science and technology===

The termite gut has inspired various research efforts aimed at replacing fossil fuels with cleaner, renewable energy sources. Termites are efficient bioreactors, theoretically capable of producing two litres of hydrogen from a single sheet of paper. Approximately 200 species of microbes live inside the termite hindgut, releasing the hydrogen that was trapped inside wood and plants that they digest. Through the action of unidentified enzymes in the termite gut, lignocellulose polymers are broken down into sugars and are transformed into hydrogen. The bacteria within the gut turns the sugar and hydrogen into cellulose acetate, an acetate ester of cellulose on which termites rely for energy. Community DNA sequencing of the microbes in the termite hindgut has been employed to provide a better understanding of the metabolic pathway. Genetic engineering may enable hydrogen to be generated in bioreactors from woody biomass.

The development of autonomous robots capable of constructing intricate structures without human assistance has been inspired by the complex mounds that termites build. These robots work independently and can move by themselves on a tracked grid, capable of climbing and lifting up bricks. Such robots may be useful for future projects on Mars, or for building levees to prevent flooding.

Termites use sophisticated means to control the temperatures of their mounds. As discussed above, the shape and orientation of the mounds of the Australian compass termite stabilises their internal temperatures during the day. As the towers heat up, the solar chimney effect (stack effect) creates an updraft of air within the mound. Wind blowing across the tops of the towers enhances the circulation of air through the mounds, which also include side vents in their construction. The solar chimney effect has been in use for centuries in the Middle East and Near East for passive cooling, as well as in Europe by the Romans. It is only relatively recently, however, that climate responsive construction techniques have become incorporated into modern architecture. Especially in Africa, the stack effect has become a popular means to achieve natural ventilation and passive cooling in modern buildings.

===In culture===

The Eastgate Centre is a shopping centre and office block in central Harare, Zimbabwe, whose architect, Mick Pearce, used passive cooling inspired by that used by the local termites. It was the first major building exploiting termite-inspired cooling techniques to attract international attention. Other such buildings include the Learning Resource Center at the Catholic University of Eastern Africa and the Council House 2 building in Melbourne, Australia.

Few zoos hold termites, due to the difficulty in keeping them captive and to the reluctance of authorities to permit potential pests. One of the few that do, the Zoo Basel in Switzerland, has two thriving &quot;Macrotermes bellicosus&quot; populations – resulting in an event very rare in captivity: the mass migrations of young flying termites. This happened in September 2008, when thousands of male termites left their mound each night, died, and covered the floors and water pits of the house holding their exhibit.

African tribes in several countries have termites as totems, and for this reason tribe members are forbidden to eat the reproductive alates. Termites are widely used in traditional popular medicine; they are used as treatments for diseases and other conditions such as asthma, bronchitis, hoarseness, influenza, sinusitis, tonsillitis and whooping cough. In Nigeria, &quot;Macrotermes nigeriensis&quot; is used for spiritual protection and to treat wounds and sick pregnant women. In Southeast Asia, termites are used in ritual practices. In Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand, termite mounds are commonly worshiped among the populace. Abandoned mounds are viewed as structures created by spirits, believing a local guardian dwells within the mound; this is known as Keramat and Datok Kong. In urban areas, local residents construct red-painted shrines over mounds that have been abandoned, where they pray for good health, protection and luck.

==See also==
* Mound-building termites
* Stigmergy
* Termite shield
* Xylophagy

==Notes==
==References==
===Cited literature===
*
pest control Sydney

==External links==

* Isoptera: termites at CSIRO Australia Entomology
* Jared Leadbetter seminar: Termites and Their Symbiotic Gut Microbes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="0" end="8" title="Termite" label="Termites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750657" start="24" end="38" title="detritivore" label="detritophagous"/>
<link wikidata="Q753694" start="39" end="47" title="Eusociality" label="eusocial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="48" end="54" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q736879" start="83" end="106" title="Detritus" label="decaying plant material"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="133" end="137" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512035" start="139" end="150" title="Plant litter" label="leaf litter"/>
<link wikidata="Q172645" start="156" end="166" title="Humus" label="soil humus"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="322" end="332" title="Termite" label="white ants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="362" end="365" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661828" start="398" end="407" title="cockroach" label="cockroach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="430" end="437" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050699" start="504" end="514" title="Termitidae" label="Termitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="539" end="549" title="infraorder" label="infraorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="550" end="558" title="Termite" label="Isoptera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="581" end="590" title="Taxonomic rank#All ranks" label="epifamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="591" end="602" title="Termite" label="Termitoidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25309" start="621" end="630" title="Blattodea" label="Blattodea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661828" start="643" end="652" title="cockroach" label="cockroach"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="701" end="706" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="736" end="748" title="phylogenetic" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="854" end="866" title="sister group" label="sister group"/>
<link wikidata="Q139704" start="913" end="925" title="Cryptocercus" label="Cryptocercus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="999" end="1007" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="1011" end="1019" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q499312" start="1087" end="1100" title="Late Jurassic" label="Late Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q752187" start="1139" end="1155" title="Early Cretaceous" label="Early Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="1185" end="1188" title="bee" label="bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458574" start="1194" end="1198" title="wasp" label="wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q22651" start="1224" end="1235" title="Hymenoptera" label="Hymenoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901585" start="1562" end="1572" title="Monogamy in animals" label="monogamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048559" start="1613" end="1635" title="complete metamorphosis" label="complete metamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800474" start="1657" end="1681" title="incomplete metamorphosis" label="incomplete metamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q258362" start="1709" end="1714" title="nymph (biology)" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q207254" start="1720" end="1725" title="Imago" label="adult"/>
<link wikidata="Q916139" start="1777" end="1790" title="superorganism" label="superorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945560" start="2373" end="2380" title="Biomass (ecology)" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="2398" end="2404" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="2539" end="2550" title="Subtropics" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="2555" end="2563" title="Tropics" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q962054" start="2690" end="2708" title="ecosystem engineer" label="ecosystem engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="2730" end="2734" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q42250" start="2759" end="2768" title="hydrology" label="hydrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070482" start="2785" end="2801" title="nutrient cycling" label="nutrient cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="2851" end="2863" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q965847" start="2882" end="2888" title="Termite mound" label="mounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287619" start="3030" end="3040" title="Makiritare" label="Makiritare"/>
<link wikidata="Q443529" start="3048" end="3060" title="Alto Orinoco Municipality" label="Alto Orinoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="3073" end="3082" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="3147" end="3179" title="Traditional medicine" label="traditional medicinal treatments"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="3441" end="3454" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3459" end="3468" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="3474" end="3493" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q388614" start="3499" end="3514" title="Afrotropical realm" label="tropical Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="3520" end="3535" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="3544" end="3555" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11842491" start="3660" end="3671" title="Coptotermes" label="Coptotermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="3777" end="3791" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="3958" end="3969" title="Greek language" label="Greek words"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="4129" end="4134" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503113" start="4139" end="4149" title="Late Latin" label="Late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="4687" end="4700" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q139704" start="4894" end="4906" title="Cryptocercus" label="Cryptocercus"/>
<link wikidata="Q240433" start="4976" end="4988" title="flagellate" label="flagellates."/>
<link wikidata="Q258362" start="5174" end="5180" title="Nymph (biology)" label="nymphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q285223" start="5190" end="5202" title="DNA analysis" label="DNA analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13645602" start="5208" end="5216" title="MT-RNR2" label="16S rRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q25309" start="5325" end="5334" title="Blattodea" label="Blattodea"/>
<link wikidata="Q921513" start="5743" end="5759" title="social behavior" label="social behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q676036" start="5768" end="5780" title="trophallaxis" label="trophallaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q616914" start="5785" end="5797" title="Social grooming" label="allogrooming"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5887" end="5899" title="Xylophagodea" label="Xylophagodea"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="6026" end="6035" title="epifamily" label="epifamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q131250" start="6212" end="6219" title="Mantis" label="mantids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087279" start="6269" end="6280" title="Dictyoptera" label="Dictyoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="6315" end="6322" title="fossils" label="fossils"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="6341" end="6351" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082668" start="6621" end="6633" title="Mammaliaformes" label="mammaliaform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420570" start="6640" end="6652" title="Fruitafossor" label="Fruitafossor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195552" start="6664" end="6682" title="Morrison Formation" label="Morrison Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="6925" end="6941" title="Upper Cretaceous" label="Upper Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358102" start="6945" end="6955" title="West Texas" label="West Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11988630" start="7124" end="7139" title="Mastotermitidae" label="Mastotermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077390" start="7168" end="7180" title="Late Permian" label="Late Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="7379" end="7386" title="Permian" label="Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="7468" end="7481" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7531" end="7544" title="Pycnoblattina" label="Pycnoblattina"/>
<link wikidata="Q62673222" start="7703" end="7716" title="Kumar Krishna" label="Kumar Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q752187" start="8044" end="8060" title="Early Cretaceous" label="Early Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q135349" start="8076" end="8098" title="giant northern termite" label="giant northern termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="8430" end="8450" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582528" start="8688" end="8711" title="Zootermopsis nevadensis" label="Zootermopsis nevadensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q573880" start="8760" end="8781" title="Nature Communications" label="Nature Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q49620889" start="8864" end="8886" title="Macrotermes natalensis" label="Macrotermes natalensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8903" end="8924" title="Cryptotermes secundus" label="Cryptotermes secundus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="9174" end="9181" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754478" start="9514" end="9534" title="Cratomastotermitidae" label="Cratomastotermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11988630" start="9550" end="9565" title="Mastotermitidae" label="Mastotermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9606" end="9624" title="Melqartitermitidae" label="Melqartitermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9640" end="9657" title="Mylacrotermitidae" label="Mylacrotermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9673" end="9690" title="Krishnatermitidae" label="Krishnatermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942128" start="9706" end="9717" title="Termopsidae" label="Termopsidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9733" end="9749" title="Carinatermitidae" label="Carinatermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18395404" start="9793" end="9809" title="Archotermopsidae" label="Archotermopsidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040698" start="9825" end="9839" title="Hodotermitidae" label="Hodotermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21214869" start="9855" end="9870" title="Hodotermopsidae" label="Hodotermopsidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9890" end="9908" title="Hodotermopsellinae" label="Hodotermopsellinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9928" end="9943" title="Hodotermopsinae" label="Hodotermopsinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9959" end="9974" title="Arceotermitidae" label="Arceotermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9994" end="10009" title="Arceotermitinae" label="Arceotermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10029" end="10044" title="Cosmotermitinae" label="Cosmotermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21069247" start="10060" end="10075" title="Stolotermitidae" label="Stolotermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10095" end="10110" title="Stolotermitinae" label="Stolotermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10130" end="10144" title="Porotermitinae" label="Porotermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10186" end="10200" title="Tanytermitidae" label="Tanytermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952988" start="10244" end="10258" title="Kalotermitidae" label="Kalotermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="10275" end="10286" title="Neoisoptera" label="Neoisoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="10357" end="10368" title="Neoisoptera" label="Neoisoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953004" start="10523" end="10538" title="Rhinotermitidae" label="Rhinotermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050699" start="10543" end="10553" title="Termitidae" label="Termitidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10737" end="10742" title="#Caste system" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="11198" end="11206" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="11232" end="11236" title="Taxon" label="taxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382732" start="11315" end="11327" title="Termitomyces" label="Termitomyces"/>
<link wikidata="Q240433" start="11422" end="11432" title="flagellate" label="flagellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="11438" end="11448" title="prokaryote" label="prokaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q20171581" start="11586" end="11607" title="Archeorhinotermitidae" label="Archeorhinotermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q16531196" start="11619" end="11634" title="Stylotermitidae" label="Stylotermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049312" start="11646" end="11661" title="Serritermitidae" label="Serritermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953004" start="11673" end="11688" title="Rhinotermitidae" label="Rhinotermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11700" end="11716" title="Termitogetonidae" label="Termitogetonidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11728" end="11744" title="Psammotermitidae" label="Psammotermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11760" end="11778" title="Prorhinotermitinae" label="Prorhinotermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q16860190" start="11794" end="11810" title="Psammotermitinae" label="Psammotermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747822" start="11844" end="11860" title="Heterotermitinae" label="Heterotermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050699" start="11875" end="11885" title="Termitidae" label="Termitidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11901" end="11918" title="Sphaerotermitinae" label="Sphaerotermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10936976" start="11934" end="11949" title="Macrotermitinae" label="Macrotermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11965" end="11983" title="Foraminitermitinae" label="Foraminitermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11999" end="12014" title="Apicotermitinae" label="Apicotermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12030" end="12049" title="Microcerotermitinae" label="Microcerotermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15275401" start="12065" end="12078" title="Syntermitinae" label="Syntermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12094" end="12113" title="Forficulitermitinae" label="Forficulitermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12129" end="12145" title="Engelitermitinae" label="Engelitermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12161" end="12178" title="Crepititermitinae" label="Crepititermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12194" end="12213" title="Protohamitermitinae" label="Protohamitermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12229" end="12247" title="Cylindrotermitinae" label="Cylindrotermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12263" end="12281" title="Neocapritermitinae" label="Neocapritermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15213827" start="12297" end="12313" title="Nasutitermitinae" label="Nasutitermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12329" end="12346" title="Promirotermitinae" label="Promirotermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12362" end="12381" title="Mirocapritermitinae" label="Mirocapritermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746932" start="12397" end="12410" title="Amitermitinae" label="Amitermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15984008" start="12426" end="12440" title="Cubitermitinae" label="Cubitermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15275402" start="12456" end="12466" title="Termitinae" label="Termitinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="12544" end="12554" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="12599" end="12612" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="12617" end="12623" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="12693" end="12706" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="12819" end="12825" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q24451" start="12960" end="12980" title="Kruger National Park" label="Kruger National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="12991" end="12995" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="13064" end="13069" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="13124" end="13132" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="13137" end="13148" title="subtropical" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="13189" end="13198" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="13272" end="13279" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945560" start="13447" end="13454" title="biomass (ecology)" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="13469" end="13472" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582607" start="13952" end="13971" title="Cryptotermes brevis" label="Cryptotermes brevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043563" start="14169" end="14191" title="Macrotermes bellicosus" label="Macrotermes bellicosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="14336" end="14343" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="14355" end="14362" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575587" start="14536" end="14558" title="Hodotermes" label="Hodotermes mossambicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q942537" start="14571" end="14584" title="compound eyes" label="compound eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708806" start="14664" end="14669" title="alate" label="alate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364287" start="14727" end="14733" title="Simple eye in invertebrates" label="ocelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040698" start="14814" end="14828" title="Hodotermitidae" label="Hodotermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942128" start="14830" end="14841" title="Termopsidae" label="Termopsidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18395404" start="14847" end="14863" title="Archotermopsidae" label="Archotermopsidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q360768" start="14921" end="14927" title="Labrum (arthropod mouthpart)" label="labrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103783" start="14934" end="14941" title="Clypeus (arthropod anatomy)" label="clypeus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15190" end="15195" title="Antenna (biology)#Structure" label="scape"/>
<link wikidata="Q350956" start="15332" end="15340" title="Maxilla (arthropod mouthpart)" label="maxillae"/>
<link wikidata="Q920112" start="15365" end="15374" title="Mandible (insect mouthpart)" label="mandibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q932179" start="15405" end="15410" title="Pedipalp" label="palps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797676" start="15459" end="15466" title="Arthropod cuticle" label="cuticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139127" start="15670" end="15682" title="Life history theory" label="life history"/>
<link wikidata="Q942508" start="15864" end="15870" title="Thorax (insect anatomy)" label="thorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q123439" start="15903" end="15912" title="prothorax" label="prothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118266" start="15918" end="15928" title="mesothorax" label="mesothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925178" start="15937" end="15947" title="metathorax" label="metathorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133438" start="15981" end="15984" title="Arthropod leg" label="leg"/>
<link wikidata="Q652546" start="16267" end="16275" title="Tergum" label="tergites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777684" start="16284" end="16293" title="Sternum (arthropod anatomy)" label="sternites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054892" start="16343" end="16348" title="Cercus" label="cerci"/>
<link wikidata="Q11789797" start="16521" end="16539" title="intromittent organ" label="intromittent organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q33596" start="16694" end="16702" title="motility" label="motility"/>
<link wikidata="Q868460" start="16807" end="16817" title="ovipositor" label="ovipositor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17258" end="17262" title="Arthropod leg#Coxa" label="coxa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17264" end="17274" title="Arthropod leg#Trochanter" label="trochanter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17276" end="17281" title="Arthropod leg#Femur" label="femur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17283" end="17288" title="Arthropod leg#Tibia" label="tibia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17297" end="17303" title="Arthropod leg#Tarsus" label="tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069045" start="17429" end="17434" title="Chela (organ)" label="claws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800474" start="17996" end="18018" title="Hemimetabolism" label="hemimetabolous insects"/>
<link wikidata="Q22651" start="18274" end="18285" title="Hymenoptera" label="Hymenoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048559" start="18332" end="18354" title="Holometabolism" label="complete metamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="18425" end="18437" title="Larva" label="larval stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179631" start="18450" end="18466" title="Instar" label="adultoid instars"/>
<link wikidata="Q207254" start="18548" end="18558" title="Imago" label="final molt"/>
<link wikidata="Q603178" start="18720" end="18729" title="Neoteny" label="neotenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q862600" start="18969" end="18981" title="cell potency" label="cell potency"/>
<link wikidata="Q18395404" start="19820" end="19836" title="Archotermopsidae" label="Archotermopsidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708806" start="20553" end="20558" title="Alate" label="Alate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559380" start="21142" end="21152" title="Altruism (biology)" label="altruistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="21386" end="21397" title="Neoisoptera" label="Neoisoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="21858" end="21867" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q676036" start="22008" end="22020" title="trophallaxis" label="trophallaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="22480" end="22484" title="Taxon" label="taxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q485680" start="22669" end="22680" title="Polymorphism (biology)" label="polymorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050699" start="22984" end="22994" title="Termitidae" label="Termitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18395404" start="23130" end="23146" title="Archotermopsidae" label="Archotermopsidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350329" start="23836" end="23844" title="ergatoid" label="ergatoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q752693" start="25123" end="25133" title="Fontanelle" label="Fontanelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="25248" end="25259" title="Neoisoptera" label="Neoisoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036734" start="25598" end="25610" title="Cryptotermes" label="Cryptotermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014703" start="25736" end="25748" title="Incisitermes" label="Incisitermes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25773" end="25783" title="Cubitermes" label="Cubitermes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25817" end="25833" title="Dentispicotermes" label="Dentispicotermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582623" start="25870" end="25876" title="Termes (insect)" label="Termes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16611144" start="25914" end="25928" title="Neocapritermes" label="Neocapritermes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25957" end="25967" title="Armitermes" label="Armitermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15213827" start="26138" end="26145" title="Nasutitermitinae" label="Nasutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465144" start="26189" end="26194" title="Fontanellar gun" label="nasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q59447" start="26287" end="26296" title="diterpene" label="diterpene"/>
<link wikidata="Q272467" start="26316" end="26333" title="Nitrogen fixation" label="Nitrogen fixation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587899" start="27217" end="27226" title="fecundity" label="fecundity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189761" start="27254" end="27267" title="physogastrism" label="physogastrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369077" start="27417" end="27431" title="nuptial flight" label="nuptial flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q753694" start="28103" end="28109" title="eusociality" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="28546" end="28553" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="28750" end="28753" title="egg (biology)" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800474" start="28853" end="28877" title="incomplete metamorphosis" label="incomplete metamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800474" start="29008" end="29022" title="Hemimetabolism" label="hemimetabolous"/>
<link wikidata="Q381084" start="29177" end="29183" title="Moulting" label="moults"/>
<link wikidata="Q207254" start="29201" end="29207" title="Imago" label="adults"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="30002" end="30006" title="Taxon" label="taxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q753694" start="30845" end="30853" title="eusociality" label="eusocial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074282" start="30868" end="30882" title="Reticulitermes" label="Reticulitermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587899" start="30949" end="30958" title="fecundity" label="fecundity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205759" start="31048" end="31068" title="DNA oxidation" label="oxidative DNA damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12824566" start="31162" end="31170" title="catalase" label="catalase"/>
<link wikidata="Q898814" start="31204" end="31220" title="oxidative stress" label="oxidative stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369077" start="31320" end="31334" title="nuptial flight" label="nuptial flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358866" start="32653" end="32661" title="ovariole" label="ovariole"/>
<link wikidata="Q173432" start="33914" end="33934" title="asexual reproduction" label="asexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q603178" start="34062" end="34070" title="Neoteny" label="neotenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="34079" end="34098" title="Parthenogenesis" label="parthenogenetically"/>
<link wikidata="Q603178" start="34287" end="34295" title="neoteny" label="neotenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291674" start="34331" end="34358" title="thelytoky" label="thelytokous parthenogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="34400" end="34415" title="parthenogenesis" label="parthenogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13048280" start="34442" end="34456" title="zygosity" label="heterozygosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="34479" end="34485" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481109" start="34525" end="34546" title="inbreeding depression" label="inbreeding depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750657" start="34611" end="34622" title="detritivore" label="detritivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="34806" end="34815" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817113" start="34927" end="34946" title="atmospheric methane" label="atmospheric methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="34965" end="34979" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q240433" start="35110" end="35120" title="flagellate" label="flagellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10892" start="35121" end="35128" title="protist" label="protist"/>
<link wikidata="Q499091" start="35138" end="35147" title="metamonad" label="metamonad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1833941" start="35153" end="35166" title="hypermastigid" label="hypermastigid"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="35599" end="35607" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q419557" start="35668" end="35684" title="digestive enzyme" label="digestive enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q410324" start="35768" end="35777" title="cellulase" label="cellulase"/>
<link wikidata="Q12673555" start="35910" end="35921" title="Spirochaete" label="spirochetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324240" start="36338" end="36343" title="Insect mouthparts" label="mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q739734" start="36470" end="36484" title="gut flora" label="gut microbiota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087279" start="36504" end="36515" title="dictyoptera" label="dictyoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q17424578" start="37050" end="37060" title="CrAssphage" label="CrAssphage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37118" end="37144" title="Gnathamitermes tubiformans" label="Gnathamitermes tubiformans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37244" end="37262" title="Aristida longiseta" label="Aristida longiseta"/>
<link wikidata="Q143816" start="37309" end="37328" title="Buchloe dactyloides" label="Buchloe dactyloides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922605" start="37377" end="37395" title="Bouteloua gracilis" label="Bouteloua gracilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25356" start="37825" end="37831" title="Populus" label="poplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="37836" end="37841" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067736" start="38030" end="38042" title="fungiculture" label="fungiculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382732" start="38115" end="38127" title="Termitomyces" label="Termitomyces"/>
<link wikidata="Q10936976" start="38391" end="38406" title="Macrotermitinae" label="Macrotermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q172645" start="39150" end="39155" title="humus" label="humus"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="39257" end="39265" title="protozoa" label="protozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25373728" start="39276" end="39293" title="Holomastigotoides" label="Holomastigotoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="39442" end="39451" title="Predation" label="predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575587" start="39486" end="39508" title="Hodotermes" label="Hodotermes mossambicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="39566" end="39570" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="39579" end="39585" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="39588" end="39597" title="Arthropod" label="Arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="39607" end="39611" title="ants" label="ants"/>
<link wikidata="Q43447" start="39613" end="39622" title="centipede" label="centipede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661828" start="39625" end="39634" title="cockroach" label="cockroach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776776" start="39638" end="39646" title="Cricket (insect)" label="crickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q80066" start="39648" end="39659" title="Dragonfly" label="dragonflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q19125" start="39661" end="39669" title="scorpion" label="scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357" start="39675" end="39681" title="spider" label="spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="39684" end="39691" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="39701" end="39707" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="39714" end="39723" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="39733" end="39737" title="frog" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453151" start="39743" end="39747" title="toad" label="toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357" start="39776" end="39782" title="spider" label="spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q10545" start="39798" end="39809" title="Ammoxenidae" label="Ammoxenidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q46212" start="39870" end="39878" title="aardvark" label="aardvark"/>
<link wikidata="Q185295" start="39881" end="39891" title="Aardwolf" label="aardwolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q972452" start="39893" end="39901" title="anteater" label="anteater"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="39904" end="39907" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11788" start="39910" end="39914" title="bear" label="bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q617087" start="39917" end="39924" title="Macrotis" label="bilbies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="39931" end="39935" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q21824" start="39938" end="39946" title="echidnas" label="echidnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="39948" end="39951" title="fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q185239" start="39955" end="39961" title="galago" label="galago"/>
<link wikidata="Q242419" start="39964" end="39970" title="numbat" label="numbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="39973" end="39977" title="Mouse" label="mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191516" start="39982" end="39990" title="pangolin" label="pangolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185295" start="39997" end="40005" title="aardwolf" label="aardwolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q677088" start="40012" end="40025" title="insectivore" label="insectivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="40026" end="40032" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q145016" start="40270" end="40281" title="Sloth bears" label="Sloth bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126704" start="40332" end="40343" title="Common chimpanzee" label="chimpanzees"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40349" end="40364" title="Tool use by animals#Primates" label="developed tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q107588" start="40465" end="40472" title="hominin" label="hominin"/>
<link wikidata="Q310529" start="40479" end="40500" title="Paranthropus robustus" label="Paranthropus robustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122109" start="40706" end="40716" title="Megaponera" label="Megaponera"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720481" start="40842" end="40863" title="Paltothyreus" label="Paltothyreus tarsatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q920112" start="40972" end="40981" title="Mandible (insect mouthpart)" label="mandibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q10278257" start="41134" end="41158" title="Eurhopalothrix" label="Eurhopalothrix heliscata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132570" start="41399" end="41418" title="Tetramorium" label="Tetramorium uelense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612058" start="41619" end="41631" title="Centromyrmex" label="Centromyrmex"/>
<link wikidata="Q141460" start="41648" end="41659" title="Iridomyrmex" label="Iridomyrmex"/>
<link wikidata="Q965847" start="41693" end="41706" title="termite mound" label="termite mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943591" start="41866" end="41880" title="Acanthostichus" label="Acanthostichus"/>
<link wikidata="Q157875" start="41894" end="41904" title="Camponotus" label="Camponotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128283" start="41918" end="41931" title="Crematogaster" label="Crematogaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944081" start="41945" end="41959" title="Cylindromyrmex" label="Cylindromyrmex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820179" start="41973" end="41983" title="Leptogenys" label="Leptogenys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000819" start="41997" end="42009" title="Odontomachus" label="Odontomachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18816097" start="42023" end="42036" title="Ophthalmopone" label="Ophthalmopone"/>
<link wikidata="Q137810" start="42050" end="42062" title="Pachycondyla" label="Pachycondyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481846" start="42076" end="42089" title="Rhytidoponera" label="Rhytidoponera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075697" start="42103" end="42113" title="Fire ant" label="Solenopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935347" start="42130" end="42139" title="Wasmannia" label="Wasmannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352647" start="42248" end="42255" title="Dorylus" label="Dorylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14640326" start="42307" end="42318" title="Macrotermes" label="Macrotermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q531656" start="42397" end="42410" title="Spheciformes" label="sphecoid wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q785677" start="42448" end="42455" title="Polybia" label="Polybia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14423278" start="42472" end="42484" title="Angiopolybia pallens" label="Angiopolybia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356990" start="42845" end="42853" title="Pyemotes" label="Pyemotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185" start="42889" end="42897" title="nematode" label="nematode"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164" start="42950" end="42960" title="Rhabditida" label="Rhabditida"/>
<link wikidata="Q17598469" start="42992" end="42998" title="Mermis" label="Mermis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43012" end="43032" title="Diplogaster aerivora" label="Diplogaster aerivora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719086" start="43049" end="43068" title="Heterakis gallinarum" label="Harteria gallinarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10420032" start="43204" end="43222" title="Aspergillus nomius" label="Aspergillus nomius"/>
<link wikidata="Q134941" start="43239" end="43261" title="Metarhizium anisopliae" label="Metarhizium anisopliae"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145565" start="43812" end="43828" title="Entomopoxvirinae" label="Entomopoxvirinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q763221" start="43837" end="43863" title="Nuclear Polyhedrosis Virus" label="Nuclear Polyhedrosis Virus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44814" end="44835" title="Nasutitermes costalis" label="Nasutitermes costalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114998" start="45256" end="45267" title="Lévy flight" label="Lévy flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q395324" start="45423" end="45442" title="agonistic behaviour" label="agonistic behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754623" start="46264" end="46286" title="Coptotermes formosanus" label="Coptotermes formosanus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47508" end="47513" title="Pheromone#Alarm" label="alarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832766" start="47515" end="47520" title="Trail pheromone" label="trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458527" start="47525" end="47538" title="sex pheromone" label="sex pheromone"/>
<link wikidata="Q134941" start="49598" end="49620" title="Metarhizium anisopliae" label="Metarhizium anisopliae"/>
<link wikidata="Q180335" start="50114" end="50121" title="Phalanx formation" label="phalanx"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122109" start="50214" end="50231" title="Megaponera analis" label="Megaponera analis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15213827" start="50794" end="50810" title="Nasutitermitinae" label="Nasutitermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465144" start="50923" end="50951" title="fontanellar gun" label="horn-like frontal projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q32528" start="51091" end="51102" title="monoterpene" label="monoterpene"/>
<link wikidata="Q146505" start="51115" end="51122" title="solvent" label="solvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754623" start="51193" end="51222" title="Formosan subterranean termite" label="Formosan subterranean termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q179724" start="51251" end="51262" title="naphthalene" label="naphthalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039502" start="51318" end="51340" title="Globitermes sulphureus" label="Globitermes sulphureus"/>
<link wikidata="Q145506" start="51365" end="51375" title="autothysis" label="autothysis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51620" end="51641" title="Neocapriterme taracua" label="Neocapriterme taracua"/>
<link wikidata="Q217151" start="51903" end="51914" title="Neotropical realm" label="neotropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049312" start="51930" end="51945" title="Serritermitidae" label="Serritermitidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="52349" end="52358" title="pathogens" label="pathogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q864784" start="52392" end="52405" title="necrophoresis" label="necrophoresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="52663" end="52669" title="fungus" label="fungus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572352" start="52954" end="52966" title="glucosidases" label="glucosidases"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53037" end="53050" title="Trichopsenius" label="Trichopsenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074282" start="53106" end="53120" title="Reticulitermes" label="Reticulitermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403158" start="53155" end="53162" title="cuticular" label="cuticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="53163" end="53174" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415392" start="53329" end="53339" title="appendages" label="appendages"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53377" end="53401" title="Austrospirachtha mimetes" label="Austrospirachtha mimetes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53589" end="53602" title="Formica nigra" label="Formica nigra"/>
<link wikidata="Q914888" start="53745" end="53754" title="Ponerinae" label="Ponerinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037541" start="53919" end="53928" title="Dorylinae" label="Dorylinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967778" start="54056" end="54077" title="Nasutitermes corniger" label="Nasutitermes corniger"/>
<link wikidata="Q292585" start="54209" end="54215" title="Azteca (ant)" label="Azteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q142968" start="55419" end="55440" title="Rhizanthella gardneri" label="Rhizanthella gardneri"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="55520" end="55531" title="Orchidaceae" label="Orchidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="55970" end="55979" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q30326290" start="56123" end="56138" title="Termite barriers" label="termite barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171483" start="56207" end="56217" title="Eremophila (plant)" label="Eremophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q375816" start="56711" end="56719" title="Caatinga" label="Caatinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="56812" end="56818" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57794" end="57807" title="#Shelter tubes" label="shelter tubes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58706" end="58721" title="Apicotermitinae" label="Apicotermitinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817834" start="59209" end="59223" title="mangrove swamp" label="mangrove swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="59274" end="59280" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="59529" end="59540" title="Puerto Rica" label="Puerto Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q853914" start="59716" end="59733" title="Rhizophora mangle" label="Rhizophora mangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q570551" start="59762" end="59781" title="Avicennia germinans" label="Avicennia germinans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705317" start="59815" end="59836" title="Laguncularia racemosa" label="Laguncularia racemosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60077" end="60088" title="Apicotermes" label="Apicotermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16642719" start="60105" end="60119" title="Trinervitermes" label="Trinervitermes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60821" end="60831" title="Cubitermes" label="Cubitermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709388" start="61417" end="61439" title="Amitermes meridionalis" label="Amitermes meridionalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="61997" end="62013" title="thermoregulation" label="thermoregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q893396" start="66343" end="66359" title="Bordeaux mixture" label="Bordeaux mixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="66393" end="66399" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864498" start="66408" end="66433" title="chromated copper arsenate" label="chromated copper arsenate"/>
<link wikidata="Q415933" start="66518" end="66526" title="Fipronil" label="Fipronil"/>
<link wikidata="Q516584" start="66876" end="66886" title="orange oil" label="orange oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q79448" start="67062" end="67078" title="immunoglobulin G" label="immunoglobulin G"/>
<link wikidata="Q739897" start="67232" end="67237" title="assay" label="assay"/>
<link wikidata="Q332126" start="67489" end="67494" title="ELISA" label="ELISA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201993" start="67501" end="67505" title="RNAi" label="RNAi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="67540" end="67558" title="insecticide development" label="are in development"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290" start="67580" end="67590" title="investment" label="investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="67598" end="67622" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610615" start="67659" end="67679" title="Pesticide resistance" label="resistance evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074282" start="67722" end="67736" title="Reticulitermes" label="Reticulitermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227656" start="67788" end="67795" title="Saunton" label="Saunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="67797" end="67802" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q601819" start="68303" end="68355" title="Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities" label="Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="68807" end="68814" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708806" start="69097" end="69102" title="alate" label="alate"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="69403" end="69406" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q961751" start="69787" end="69796" title="winnowing" label="winnowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q427457" start="69887" end="69890" title="cooking oil" label="Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="70264" end="70286" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349107" start="70468" end="70476" title="geophagy" label="geophagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="70506" end="70511" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="70513" end="70521" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="70523" end="70529" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="70531" end="70539" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="70544" end="70556" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572582" start="70649" end="70666" title="Space farming" label="space agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71143" end="71155" title="bioturbation#Terrestrial" label="bioturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="71229" end="71238" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="71385" end="71392" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q156354" start="71394" end="71400" title="Coffea" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q719312" start="71402" end="71408" title="Gossypium" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="71423" end="71428" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="71430" end="71436" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q889514" start="71742" end="71752" title="crop yield" label="crop yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="72211" end="72223" title="fossil fuels" label="fossil fuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q864699" start="72287" end="72297" title="bioreactor" label="bioreactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="72349" end="72357" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q508355" start="72603" end="72617" title="lignocellulose" label="lignocellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="72618" end="72625" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q124686" start="72752" end="72769" title="cellulose acetate" label="cellulose acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q212527" start="72774" end="72781" title="acetate" label="acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="72782" end="72787" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72836" end="72860" title="Microbiota#Metagenomic sequencing" label="Community DNA sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q68685" start="72959" end="72976" title="metabolic pathway" label="metabolic pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916098" start="73089" end="73105" title="autonomous robot" label="autonomous robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="73430" end="73435" title="levee" label="levee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73537" end="73555" title="#Mounds" label="As discussed above"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962572" start="73713" end="73726" title="solar chimney" label="solar chimney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709610" start="73735" end="73747" title="stack effect" label="stack effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="74003" end="74014" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="74019" end="74028" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="74078" end="74084" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278256" start="74387" end="74402" title="Eastgate Centre, Harare" label="Eastgate Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921" start="74452" end="74458" title="Harare" label="Harare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140435" start="74487" end="74498" title="Mick Pearce" label="Mick Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068508" start="74505" end="74520" title="passive cooling" label="passive cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736407" start="74746" end="74783" title="Catholic University of Eastern Africa" label="Catholic University of Eastern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866891" start="74792" end="74807" title="Council House 2" label="Council House 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="74820" end="74829" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q220009" start="75005" end="75014" title="Zoo Basel" label="Zoo Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="75018" end="75029" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q263443" start="75417" end="75422" title="totem" label="totem"/>
<link wikidata="Q173022" start="75641" end="75651" title="bronchitis" label="bronchitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q836379" start="75653" end="75663" title="hoarseness" label="hoarseness"/>
<link wikidata="Q183344" start="75676" end="75685" title="sinusitis" label="sinusitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186470" start="75687" end="75698" title="tonsillitis" label="tonsillitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75737" end="75760" title="Macrotermes nigeriensis" label="Macrotermes nigeriensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213995" start="76129" end="76136" title="Keramat" label="Keramat"/>
<link wikidata="Q965847" start="76323" end="76346" title="Mound-building termites" label="Mound-building termites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141158" start="76349" end="76358" title="Stigmergy" label="Stigmergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702884" start="76361" end="76375" title="Termite shield" label="Termite shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851532" start="76378" end="76387" title="Xylophagy" label="Xylophagy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54813" wikidata="Q429659" url="?curid=54813" title="Shellac">
<text>Shellac () is a resin secreted by the female lac bug on trees in the forests of India and Thailand. Chemically, it is mainly composed of aleuritic acid, jalaric acid, shellolic acid, and other natural waxes. It is processed and sold as dry flakes and dissolved in alcohol to make liquid shellac, which is used as a brush-on colorant, food glaze and wood finish. Shellac functions as a tough natural primer, sanding sealant, tannin-blocker, odour-blocker, stain, and high-gloss varnish. Shellac was once used in electrical applications as it possesses good insulation qualities and seals out moisture. Phonograph and 78 rpm gramophone records were made of shellac until they were gradually replaced by vinyl.

From the time shellac replaced oil and wax finishes in the 19th century, it was one of the dominant wood finishes in the western world until it was largely replaced by nitrocellulose lacquer in the 1920s and 1930s. Besides wood finishing, shellac is used as an ingredient in food, medication and candy as &quot;confectioner&#x27;s glaze&quot;, as well as a means of preserving harvested citrus fruit.

== Etymology ==
&quot;Shellac&quot; comes from &quot;shell&quot; and &quot;lac&quot;, a partial calque of French , &#x27;lac in thin pieces&#x27;, later , &#x27;gum lac&#x27;. Most European languages (except Romance ones and Greek) have borrowed the word for the substance from English or from the German equivalent .

== Production ==

Shellac is scraped from the bark of the trees where the female lac bug, &quot;Kerria lacca&quot; (order Hemiptera, family Kerriidae, also known as &quot;Laccifer lacca&quot;), secretes it to form a tunnel-like tube as it traverses the branches of the tree. Though these tunnels are sometimes referred to as &quot;cocoons&quot;, they are not cocoons in the entomological sense. This insect is in the same superfamily as the insect from which cochineal is obtained. The insects suck the sap of the tree and excrete &quot;sticklac&quot; almost constantly. The least-coloured shellac is produced when the insects feed on the kusum tree (&quot;Schleichera&quot;).

The number of lac bugs required to produce of shellac has variously been estimated between and . The root word lakh is a unit in the Indian numbering system for and presumably refers to the huge numbers of insects that swarm on host trees, up to .

The raw shellac, which contains bark shavings and lac bugs removed during scraping, is placed in canvas tubes (much like long socks) and heated over a fire. This causes the shellac to liquefy, and it seeps out of the canvas, leaving the bark and bugs behind. The thick, sticky shellac is then dried into a flat sheet and broken into flakes, or dried into &quot;buttons&quot; (pucks/cakes), then bagged and sold. The end-user then crushes it into a fine powder and mixes it with ethyl alcohol before use, to dissolve the flakes and make liquid shellac.

Liquid shellac has a limited shelf life (about 1 year), so is sold in dry form for dissolution before use. Liquid shellac sold in hardware stores is often marked with the production (mixing) date, so the consumer can know whether the shellac inside is still good. Some manufacturers (e.g., Zinsser) have ceased labeling shellac with the production date, but the production date may be discernible from the production lot code. Alternatively, old shellac may be tested to see if it is still usable: a few drops on glass should dry to a hard surface in roughly 15 minutes. Shellac that remains tacky for a long time is no longer usable. Storage life depends on peak temperature, so refrigeration extends shelf life.

The thickness (concentration) of shellac is measured by the unit &quot;pound cut&quot;, referring to the amount (in pounds) of shellac flakes dissolved in a gallon of denatured alcohol. For example: a 1-lb. cut of shellac is the strength obtained by dissolving one pound of shellac flakes in a gallon of alcohol (equivalent to ). Most pre-mixed commercial preparations come at a 3-lb. cut. Multiple thin layers of shellac produce a significantly better end result than a few thick layers. Thick layers of shellac do not adhere to the substrate or to each other well, and thus can peel off with relative ease; in addition, thick shellac will obscure fine details in carved designs in wood and other substrates.

Shellac naturally dries to a high-gloss sheen. For applications where a flatter (less shiny) sheen is desired, products containing amorphous silica, such as &quot;Shellac Flat&quot;, may be added to the dissolved shellac.

Shellac naturally contains a small amount of wax (3%–5% by volume), which comes from the lac bug. In some preparations, this wax is removed (the resulting product being called &quot;dewaxed shellac&quot;). This is done for applications where the shellac will be coated with something else (such as paint or varnish), so the topcoat will adhere. Waxy (non-dewaxed) shellac appears milky in liquid form, but dries clear.

== Colours and availability ==
Shellac comes in many warm colours, ranging from a very light blonde (&quot;platina&quot;) to a very dark brown (&quot;garnet&quot;), with many varieties of brown, yellow, orange and red in between. The colour is influenced by the sap of the tree the lac bug is living on and by the time of harvest. Historically, the most commonly sold shellac is called &quot;orange shellac&quot;, and was used extensively as a combination stain and protectant for wood panelling and cabinetry in the 20th century.

Shellac was once very common anywhere paints or varnishes were sold (such as hardware stores). However, cheaper and more abrasion- and chemical-resistant finishes, such as polyurethane, have almost completely replaced it in decorative residential wood finishing such as hardwood floors, wooden wainscoting plank panelling, and kitchen cabinets. These alternative products, however, must be applied over a stain if the user wants the wood to be coloured; clear or blonde shellac may be applied over a stain without affecting the colour of the finished piece, as a protective topcoat. &quot;Wax over shellac&quot; (an application of buffed-on paste wax over several coats of shellac) is often regarded as a beautiful, if fragile, finish for hardwood floors. Luthiers still use shellac to &quot;French polish&quot; fine acoustic stringed instruments, but it has been replaced by synthetic plastic lacquers and varnishes in many workshops, especially high-volume production environments.

Shellac dissolved in alcohol, typically more dilute than as used in French polish, is now commonly sold as &quot;sanding sealer&quot; by several companies. It is used to seal wooden surfaces, often as preparation for a final more durable finish; it reduces the amount of final coating required by reducing its absorption into the wood.

== Properties ==

Shellac is a natural bioadhesive polymer and is chemically similar to synthetic polymers. It can thus be considered a natural form of plastic.
With a melting point of , it can be classed as a thermoplastic used to bind wood flour, the mixture can be moulded with heat and pressure.

Shellac scratches more easily than most lacquers and varnishes, and application is more labour-intensive, which is why it has been replaced by plastic in most areas. Shellac is much softer than Urushi lacquer, for instance, which is far superior with regard to both chemical and mechanical resistance. But damaged shellac can easily be touched up with another coat of shellac (unlike polyurethane, which chemically cures to a solid) because the new coat merges with and bonds to the existing coat(s).

Shellac is soluble in alkaline solutions of ammonia, sodium borate, sodium carbonate, and sodium hydroxide, and also in various organic solvents. When dissolved in alcohol (typically denatured ethanol) for application, shellac yields a coating of good durability and hardness.

Upon mild hydrolysis shellac gives a complex mix of aliphatic and alicyclic hydroxy acids and their polymers that varies in exact composition depending upon the source of the shellac and the season of collection. The major component of the aliphatic component is aleuritic acid, whereas the main alicyclic component is shellolic acid.

Shellac is UV-resistant, and does not darken as it ages (though the wood under it may do so, as in the case of pine).

== History ==

The earliest written evidence of shellac goes back years, but shellac is known to have been used earlier. According to the ancient Indian epic poem, the Mahabharata, an entire palace was coated with dried shellac.

Shellac was uncommonly used as a dyestuff for as long as there was a trade with the East Indies. According to Merrifield, shellac was first used as a binding agent in artist&#x27;s pigments in Spain in the year 1220. 

The use of overall paint or varnish decoration on large pieces of furniture was first popularised in Venice (then later throughout Italy). There are a number of 13th-century references to painted or varnished cassone, often dowry cassone that were made deliberately impressive as part of dynastic marriages. The definition of varnish is not always clear, but it seems to have been a spirit varnish based on gum benjamin or mastic, both traded around the Mediterranean. At some time, shellac began to be used as well. An article from the &quot;Journal of the American Institute of Conservation&quot; describes using infrared spectroscopy to identify shellac coating on a 16th-century cassone. This is also the period in history where &quot;varnisher&quot; was identified as a distinct trade, separate from both carpenter and artist.

Another use for shellac is sealing wax. The widespread use of shellac seals in Europe dates back to the 17th century, thanks to the increasing trade with India.

== Uses ==
=== Historical ===
In the early- and mid-twentieth century, orange shellac was used as a one-product finish (combination stain and varnish-like topcoat) on decorative wood panelling used on walls and ceilings in homes, particularly in the US. In the American South, use of knotty pine plank panelling covered with orange shellac was once as common in new construction as drywall is today. It was also often used on kitchen cabinets and hardwood floors, prior to the advent of polyurethane.

Until the advent of vinyl, most gramophone records were pressed from shellac compounds. From 1921 to 1928, tons of shellac were used to create 260 million records for Europe. In the 1930s, it was estimated that half of all shellac was used for gramophone records. Use of shellac for records was common until the 1950s and continued into the 1970s in some non-Western countries, as well as for some children&#x27;s records.

Until recent advances in technology, shellac (French polish) was the only glue used in the making of ballet dancers&#x27; pointe shoes, to stiffen the box (toe area) to support the dancer en pointe. Many manufacturers of pointe shoes still use the traditional techniques, and many dancers use shellac to revive a softening pair of shoes.

Shellac was historically used as a protective coating on paintings.

Sheets of Braille were coated with shellac to help protect them from wear due to being read by hand.

Shellac was used from the mid-nineteenth century to produce small moulded goods such as picture frames, boxes, toilet articles, jewelry, inkwells and even dentures. Advances in plastics have rendered shellac obsolete as a moulding compound.

Shellac (both orange and white varieties) was used both in the field and laboratory to glue and stabilise dinosaur bones until about the mid-1960s. While effective at the time, the long-term negative effects of shellac (being organic in nature) on dinosaur bones and other fossils is debated, and shellac is very rarely used by professional conservators and fossil preparators today.

Shellac was used for fixing inductor, motor, generator and transformer windings. It was applied directly to single-layer windings in an alcohol solution. For multi-layer windings, the whole coil was submerged in shellac solution, then drained and placed in a warm location to allow the alcohol to evaporate. The shellac locked the wire turns in place, provided extra insulation, prevented movement and vibration and reduced buzz and hum. In motors and generators it also helps transfer force generated by magnetic attraction and repulsion from the windings to the rotor or armature. In more recent times, shellac has been replaced in these applications by synthetic resins such as polyester resin. Some applications use shellac mixed with other natural or synthetic resins, such as pine resin or phenol-formaldehyde resin, of which Bakelite is the best known, for electrical use. Mixed with other resins, barium sulfate, calcium carbonate, zinc sulfide, aluminium oxide and/or cuprous carbonate (malachite), shellac forms a component of heat-cured capping cement used to fasten the caps or bases to the bulbs of electric lamps.

=== Current uses ===
It is the central element of the traditional &quot;French polish&quot; method of finishing furniture, fine string instruments, and pianos.

Shellac, being edible, is used as a glazing agent on pills (see excipient) and sweets, in the form of pharmaceutical glaze (or, &quot;confectioner&#x27;s glaze&quot;). Because of its acidic properties (resisting stomach acids), shellac-coated pills may be used for a timed enteric or colonic release. Shellac is used as a &#x27;wax&#x27; coating on citrus fruit to prolong its shelf/storage life. It is also used to replace the natural wax of the apple, which is removed during the cleaning process. When used for this purpose, it has the food additive E number E904.

Shellac is an odour and stain blocker and so is often used as the base of &quot;all-purpose&quot; primers. Although its durability against abrasives and many common solvents is not very good, shellac provides an excellent barrier against water vapour penetration. Shellac-based primers are an effective sealant to control odours associated with fire damage.

Shellac has traditionally been used as a dye for cotton and, especially, silk cloth in Thailand, particularly in the north-eastern region. It yields a range of warm colours from pale yellow through to dark orange-reds and dark ochre. Naturally dyed silk cloth, including that using shellac, is widely available in the rural northeast, especially in Ban Khwao District, Chaiyaphum province. The Thai name for the insect and the substance is &quot;khrang&quot; (Thai: ครั่ง).

====Wood finish====

Wood finishing is one of the most traditional and still popular uses of shellac mixed with solvents or alcohol. This dissolved shellac liquid, applied to a piece of wood, is an evaporative finish: the alcohol of the shellac mixture evaporates, leaving behind a protective film.

Shellac as wood finish is natural and non-toxic in its pure form. A finish made of shellac is UV-resistant. For water-resistance and durability, it does not keep up with synthetic finishing products.

Because it is compatible with most other finishes, shellac is also used as a barrier or primer coat on wood to prevent the bleeding of resin or pigments into the final finish, or to prevent wood stain from blotching.

==== Other ====
Shellac is used:
* in the tying of artificial flies for trout and salmon, where the shellac was used to seal all trimmed materials at the head of the fly.
* in combination with wax for preserving and imparting a shine to citrus fruits, such as lemons and oranges.
* in dental technology, where it is occasionally used in the production of custom impression trays and temporary denture baseplate production.
* as a binder in India ink.
* for bicycles, as a protective and decorative coating for bicycle handlebar tape, and as a hard-drying adhesive for tubular tyres, particularly for track racing.
* for re-attaching ink sacs when restoring vintage fountain pens, the orange variety preferably.
* applied as a coating with either a standard or modified Huon-Stuehrer nozzle, can be economically micro-sprayed onto various smooth candies, such as chocolate coated peanuts. Irregularities on the surface of the product being sprayed may result in the formation of unsightly aggregates (&quot;lac-aggs&quot;) which precludes the use of this technique on foods such as walnuts or raisins.
* for fixing pads to the key-cups of woodwind instruments.
* for luthierie applications, to bind wood fibres down and prevent tear out on the soft spruce soundboards.
* to stiffen and impart water-resistance to felt hats, for wood finishing and as a constituent of &quot;gossamer&quot; (or &quot;goss&quot; for short), a cheesecloth fabric coated in shellac and ammonia solution used in the shell of traditional silk top and riding hats.
* for mounting insects, in the form of a gel adhesive mixture composed of 75% ethyl alcohol.
* as a binder in the fabrication of abrasive wheels, imparting flexibility and smoothness not found in vitrified (ceramic bond) wheels. &#x27;Elastic&#x27; bonded wheels typically contain plaster of paris, yielding a stronger bond when mixed with shellac; the mixture of dry plaster powder, abrasive (e.g. corundum/aluminium oxide Al2O3), and shellac are heated and the mixture pressed in a mould.
* in fireworks pyrotechnic compositions as a low-temperature fuel, where it allows the creation of pure &#x27;greens&#x27; and &#x27;blues&#x27;- colours difficult to achieve with other fuel mixes.
* in jewellery; shellac is often applied to the top of a &#x27;shellac stick&#x27; in order to hold small, complex, objects. By melting the shellac, the jeweller can press the object (such as a stone setting mount) into it. The shellac, once cool, can firmly hold the object, allowing it to be manipulated with tools.
* in watchmaking, due to its low melting temperature (about ), shellac is used in most mechanical movements to adjust and adhere pallet stones to the pallet fork and secure the roller jewel to the roller table of the balance wheel. Also for securing small parts to a &#x27;wax chuck&#x27; (faceplate) in a watchmakers&#x27; lathe.
* in the early twentieth century, it was used to protect some military rifle stocks.
* in Jelly Belly jelly beans, in combination with beeswax to give them their final buff and polish.
* in modern traditional archery, shellac is one of the hot-melt glue/resin products used to attach arrowheads to wooden or bamboo arrow shafts.
* in alcohol solution as sanding sealer, widely sold to seal sanded surfaces, typically wooden surfaces before a final coat of a more durable finish. Similar to French polish but more dilute.
* as a topcoat in nail polish (although not all nail polish sold as &quot;shellac&quot; contains shellac, and some nail polish not labelled in this way does).
* in sculpture, to seal plaster and in conjunction with wax or oil-soaps, to act as a barrier during mold-making processes.
* as a dilute solution in the sealing of harpsichord soundboards, protecting them from dust and buffering humidity changes while maintaining a bare-wood appearance.
* as a waterproofing agent for leather (e.g., for the soles of figure skate boots).
* as a way for ballet dancers to harden their pointe shoes, making them last longer.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Polymers
* Rosin

== References ==

== External links ==
* Shellac.net US shellac vendor – properties and uses of dewaxed and non-dewaxed shellac
* The Story of Shellac (history)
* DIYinfo.org&#x27;s Shellac Wiki, practical information on everything to do with shellac
* Reactive Pyrolysis-Gas Chromatography of Shellac 
* Shellac A short introduction to the origin of shellac, the history of Japanning and French polishing, and how to conserve and repair these finishes sympathetically
* Shellac Application By Smith &amp; Rodger</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q429659" start="0" end="7" title="Shellac" label="Shellac"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="16" end="21" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q545269" start="45" end="52" title="Kerria lacca" label="lac bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716536" start="137" end="151" title="aleuritic acid" label="aleuritic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="264" end="271" title="ethanol" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q334582" start="339" end="344" title="glazing agent" label="glaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q119172976" start="349" end="360" title="wood finish" label="wood finish"/>
<link wikidata="Q380866" start="399" end="405" title="primer (paint)" label="primer"/>
<link wikidata="Q142274" start="407" end="414" title="sanding" label="sanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427914" start="415" end="422" title="sealant" label="sealant"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="424" end="430" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q485537" start="440" end="445" title="odour" label="odour"/>
<link wikidata="Q16060211" start="455" end="460" title="wood stain" label="stain"/>
<link wikidata="Q900581" start="466" end="476" title="Gloss (material appearance)" label="high-gloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q81683" start="477" end="484" title="varnish" label="varnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="556" end="566" title="electrical insulation" label="insulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="601" end="611" title="Phonograph" label="Phonograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="623" end="640" title="gramophone record" label="gramophone record"/>
<link wikidata="Q146368" start="701" end="706" title="polyvinyl chloride" label="vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11236878" start="877" end="899" title="nitrocellulose lacquer" label="nitrocellulose lacquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118890" start="1020" end="1045" title="resinous glaze" label="confectioner&amp;#x27;s glaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="1096" end="1108" title="citrus fruit" label="citrus fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15112450" start="1186" end="1189" title="Lac (resin)" label="lac"/>
<link wikidata="Q204826" start="1199" end="1213" title="partial calque" label="partial calque"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1217" end="1223" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="1319" end="1326" title="Romance languages" label="Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1409" end="1415" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q184453" start="1476" end="1480" title="Bark (botany)" label="bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q545269" start="1526" end="1538" title="Kerria lacca" label="Kerria lacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434347" start="1570" end="1579" title="Kerriidae" label="Kerriidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="1761" end="1768" title="Cocoon (silk)" label="cocoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="1852" end="1863" title="Superfamily (zoology)" label="superfamily"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1889" end="1898" title="cochineal#Dye" label="cochineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15112450" start="1967" end="1975" title="Lac (resin)" label="sticklac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700468" start="2087" end="2098" title="Schleichera" label="Schleichera"/>
<link wikidata="Q949243" start="2219" end="2223" title="lakh" label="lakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143810" start="2241" end="2264" title="Indian numbering system" label="Indian numbering system"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="2835" end="2848" title="ethyl alcohol" label="ethyl alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741056" start="5479" end="5488" title="cabinetry" label="cabinetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q146322" start="5683" end="5695" title="polyurethane" label="polyurethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q49094494" start="5805" end="5816" title="wainscoting" label="wainscoting"/>
<link wikidata="Q762707" start="6267" end="6274" title="Luthier" label="Luthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040889" start="6303" end="6316" title="French polish" label="French polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914690" start="6872" end="6883" title="bioadhesive" label="bioadhesive"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="6884" end="6891" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="6985" end="6992" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q380677" start="7043" end="7056" title="thermoplastic" label="thermoplastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q816713" start="7070" end="7080" title="wood flour" label="wood flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055732" start="7101" end="7108" title="moulding (process)" label="moulded"/>
<link wikidata="Q28933284" start="7328" end="7334" title="Urushi" label="Urushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="7647" end="7654" title="solubility" label="soluble"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="7658" end="7666" title="alkaline" label="alkaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="7680" end="7687" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122152" start="7689" end="7702" title="sodium borate" label="sodium borate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190227" start="7704" end="7720" title="sodium carbonate" label="sodium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="7726" end="7742" title="sodium hydroxide" label="sodium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q146505" start="7764" end="7779" title="organic solvent" label="organic solvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q855523" start="7819" end="7836" title="Denatured alcohol" label="denatured ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="7924" end="7934" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192596" start="7966" end="7975" title="aliphatic" label="aliphatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q155368" start="7980" end="7989" title="alicyclic" label="alicyclic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10528967" start="7990" end="8003" title="hydroxy acids" label="hydroxy acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716536" start="8177" end="8191" title="aleuritic acid" label="aleuritic acid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8233" end="8247" title="shellolic acid" label="shellolic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="8537" end="8548" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q213137" start="8683" end="8694" title="East Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q945313" start="9027" end="9034" title="cassone" label="cassone"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="9042" end="9047" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9201" end="9215" title="Varnish#Shellac" label="spirit varnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q793163" start="9225" end="9237" title="Benzoin resin" label="gum benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q318367" start="9241" end="9247" title="Mastic (plant resin)" label="mastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q70906" start="9433" end="9454" title="infrared spectroscopy" label="infrared spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505624" start="9678" end="9689" title="sealing wax" label="sealing wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016" start="9755" end="9767" title="17th century" label="17th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="10074" end="10088" title="American South" label="American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="10104" end="10108" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49094494" start="10115" end="10124" title="panelling" label="panelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="10195" end="10202" title="drywall" label="drywall"/>
<link wikidata="Q146322" start="10300" end="10312" title="polyurethane" label="polyurethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q146368" start="10335" end="10340" title="Polyvinyl chloride" label="vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="10347" end="10365" title="gramophone records" label="gramophone records"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="10559" end="10577" title="Phonograph record" label="gramophone records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040889" start="10785" end="10798" title="French polish" label="French polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q41425" start="10840" end="10846" title="ballet" label="ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q908570" start="10861" end="10872" title="pointe shoe" label="pointe shoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="11157" end="11164" title="Braille" label="Braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q617224" start="11216" end="11220" title="wear" label="wear"/>
<link wikidata="Q860792" start="11337" end="11350" title="picture frame" label="picture frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q188075" start="11353" end="11356" title="box" label="box"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="11377" end="11384" title="jewelry" label="jewelry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160546" start="11386" end="11393" title="inkwell" label="inkwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q143567" start="11404" end="11412" title="dentures" label="dentures"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="11426" end="11434" title="plastics" label="plastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325" start="11904" end="11912" title="inductor" label="inductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q72313" start="11914" end="11919" title="Electric motor" label="motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131502" start="11921" end="11930" title="Electrical generator" label="generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="11935" end="11946" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q557042" start="12449" end="12457" title="armature (electrical engineering)" label="armature"/>
<link wikidata="Q146559" start="12557" end="12572" title="polyester resin" label="polyester resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="12658" end="12668" title="pine resin" label="pine resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="12679" end="12691" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q146578" start="12708" end="12716" title="Bakelite" label="Bakelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q309038" start="12781" end="12795" title="barium sulfate" label="barium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="12797" end="12814" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q204952" start="12816" end="12828" title="zinc sulfide" label="zinc sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="12830" end="12845" title="aluminium oxide" label="aluminium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q164411" start="12872" end="12881" title="malachite" label="malachite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040889" start="13077" end="13090" title="French polish" label="French polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q119172976" start="13107" end="13116" title="wood finishing" label="finishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798603" start="13133" end="13150" title="string instrument" label="string instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="13157" end="13162" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q334582" start="13202" end="13215" title="glazing agent" label="glazing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q902638" start="13230" end="13239" title="excipient" label="excipient"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118890" start="13268" end="13288" title="pharmaceutical glaze" label="pharmaceutical glaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811185" start="13439" end="13446" title="Enteric coating" label="enteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="13613" end="13618" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q189567" start="13705" end="13718" title="food additive" label="food additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="13719" end="13727" title="E number" label="E number"/>
<link wikidata="Q475114" start="14443" end="14461" title="Ban Khwao District" label="Ban Khwao District"/>
<link wikidata="Q275377" start="14463" end="14482" title="Chaiyaphum province" label="Chaiyaphum province"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="15173" end="15177" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="15205" end="15210" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="15214" end="15222" title="pigments" label="pigments"/>
<link wikidata="Q16060211" start="15260" end="15270" title="wood stain" label="wood stain"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="15525" end="15538" title="Citrus" label="citrus fruits"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="15548" end="15553" title="lemon" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="15559" end="15565" title="Orange (fruit)" label="orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q12128" start="15573" end="15590" title="dentistry" label="dental technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981547" start="15728" end="15737" title="India ink" label="India ink"/>
<link wikidata="Q11442" start="15745" end="15753" title="bicycles" label="bicycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148375" start="15798" end="15815" title="bicycle handlebar" label="bicycle handlebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411619" start="15856" end="15869" title="tubular tyres" label="tubular tyres"/>
<link wikidata="Q221635" start="15888" end="15900" title="track cycling" label="track racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192401" start="15953" end="15965" title="fountain pen" label="fountain pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q181247" start="16426" end="16434" title="woodwind" label="woodwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q762707" start="16454" end="16461" title="luthier" label="luthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="16536" end="16542" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="16751" end="16758" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110304" start="16806" end="16809" title="top hats" label="top"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931980" start="16956" end="16970" title="abrasive wheel" label="abrasive wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q274988" start="17108" end="17124" title="plaster of paris" label="plaster of paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q131777" start="17226" end="17234" title="corundum" label="corundum"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="17235" end="17250" title="aluminium oxide" label="aluminium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="17323" end="17332" title="fireworks" label="fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="17521" end="17530" title="jewellery" label="jewellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q157798" start="17839" end="17850" title="watchmaking" label="watchmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q557067" start="17984" end="17995" title="pallet fork" label="pallet fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928854" start="18051" end="18064" title="balance wheel" label="balance wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q124072" start="18236" end="18241" title="rifle" label="rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q522497" start="18255" end="18266" title="Jelly Belly" label="Jelly Belly"/>
<link wikidata="Q143739" start="18300" end="18307" title="beeswax" label="beeswax"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="18374" end="18381" title="archery" label="archery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340237" start="18405" end="18424" title="Hot-melt adhesive" label="hot-melt glue/resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643900" start="18449" end="18458" title="arrowhead" label="arrowhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q45922" start="18480" end="18485" title="arrow" label="arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q81683" start="18519" end="18533" title="sanding sealer" label="sanding sealer"/>
<link wikidata="Q223807" start="18704" end="18715" title="nail polish" label="nail polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q223807" start="18734" end="18745" title="nail polish" label="nail polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q223807" start="18801" end="18812" title="nail polish" label="nail polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q274988" start="18869" end="18876" title="plaster" label="plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="19010" end="19021" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q4483467" start="19197" end="19209" title="figure skate" label="figure skate"/>
<link wikidata="Q908570" start="19264" end="19276" title="pointe shoes" label="pointe shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="19335" end="19343" title="Polymer" label="Polymers"/>
<link wikidata="Q138937" start="19346" end="19351" title="Rosin" label="Rosin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54831" wikidata="Q5168740" url="?curid=54831" title="Copper Island">
<text>Copper Island is a local name given to the northern part of the Keweenaw Peninsula (projecting northeastward into Lake Superior at the western end of the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, United States of America), separated from the rest of the Keweenaw Peninsula by Portage Lake and the Keweenaw Waterway.

== Geography ==
The area was &quot;isolated&quot; by dredging in 1859 and construction in the 1860s of a ship canal across an isthmus of the Keweenaw Peninsula from Portage Lake—on the east side of the Keweenaw Peninsula—to Lake Superior on the west. The ship canal is wide and deep. The resulting &quot;island&quot; was called &quot;Kuparisaari&quot; (meaning &quot;Copper Island&quot;) by Finnish, Irish, and French/French Canadian settlers in the area. However, neither the United States Geological Survey nor the state of Michigan identify this area as an island or use this name. Isle Royale is the largest naturally isolated island in Lake Superior; considered as an island, Copper Island would be the largest, with an area of around . It has a population around 21,500.

== History ==
Historically, &quot;Kuparisaari&quot; (&#x27;Copper Island&#x27;) was used to mean the Keweenaw north of Portage Lake, but more generically the copper country of the Upper Peninsula. Inhabitants of the area wryly claimed &quot;that they were outside the American mainland. In practical usage, however, the term included towns such as Oskar, Atlantic, Baltic, South Range, Houghton, Dodgeville and Hurontown&quot; all of which were south of Portage Lake. Nevertheless, &quot;unquestionably&quot; Finns in those locales considered themselves to be &quot;Copper Islanders&quot;. As the foregoing source indicates, &quot;Copper Island&quot; has sometimes been used as a sobriquet for Michigan&#x27;s &quot;copper country.&quot;

But in a larger sense, &quot;Kuparisaari&quot; was an amalgam of geographic location and cultural identity, particularly for the Finns. As one scholarly source notes:

Finnish immigration to Michigan’s copper district grew to become the most populous ethnic group with an enduring cultural identity. Kuparisaari, “copper island,” went beyond the Finnish immigrant identification of the island that comprises the northern half of the Keweenaw Peninsula to a symbolic island of landing, an Ellis Island. Michigan’s Copper Country is recognized as focal to Finnish immigration to America, the birthplace of many Finnish-American institutions religious, political and educational. This “island” includes both settlements in growing industrial urban communities like the Quincy, Calumet &amp; Hecla and Champion mining {&quot;See,&quot; Copper Range Company} settlements, and cleared forestland for traditional Finnish agriculture as in Toivola, Tapiola, Elo, Pelkie, and Waasa; Finns settled north and south of the Portage Waterway that bisects the peninsula. Perhaps more than any other immigrant group, the Finnish communities in the district were bisected into divisions of politics and faith. The Finns who immigrated to the copper mining district held to a pietistic Laestadian (Apostolic) Lutheran belief, to the state-sanctioned Lutheranism of Finland (Suomi Synod) or rejected faith altogether. Within these divides of conscience of faith was a wide political spectrum: conservative to liberal adherents, resolute temperance advocates and active radical socialists. The social and economic conditions that emigrants left in northern Scandinavia and the Duchy of Finland influenced these allegiances and beliefs.

== Communities and transportation ==
The principal towns on the Copper Island end of Keweenaw Peninsula are Hancock and Calumet. The area is connected to the rest of the Upper Peninsula by the Portage Lake Lift Bridge, the latest in a series of bridges between Hancock and Houghton. The bridge crosses the Portage Canal.

US 41 crosses this bridge. It enters Michigan at Menominee and goes north to its terminus just east of Copper Harbor at the far eastern tip of the peninsula.

== Modern usage of the name ==
Copper Island is the core that the Keweenaw Water Trail wraps around. It is a designated loop route (which eliminates any need to use a shuttle or spot two vehicles) around and through the Keweenaw Peninsula for canoes and sea kayaks. The Keweenaw Waterway is central to it, crossing the peninsula.

The &#x27;Copper Island Classic&#x27; is an ice hockey tournament contested annually between Hancock Central High School and Calumet High School. Such local usage still persists, and there are many business in the area that use it.

&quot;The Race for Copper Island&quot; (New York: Benziger Bros., 1905) is a novel written by Henry Sanislaus Spaulding (1865–1934) that involves the area.

== Alternate use ==
The phrase &quot;Copper Island&quot; was also used, especially in the 18th century, to describe a possibly mythical island in Lake Superior where there is an abundance of copper sitting on the surface of the land. While some scholars believe this was a reference to Isle Royale, the &quot;island,&quot; because of its abundance of copper, could also have been the northern Keweenaw Peninsula, especially given the presence of vast quantities of native copper in the region.

== See also ==
* Copper Country
* Keweenaw National Historical Park
* Door Peninsula

== References ==

== Further reading ==
*
== External links ==
*Exploring Houghton and Hancock in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan
*In-group Finnish Place Names - Michigan
*Keweenaw Ethnic Groups - MTU Archives and Copper Country Historical Collections, J. Robert Van Pelt Library
*Keweenaw Time Traveler an interactive digital historical atlas of the Copper Country</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5168740" start="0" end="13" title="Copper Island" label="Copper Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q12430" start="64" end="82" title="Keweenaw Peninsula" label="Keweenaw Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066" start="114" end="127" title="Lake Superior" label="Lake Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338" start="154" end="181" title="Upper Peninsula of Michigan" label="Upper Peninsula of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="183" end="207" title="United States" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397950" start="263" end="275" title="Portage Lake (Keweenaw)" label="Portage Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397950" start="284" end="301" title="Keweenaw Waterway" label="Keweenaw Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q93267" start="430" end="437" title="isthmus" label="isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="695" end="702" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="704" end="709" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="715" end="721" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="722" end="737" title="French Canadian" label="French Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="781" end="812" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q163503" start="889" end="900" title="Isle Royale" label="Isle Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q387163" start="1240" end="1254" title="copper country" label="copper country"/>
<link wikidata="Q170284" start="1591" end="1596" title="Finns" label="Finns"/>
<link wikidata="Q59577332" start="1762" end="1771" title="sobriquet" label="sobriquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q202175" start="2309" end="2321" title="Ellis Island" label="Ellis Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272158" start="2587" end="2593" title="Quincy Mine" label="Quincy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024102" start="2595" end="2614" title="Calumet and Hecla Mining Company" label="Calumet &amp;amp; Hecla"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257641" start="2619" end="2634" title="Champion Mining Company" label="Champion mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168765" start="2653" end="2673" title="Copper Range Company" label="Copper Range Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813417" start="2753" end="2760" title="Toivola, Michigan" label="Toivola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684655" start="2762" end="2769" title="Tapiola, Michigan" label="Tapiola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2771" end="2774" title="Elo, Michigan" label="Elo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161494" start="2776" end="2782" title="Pelkie, Michigan" label="Pelkie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2788" end="2793" title="Waasa, Michigan" label="Waasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397950" start="2832" end="2848" title="Portage Waterway" label="Portage Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q730475" start="3089" end="3120" title="Laestadianism" label="Laestadian (Apostolic) Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379849" start="3177" end="3188" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland" label="Suomi Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="3478" end="3494" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Duchy of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12435" start="3646" end="3653" title="Hancock, Michigan" label="Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645447" start="3658" end="3665" title="Calumet, Michigan" label="Calumet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231422" start="3731" end="3755" title="Portage Lake Lift Bridge" label="Portage Lake Lift Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12435" start="3799" end="3806" title="Hancock, Michigan" label="Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12429" start="3811" end="3819" title="Houghton, Michigan" label="Houghton"/>
<link wikidata="Q449988" start="3860" end="3865" title="U.S. Route 41 in Michigan" label="US 41"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280" start="3879" end="3885" title="bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635319" start="3909" end="3918" title="Menominee, Michigan" label="Menominee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168735" start="3963" end="3976" title="Copper Harbor, Michigan" label="Copper Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="4007" end="4016" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4139" end="4143" title=":wikt:loop" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397950" start="4289" end="4306" title="Keweenaw Waterway" label="Keweenaw Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="4394" end="4404" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="4867" end="4871" title="myth" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q583353" start="5205" end="5218" title="native copper" label="native copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q387163" start="5252" end="5266" title="Copper Country" label="Copper Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q163481" start="5269" end="5302" title="Keweenaw National Historical Park" label="Keweenaw National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q681471" start="5305" end="5319" title="Door Peninsula" label="Door Peninsula"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54832" wikidata="Q1076932" url="?curid=54832" title="Nancy Drew">
<text>Nancy Drew is a fictional character appearing in several mystery book series, movies, video games, and TV shows as a teenage amateur sleuth. The books are ghostwritten by a number of authors and published under the collective pseudonym Carolyn Keene. Created by the publisher Edward Stratemeyer as the female counterpart to his Hardy Boys series, the character first appeared in 1930 in the &quot;Nancy Drew Mystery Stories&quot; series, which lasted until 2003 and consisted of 175 novels.

Over the decades, the character has evolved in response to changes in American culture and tastes. Beginning in 1959, the books were extensively revised and shortened, partly to lower the printing costs, with arguable success. In the revision process, the heroine&#x27;s original character was changed to be less unruly and violent. In the 1980s, an older and more professional Nancy emerged in a new series, &quot;The Nancy Drew Files&quot;, that included romantic subplots for the sleuth. Launched in 2004, the &quot;Nancy Drew: Girl Detective&quot; series features Nancy driving a hybrid electric vehicle and using a cell phone. In 2012, the &quot;Girl Detective&quot; series ended, and a new series, &quot;Nancy Drew Diaries&quot;, was launched in 2013. Illustrations of the character evolved over time to reflect contemporary styles.

The &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; franchise has been adapted into other forms of media with varied success. As of April 2020, the character has been adapted into six feature films, three television series, four television pilots, 34 video games produced by the brand HeR Interactive, and two different comic book series. Film and television adaptations of the character have been met with mixed reviews, while the video games by HeR Interactive have often been lauded. The character proves continuously popular worldwide; at least 80 million copies of the books have been sold, and the books have been translated into over 45 languages.

A cultural icon, Nancy Drew is cited as a formative influence by several women, from Supreme Court Justices Sandra Day O&#x27;Connor and Sonia Sotomayor to former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and former First Lady Laura Bush. Feminist literary critics have analyzed the character&#x27;s enduring appeal, arguing variously that Nancy Drew is a mythic heroine, an expression of wish fulfillment, or an embodiment of contradictory ideas about femininity.

== Characteristics ==
Nancy Drew is a fictional amateur detective. She is originally depicted as a blonde-haired and blue-eyed 16-year-old high school graduate, but in later editions is rewritten as a titian-haired and blue-eyed 18-year-old graduate and detective. In the series, she lives in the fictional town of River Heights with her father, attorney Carson Drew, and their housekeeper, Hannah Gruen. Carson is very successful in his job, and is often called away on business for days or even weeks at a time, leaving Nancy on her own—and when this happens, he is always shown to have complete faith and trust in Nancy&#x27;s ability to look after herself, and to solve mysteries. Nancy for her part is very proud of her father and his work, and is unshakable in her respect and admiration for him. She loses her mother at the age of ten in the original versions and at the age of three in the later version. This loss is reflected in her early independence—running a household since the age of ten with Hannah clearly identified as a servant in the earlier series, who is however later referred to as a surrogate parent. As a teenager, she spends her time solving mysteries; some she stumbles upon, and some begin as cases of her father&#x27;s.

In the opening volumes, Nancy&#x27;s closest friend is the somewhat flighty but fun-loving Helen Corning, but this character is quickly supplanted by the fifth book by her two long-term closest friends, cousins Elizabeth &quot;Bess&quot; Marvin and George Fayne. Bess is delicate and feminine, while George is a tomboy. The two are very much opposites, although both are both loyal and devoted friends of Nancy, and usually end up assisting her in the solving of whatever mystery is at hand—Bess much more so than Helen, who is only glimpsed very, very occasionally in later volumes. Nancy is also occasionally joined by her boyfriend Ned Nickerson, a student at Emerson College, who is introduced in the seventh book.

Nancy is often described as a super girl. In the words of Bobbie Ann Mason, she is &quot;as immaculate and self-possessed as a Miss America on tour. She is as cool as a Rock Star and as sweet as Betty Crocker.&quot; Nancy is well-off, attractive, and amazingly talented:

Nancy never lacks money, and in later volumes of the series often travels to faraway locations, such as France in &quot;The Mystery of the 99 Steps&quot; (1966), Lima in &quot;The Clue in the Crossword Cipher&quot; (1967), Nairobi in &quot;The Spider Sapphire Mystery&quot; (1968), Istanbul in &quot;The Mysterious Mannequin&quot; (1970), Austria in &quot;Captive Witness&quot; (1981), Japan in &quot;The Runaway Bride&quot; (1994), Costa Rica in &quot;Scarlet Macaw Scandal&quot; (2004), and Alaska in &quot;Curse of The Arctic Star&quot; (2013). Nancy is also able to travel freely about the United States, thanks in part to her car, which is a blue roadster in the original series and a blue convertible in the later books. Despite the trouble and presumed expense to which she goes to solve mysteries, Nancy never accepts monetary compensation; however, by implication, her expenses are often paid by a client of her father&#x27;s as part of the costs of solving one of his cases.

The character of Nancy Drew has gone through many permutations over the years. The Nancy Drew mystery series was revised beginning in 1959, with commentators agreeing that Nancy&#x27;s character changed significantly from the original Nancy of the books written in the 1930s and 1940s. Observers also often see a difference between the Nancy Drew of the original series, the Nancy of &quot;The Nancy Drew Files&quot;, and the Nancy of &quot;Girl Detective&quot; series. Nevertheless, some find no significant difference among the permutations of Nancy Drew, finding Nancy to be simply a good role model for girls.

Despite revisions, &quot;What hasn&#x27;t changed, however, are [Nancy&#x27;s] basic values, her goals, her humility, and her magical gift for having at least nine lives. For more than six decades, her essence has remained intact.&quot; Nancy is a &quot;teen detective queen&quot; who &quot;offers girl readers something more than action-packed adventure: she gives them something original. Convention has it that girls are passive, respectful, and emotional, but with the energy of a girl shot out of a cannon, Nancy bends conventions and acts out every girl&#x27;s fantasies of power.&quot;

Other commentators see Nancy as &quot;a paradox—which may be why feminists can laud her as a formative &#x27;girl power&#x27; icon and conservatives can love her well-scrubbed middle-class values.&quot;

== Creation ==

The character was conceived by Edward Stratemeyer, founder of the Stratemeyer Syndicate. In 1926, Stratemeyer created the Hardy Boys series (although the first volumes were not published until 1927), which was such a success that he decided on a similar series for girls, featuring an amateur girl detective as the heroine. While Stratemeyer believed that a woman&#x27;s place was in the home, he was aware that the Hardy Boys books were popular with girl readers and wished to capitalize on girls&#x27; interest in mysteries by offering a strong female heroine.

Stratemeyer initially pitched the new series to Hardy Boys publishers Grosset &amp; Dunlap as the &quot;Stella Strong Stories,&quot; adding that &quot;they might also be called &#x27;Diana Drew Stories,&#x27; &#x27;Diana Dare Stories,&#x27; &#x27;Nan Nelson Stories,&#x27; &#x27;Nan Drew Stories,&#x27; or &#x27;Helen Hale Stories.&#x27;&quot; Editors at Grosset &amp; Dunlap preferred &quot;Nan Drew&quot; of these options, but decided to lengthen &quot;Nan&quot; to &quot;Nancy&quot;. Stratemeyer accordingly began writing plot outlines and hired Mildred Wirt, later Mildred Wirt Benson, to ghostwrite the first volumes in the series under the pseudonym Carolyn Keene. Subsequent titles have been written by several ghostwriters under the same pseudonym.

The first four titles were published in 1930 and were an immediate success. Exact sales figures are not available for the years before 1979. Still, an indication of the books&#x27; popularity can be seen in a letter that Laura Harris, a Grosset and Dunlap editor, wrote to the Syndicate in 1931: &quot;Can you let us have the manuscript as soon as possible, and no later than July 10? There will only be three or four titles brought out then, and Nancy Drew is one of the most important.&quot;

The 6,000 copies that Macy&#x27;s ordered for the 1933 Christmas season sold out within days. In 1934, &quot; Fortune&quot; featured the Syndicate in a cover story and singled Nancy Drew out for particular attention: &quot;Nancy is the greatest phenomenon among all the fifty-centers. She is a best seller. How she crashed a Valhalla that had been rigidly restricted to the male of her species is a mystery even to her publishers.&quot;

== History ==
=== 1930–1959: Early stories ===

The earliest Nancy Drew books were published as dark-blue hardcovers with the titles stamped in orange lettering with dark-blue outlines and no other images on the cover. The covers went through several changes in the early years: leaving the orange lettering with no outline and adding an orange silhouette of Nancy peering through a magnifying glass; then changing to a lighter blue board with dark blue lettering and silhouette; then changing the position of the title and silhouette on the front with black lettering and a more &quot;modern&quot; silhouette.

Nancy Drew is depicted as an independent-minded 16-year-old who has already completed her high school education (16 was the minimum age for graduation at the time). While the first four books of the series are noted for their strong continuity and sense of passing seasons and time, it is lost throughout the series with changes like Nancy&#x27;s hair color being changed to titian. Her age is changed from 16 to 18 in book 31, &quot;The Ringmaster&#x27;s Secret&quot; (1953), with no in-universe explanation. Affluent (her father is a successful lawyer), she maintains an active social, volunteer, and sleuthing schedule, as well as participating in athletics and the arts, but is never shown as working for a living or acquiring job skills. Nancy is affected neither by the Great Depression—although many of the characters in her early cases need assistance as they are poverty-stricken—nor World War II.

Nancy lives with her lawyer father, Carson Drew, and their housekeeper, Hannah Gruen. Some critics prefer the Nancy of these volumes, largely written by Mildred Benson. Benson is credited with &quot;[breathing]… a feisty spirit into Nancy&#x27;s character.&quot; The original Nancy Drew is sometimes claimed: &quot;to be a lot like [Benson] herself – confident, competent, and totally independent, quite unlike the cardboard character that [Edward] Stratemeyer had outlined.&quot;

This original Nancy is frequently outspoken and authoritative, so much so that Edward Stratemeyer told Benson that the character was &quot;much too flip, and would never be well received.&quot; The editors at Grosset &amp; Dunlap disagreed, but Benson also faced criticism from her next Stratemeyer Syndicate editor, Harriet Adams, who felt that Benson should make Nancy&#x27;s character more &quot;sympathetic, kind-hearted and lovable.&quot; In Benson&#x27;s words, Adams repeatedly asked Benson to &quot;make the sleuth less bold… &#x27;Nancy said&#x27; became &#x27;Nancy said sweetly,&#x27; &#x27;she said kindly,&#x27; and the like, all designed to produce a less abrasive, more caring character.&quot; Many readers and commentators, however, admire Nancy&#x27;s original outspoken character.

A prominent critic of the Nancy Drew character, at least the Nancy of these early Nancy Drew stories, is mystery writer Bobbie Ann Mason. Mason contends that Nancy owes her popularity largely to &quot;the appeal of her high-class advantages.&quot; Mason also criticizes the series for its racism and classism, arguing that Nancy is the upper-class WASP defender of a &quot;fading aristocracy, threatened by the restless lower classes.&quot; Mason further contends that the &quot;most appealing elements of these daredevil girl sleuth adventure books are (secretly) of this kind: tea and fancy cakes, romantic settings, food eaten in quaint places (never a Ho-Jo&#x27;s), delicious pauses that refresh, old-fashioned picnics in the woods, precious jewels, and heirlooms… The word dainty is a subversive affirmation of a feminized universe.&quot; At the bottom, says Mason, the character of Nancy Drew is that of a girl who can be &quot;perfect&quot; because she is &quot;free, white, and sixteen&quot; and whose &quot;stories seem to satisfy two standards – adventure and domesticity. But adventure is the superstructure, domesticity the bedrock.&quot;

Others argue that &quot;Nancy, despite her traditionally feminine attributes, such as good looks, a variety of clothes for all social occasions, and an awareness of good housekeeping, is often praised for her seemingly masculine traits… she operates best independently, has the freedom and money to do as she pleases, and outside of a telephone call or two home, seems to live for solving mysteries rather than participating in family life.&quot;

=== 1959–1985: Continuation of &quot;Mystery Stories,&quot; revisions at Grosset &amp; Dunlap ===
At the insistence of publishers Grosset &amp; Dunlap, the Nancy Drew books were revised in 1959 to make them more modern and eliminate racist stereotypes. Although Harriet Adams felt that these changes were unnecessary, she oversaw a complete overhaul of the series, as well as writing new volumes in keeping with the new guidelines laid down by Grosset &amp; Dunlap.

The series did not so much eliminate racial stereotypes, however, as eliminate non-white characters. For example, in the original version of &quot;The Hidden Window Mystery&quot; (1956), Nancy visits friends in the South whose African-American servant, &quot;lovable old Beulah… serves squabs, sweet potatoes, corn pudding, piping hot biscuits, and strawberry shortcake.&quot; The house mistress waits until Beulah has left the room and then says to Nancy, &quot;I try to make things easier for Beulah, but she insists on cooking and serving everything the old-fashioned way. I must confess, though, that I love it.&quot; In the revised 1975 version, Beulah is changed to Anna, a &quot;plump, smiling housekeeper&quot;.

Many other changes were relatively minor. The new books were bound in yellow with color illustrations on the front covers. Nancy&#x27;s age was raised from 16 to 18, her mother was said to have died when Nancy was three, rather than ten, and other small changes were made. Housekeeper Hannah Gruen, sent off to the kitchen in early stories, became less a servant and more a mother surrogate.

Critics saw this Nancy of the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s as an improvement in some ways, a step back in others: &quot;In these new editions, an array of elements had been modified… and most of the more overt elements of racism had been excised. In an often overlooked alteration, however, the tomboyish nature ature of the text&#x27;s title character was also tamed.&quot; Nancy becomes much more respectful of male authority figures in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, leading some to claim that the revised Nancy becomes too agreeable and less distinctive, writing of her, &quot;In the revised books, Nancy is relentlessly upbeat, puts up with her father&#x27;s increasingly protective tendencies, and, when asked if she goes to church in the 1969 &quot;The Clue of the Tapping Heels&quot;, replies, &#x27;As often as I can.&quot;

Harriet Adams continued to oversee the series until she died in 1982. After her death, Adams&#x27; protégés, Nancy Axelrad and Lilo Wuenn, and her three children oversaw the Nancy Drew books and other Stratemeyer Syndicate series production. In 1985, the five sold the Syndicate and all rights to Simon &amp; Schuster. Simon &amp; Schuster turned to book packager Mega-Books for new writers. These books continued to have the characters solve mysteries in the present day while still containing the same basic formula and style of the books during the Syndicate.

=== 1986–1997: &quot;Files&quot;, &quot;Super Mystery&quot;, and &quot;On Campus&quot; ===
In 1985, as the sale of the Stratemeyer Syndicate to Simon &amp; Schuster was finalized, Simon &amp; Schuster wanted to launch a spin-off series that focused on more mature mysteries and incorporated romance into the stories. To test whether this would work, the final two novels before the sale, &quot;The Bluebeard Room&quot; and &quot;The Phantom of Venice&quot;, were used as backdoor pilots for the new series.

The books read are drastically different from the preceding novels of the past 55 years. For example, &quot;The Phantom of Venice&quot; (1985) opens with Nancy wondering in italics, &quot;Am I or am I not in love with Ned Nickerson?&quot; Nancy begins dating other young men and acknowledges sexual desires: &quot;&#x27;I saw [you kissing him]… You don&#x27;t have to apologize to me if some guy turns you on.&#x27; &#x27;Gianni &quot;doesn&#x27;t&quot; turn me on!… Won&#x27;t you please let me explain.&#x27;&quot;

The next year, Simon &amp; Schuster launched the first Nancy Drew spin-off, titled &quot;The Nancy Drew Files&quot;. However, after the above-mentioned two Mystery Stories books, as implied in &quot;The Double Horror of Fenley Place&quot;, Nancy appears to be dating Ned again and the series continues without any reference to Nancy dating other guys in &quot;The Bluebeard Room&quot; or in &quot;The Phantom of Venice&quot;.

The Nancy Drew character in the &quot;Files&quot; series has earned mixed reviews among fans. Some, including sex-positive feminists, contend that Nancy&#x27;s character becomes &quot;more like Mildred Wirt Benson&#x27;s original heroine than any [version] since 1956.&quot; Others criticize the series for its increasing incorporation of romance and &quot;[dilution] of pre-feminist .&quot;

One reviewer noticed, &quot;Millie [Mildred Wirt Benson] purists tend to look askance upon the &quot;Files&quot; series, in which fleeting pecks bestowed on Nancy by her longtime steady, Ned Nickerson, give way to lingering embraces in a Jacuzzi.&quot; Cover art for &quot;Files&quot; titles, such as &quot;Hit and Run Holiday&quot; (1986), reflects these changes; Nancy is often dressed provocatively, in short skirts, shirts that reveal her stomach or cleavage, or a bathing suit. She is often pictured with an attentive, handsome boy in the background and frequently appears aware of and interested in that boy.

The books emphasize character relationships, with Nancy Drew and Ned Nickerson becoming more of an on-off couple and having other love interests that span multiple books. However, at the end of the last book in the series, statements imply that Nancy keeps dating Ned. The end of the book &quot;Murder on Ice&quot; strongly implies that Nancy and Ned engage in sexual intercourse (at the very least, they go into a Jacuzzi together). Nancy also becomes more vulnerable, being often chloroformed into unconsciousness, or defenseless against chokeholds.

Furthermore, the minor thefts of the original books are replaced by murders and murder attempts, and Nancy is frequently in mortal danger. In an extreme example, in the book &quot;Deadly Doubles&quot;, the fate of an entire nation and millions of lives are at stake, a character is tortured and strangled off-screen, and Nancy and her allies are nearly killed on five separate occasions.

The &quot;Files&quot; also launched its spin-off. A crossover spin-off series with &quot;The Hardy Boys&quot;, titled the &quot;Super Mystery&quot; series, began in 1988. These books were in continuity with the similar &quot;Hardy Boys&quot; spin-off, &quot;The Hardy Boys Casefiles&quot;.

In 1995, Nancy Drew finally goes to college in the &quot;Nancy Drew on Campus&quot; series. These books read more similar to soap opera books, such as the &quot;Sweet Valley High&quot; series. The &quot;On Campus&quot; books focus more on romance plots and also center around other characters; the mysteries are merely used as subplots.

By reader request, Nancy broke off her long-term relationship with boyfriend Ned Nickerson in the second volume of the series, &quot;On Her Own&quot; (1995). Similar to the &quot;Files&quot; series, reception for the &quot;On Campus&quot; series was also mixed, with some critics viewing the inclusion of adult themes such as date rape as &quot;unsuccessful&quot;. Carolyn Carpan commented that the series was &quot;more soap opera romance than mystery&quot; and that Nancy &quot;comes across as dumb, missing easy clues she wouldn&#x27;t have missed in previous series&quot;. The series was also criticized for focusing more on romance than on grades or studying, with one critic stating that the series resembled collegiate academic studying in the 1950s, where &quot;women were more interested in pursuing… the &#x27;MRS&#x27; degree.&quot;

In 1997, Simon &amp; Schuster announced a mass cancellation of Nancy Drew and Hardy Boys spin-offs, except for younger children. The &quot;Files&quot; series ran until the end of 1997, while both the &quot;Super Mystery&quot; and &quot;On Campus&quot; series ran until the beginning of 1998.

=== 2003–2012: &quot;Girl Detective&quot; and graphic novels ===

In 2003, publishers Simon &amp; Schuster ended the original Nancy Drew series and began featuring Nancy&#x27;s character in a new mystery series, &quot;Girl Detective&quot;. The Nancy Drew of the &quot;Girl Detective&quot; series drives a hybrid car, uses a mobile phone, and recounts her mysteries in the first person. Since the series is set in the 21st century, several technologies and pop-culture references exist. Many applaud these changes, arguing that Nancy has not changed at all other than learning to use a cell phone. Others praise the series as more realistic; Nancy, these commentators argue, is now a less perfect and therefore more likable being, one whom girls can more easily relate to – a better role model than the old Nancy because she can be emulated, rather than a &quot;prissy automaton of perfection.&quot;

Some, mostly fans, vociferously lament the changes, seeing Nancy as a silly, air-headed girl whose trivial adventures (such as discovering who squished the zucchini in 2004&#x27;s &quot;Without a Trace&quot;) &quot;hold a shallow mirror to a pre-teen&#x27;s world.&quot; Leona Fisher argues that the new series portrays an increasingly white River Heights, partially because &quot;the clumsy first-person narrative voice makes it nearly impossible to interlace external authorial attitudes into the discourse,&quot; while it continues and worsens &quot;the implicitly xenophobic cultural representations of racial, ethnic, and linguistic others&quot; by introducing gratuitous speculations on characters&#x27; national and ethnic origins.

The character is also the heroine of a series of graphic novels, begun in 2005 and produced by Papercutz. The graphic novels are written by Stefan Petrucha and illustrated in manga-style artwork by Sho Murase. The character&#x27;s graphic novel incarnation has been described as &quot;a fun, sassy, modern-day teen who is still hot on the heels of criminals.&quot;

When the 2007 film was released, a non-canon novelization of the movie was written to look like the older books. A new book was written for each of the &quot;Girl Detective&quot; and &quot;Clue Crew&quot; series, which deal with a mystery on a movie set. In 2008, the &quot;Girl Detective&quot; series was re-branded into trilogies with a model on the cover. These mysteries became deeper, with the mystery often spread across three books and multiple culprits. These trilogies also met with negative fan reception due to Nancy&#x27;s constant mistakes, the shortness of the books, and the lack of action. With the new trilogy format, sales began slipping. In 2010, Simon &amp; Schuster cut back from six to four &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; books per year. In December 2011, they announced that the series was canceled along with the Hardy Boys &quot;Undercover Brothers&quot;.

=== 2013–present: &quot;Diaries&quot; ===

With the cancellation of the &quot;Girl Detective&quot; series, the &quot;Diaries&quot; series began in 2013, following a similar format to its predecessor with first person narration and references to modern pop culture and technology. The books, written under the Carolyn Keene pseudonym, are targeted to readers aged 8–12 and primarily follow Nancy, with her friends Bess and George, solving both violent and nonviolent crimes. There are 26 books in the series, including one holiday special published in 2018 that also features The Hardy Boys. Like in the &quot;Girl Detective&quot; series, &quot;Diaries&quot; features themes of environmentalism.

This is the first series to be available in three different formats: paperback, hardcover (with dust jacket), and eBooks.

== Ghostwriters ==
Consistent with other Stratemeyer Syndicate properties, the Nancy Drew novels were written by various writers, all under the pen name Carolyn Keene. Following the customs of Stratemeyer Syndicate series production, ghostwriters for the Syndicate signed contracts that have sometimes been interpreted as requiring authors to sign away all rights to authorship or future royalties. Contracts stated that authors could not use their Stratemeyer Syndicate pseudonyms independently of the Syndicate. In the early days of the Syndicate, ghostwriters were paid a fee of $125, &quot;roughly equivalent to two months&#x27; wages for a typical newspaper reporter, the primary day job of the syndicate ghosts.&quot;

During the Great Depression, this fee was lowered to $100 and eventually $75. All royalties went to the Syndicate, and all correspondence with the publisher was handled through a Syndicate office. The Syndicate was able to enlist the cooperation of libraries in hiding the ghostwriters&#x27; names; when Walter Karig, who wrote volumes eight through ten of the original &quot;Nancy Drew Mystery Stories&quot;, tried to claim rights with the Library of Congress in 1933, the Syndicate instructed the Library of Congress not to reveal the names of any Nancy Drew authors, a move with which the Library of Congress complied.

The Syndicate&#x27;s process for creating the Nancy Drew books consisted of creating a detailed plot outline, drafting a manuscript, and editing the manuscript. Edward Stratemeyer and his daughters Harriet Adams and Edna Stratemeyer Squier wrote most of the outlines for the original Nancy Drew series until 1979. Volume 30, &quot;The Clue of the Velvet Mask&quot; (1953), was outlined by Andrew Svenson. Usually, other writers wrote the manuscripts. Most of the early volumes were written by Mildred Wirt Benson. Other volumes were written by Walter Karig, George Waller, Jr., Margaret Scherf, Wilhelmina Rankin, Alma Sasse, Charles S. Strong, Iris Vinton, and Patricia Doll.

Later titles were penned by Nancy Axelrad, Sharon Wagner, and James Duncan Lawrence, and according to &quot;Book Riot&quot;, Carol Gorman, Ellen Steiber, and Alison Hart Edward &quot;each wrote several Nancy Drews in the 1980s and &#x27;90s.&quot; Stratemeyer edited the first three volumes, and Harriet Adams edited most subsequent volumes until she died in 1982. In 1959, the earlier titles were revised, largely by Adams. From the late 1950s until she died in 1982, Adams herself wrote the manuscripts for most of the books.

After Adams&#x27; death, series production was overseen by Nancy Axelrad (who also wrote several volumes). The rights to the character were sold in 1984, along with the Stratemeyer Syndicate itself, to Simon &amp; Schuster. Book packager Mega-Books subsequently hired authors to write the main Nancy Drew series and a new series, &quot;The Nancy Drew Files&quot;.

=== Legal disputes ===
In 1980, Harriet Adams switched publishers to Simon &amp; Schuster, dissatisfied with the lack of creative control at Grosset &amp; Dunlap and the lack of publicity for the Hardy Boys&#x27; 50th anniversary in 1977. Grosset &amp; Dunlap filed suit against the Syndicate and the new publishers, Simon &amp; Schuster, citing &quot;breach of contract, copyright infringement, and unfair competition.&quot;

Adams filed a countersuit, claiming the case was in poor taste and frivolous and that, as the author of the Nancy Drew series, she retained the rights to her work. Although Adams had written many of the titles after 1953 and edited others, she claimed to be the author of all of the early titles. She had rewritten the older titles and was not their original author. When Mildred Benson was called to testify about her work for the Syndicate, Benson&#x27;s role in writing the manuscripts of early titles was revealed in court with extensive documentation, contradicting Adams&#x27; claims to authorship. The court ruled that Grosset had the right to publish the original series as they were in print in 1980 but did not own characters or trademarks. Furthermore, any new publishers chosen by Adams were completely within their rights to print new titles.

== Illustrations ==
Nancy Drew has been illustrated by many artists over the years, and her look constantly updated. The Stratemeyer Syndicate and the books&#x27; publishers have exercised control over how Nancy is depicted. Some aspects of Nancy&#x27;s portrayal have remained relatively constant through the decades. Her most characteristic physical depiction is that she is shown holding a flashlight.

=== 1930–1949: Russell H. Tandy ===
Commercial artist Russell H. Tandy was the first artist to illustrate Nancy Drew. Tandy was a fashion artist and infused Nancy with a contemporary fashion sensibility: her early style is that of a flatfoot flapper: heeled Mary Janes accompany her blue flapper skirt suit and cloche hat on three of the first four-volume dust jackets. As styles changed over the next few years, Nancy began to appear in glamorous frocks, with immaculately set hair, pearls, matching hats, gloves, and handbags. By the 1940s, Nancy wore simpler, tailored suits and outfits; her hair was often arranged in a pompadour. In the post-war era, Tandy&#x27;s Nancy is shown hatless, wearing casual skirt and blouse ensembles, and carrying a purse, like most teens of the late 1940s.

Tandy drew the inside sketches for the first 26 volumes of the series and painted the covers of the first 26 volumes except for volume 11 – the cover artist for volume 11 is unknown. Tandy read each text before sketching, so his early covers were closely connected to specific plot scenes. He also hand-painted the cover lettering and designed the original Nancy Drew logo: a silhouette of Nancy bending slightly and looking at the ground through a magnifying glass.

Tandy often portrays Nancy Drew with confident, assertive body language. She never appears &quot;shocked, trepidatious, or scared.&quot; Nancy is shown either boldly in the center of the action or actively, but secretively, investigating a clue. She is often observed by a menacing figure and appears to be in imminent danger, but her confident expression suggests to viewers that she is in control of the situation.

Tandy&#x27;s home was struck by fire in 1962, and most of his original paintings and sketches were destroyed. As a result, the Tandy dust-jackets are considered valuable by collectors.

=== 1950–1952: Bill Gillies ===
Beginning with Tandy in 1948 and continuing into the early 1950s, Nancy&#x27;s appearance was updated to follow the prevailing styles. In postwar opulence, a trend emerged for young adults to have their casual style instead of dressing in the same styles as more mature adults, and Nancy became less constrained. Sweater or blouse and skirt ensembles and a pageboy hairstyle were introduced in 1948 and continued with new artist Bill Gillies. They updated ten covers and illustrated three new jackets from 1950 to 1952. Using Gillies&#x27;s wife for a model, Nancy reflects the conservative 1950s, with immaculately waved hair and a limited wardrobe – she wears a similar sweater, blouse, and skirt ensembles, in different combinations, on most of these covers. Gillies also designed the modern-era trademark as a spine symbol used for decades: Nancy&#x27;s head in profile, looking through a quizzing glass.

In the later Tandy period (1946 – 1949) and throughout the 1950s, Nancy is depicted less frequently in the center of the action. &quot;The Ghost of Blackwood Hall&quot; shows an assertive Nancy leading more timid friends up the front steps of the haunted house and marks a transition to later illustrations. From 1949 forward, she is likely to observe others, often hiding or concealing herself. Her mouth is often open in surprise, and she hides her body from view. Although Nancy &quot;expresses surprise, she is not afraid. She appears to be a bit taken aback by what she sees, but she looks as if she is still in control of the situation.&quot;

Many of these covers feature Nancy poised to observe a clue, spy on criminal activity, or display her discoveries to others involved in the mystery. Only occasionally is she shown in action, such as running from the scene of a fire, riding a horse, or actively sleuthing with a flashlight. At times she is only involved in the action as her hiding place has been discovered by others. In most cases, more active scenes are used for the frontispiece, or in books after 1954, illustrations throughout the text drawn by uncredited illustrators.

=== 1953–1979: Rudy Nappi ===
Joseph Rudolf &quot;Rudy&quot; Nappi, the artist from 1953 to 1979, illustrated a more average teenager. Nappi was asked by Grosset &amp; Dunlap&#x27;s art director to update Nancy&#x27;s appearance, especially her wardrobe. Nappi gave Nancy Peter Pan collars shirtwaist dresses, a pageboy (later a flip) haircut, and the occasional pair of jeans. Nancy&#x27;s hair color was changed from blonde to strawberry-blonde, reddish-blonde, or titian by the end of the decade. The change was long rumored to have resulted from a printing ink error. Still, it was considered so favorable that it was adopted in the text for books published after 1959 and by illustrator Polly Bolian for volumes she created for a special book club in 1959–60.

In 1962, all Grosset &amp; Dunlap books became &quot;picture covers&quot;, books with artwork and advertising printed directly on their covers, as opposed to books with a dust jacket over a tweed volume. The change was to reduce production costs. Several of the 1930s and 1940s cover illustrations were updated by Nappi for this change, depicting a Nancy of the Kennedy era, though the stories themselves were not updated.

Internal illustrations, dropped in 1937, were returned to the books beginning in 1954 as pen and ink line drawings, mostly by uncredited artists but usually corresponding with Nappi&#x27;s style of drawing Nancy on the covers. Nappi followed trends initiated by Gillies and often illustrated Nancy wearing the same clothing more than once, including a mustard shirtwaist dress.

Unlike Tandy, Nappi did not read the books before illustrating them; his wife read them and provided him with a brief plot summary before Nappi began painting. Nappi&#x27;s first cover was for &quot;The Clue of the Velvet Mask&quot;, where he began a trend of portraying Nancy as &quot;bobby-soxer… a contemporary sixteen-year-old. This Nancy was perky, clean-cut, and extremely animated. In the majority of his covers, Nancy looks startled – which, no doubt, she was.&quot; Nancy&#x27;s style is considered conservative and remains so during the psychedelic period.

Although she wears bold colors and prints, or the background colors are shades of electric yellow, shocking pink, turquoise, or apple green, her clothing is high-necked and with long hemlines. Earlier Nappi covers show Nancy in poses similar to those in the covers by Tandy and Gillies; for many updated covers, he simply updated the characters&#x27; color scheme, clothing style, and hairstyles but retains their original poses in similar settings. Later Nappi covers show only Nancy&#x27;s head or part of her body, surrounded by spooky or startling elements or clues from the story. These Nappi covers would later be used for the opening credits of the television production, with photos of Pamela Sue Martin inserted on the book covers.

Often, &quot;Nancy&#x27;s face wears the blank expression of one lost in thought,&quot; making her appear passive. On the cover of &quot;The Strange Message in the Parchment&quot; (1977), for example, in contrast to earlier covers, Nancy &quot;is not shown in the midst of danger or even watching a mystery unfold from a distance. Instead, Nancy is shown thinking about the clues&quot;; in general, Nancy becomes less confident and more puzzled.

=== 1980–2000s: Ruth Sanderson, Paul Frame, and others ===
Ruth Sanderson and Paul Frame provided cover art, and interior illustrations for the first Nancy Drew paperbacks published under the Wanderer imprint. Other artists, including Aleta Jenks and others whose names are unknown, provided the cover art, but no interior illustrations, for later paperbacks. Nancy is portrayed as &quot;a wealthy, privileged sleuth who looks pretty and alert… The colors, and Nancy&#x27;s facial features, are often so vivid that some of the covers look more like glossy photographs than paintings.&quot;

Nancy is frequently portrayed pursuing a suspect, examining a clue or observing the action. She is often also shown in peril: being chased, falling off a boat, or hanging by a rope from rafters. These covers are &quot;characterized by frenetic energy on Nancy&#x27;s part; whether she is falling, limbs flailing, an alarmed look on her face, or running, hair flying, body bent, face breathless. Nancy does not have any control over the events that are happening in these covers. She is shown to be a victim, being hunted and attacked by unseen foes.&quot; Nancy is sometimes pursued by a visibly threatening foe, as on the cover of &quot;The Case of the Vanishing Veil&quot; (1988).

The covers of &quot;The Nancy Drew Files&quot; and &quot;Girl Detective&quot; series represent further departures from Tandy&#x27;s bold, confident character. The Nancy portrayed on the covers of &quot;The Nancy Drew Files&quot; is &quot;a markedly sexy Nancy, with a handsome young man always lurking in the background. Her clothes often reveal an ample bustline, and her expression is mischievous.&quot;

In the &quot;Girl Detective&quot; series, Nancy&#x27;s face is depicted on each cover in fragments. Her eyes, for example, are confined to a strip across the top of the cover, while her mouth is located near the spine in a box independent of her eyes. The artwork for Nancy&#x27;s eyes and mouth is taken from Rudy Nappi&#x27;s cover art for the revised version of &quot;The Secret of the Old Clock&quot;.

In the &quot;Diaries&quot; series, Erin McGuire made all of the cover illustrations. They depict Nancy sleuthing in the book-specific locations, much like the original series. She looks younger, and the art style is more appealing to its target demographic of children. She is always alone on the cover, usually in pursuit of a suspect.

== Books ==

The longest-running series of books to feature Nancy Drew is the original Nancy Drew series, whose 175 volumes were published from 1930 to 2003. Nancy also appeared in 124 titles in &quot;The Nancy Drew Files&quot; and became the heroine of the &quot;Diaries&quot; series. Various other series feature the character, such as the &quot;Nancy Drew Notebooks&quot; and &quot;Nancy Drew on Campus&quot;. While Nancy Drew is the central character in each series, continuity is preserved only within one series, not between them all; for example, in concurrently published titles in the &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; series and the &quot;Nancy Drew on Campus&quot; series, Nancy is respectively dating her boyfriend Ned Nickerson and broken up with Ned Nickerson.

The two exceptions are the series &quot;Super Mystery&quot; (also called &quot;A Nancy Drew and Hardy Boys Super Mystery&quot;), which ran concurrently with the &quot;Files&quot; and shares continuity with those stories and the then-running &quot;Hardy Boys Casefiles&quot;, and in 2007, a new &quot;A Nancy Drew and Hardy Boys Super Mystery&quot; series shared continuity with the &quot;Girl Detective&quot; series.

&quot;Nancy Drew Diaries&quot; started in 2013. This is a reboot of the &quot;Nancy Drew: Girl Detective&quot; series. The series is &quot;a classic Nancy Drew with her modern twist&quot;. While similar to the &quot;Nancy Drew Girl Detective&quot; series, this series includes situations and problems typical in young adult tween books. The mystery element is not always the main focus of the characters, and often, Nancy states she is avoiding mysteries or &quot;on a break&quot; from sleuthing.

Nancy often acts timid and scared; in book #16, &quot;The Haunting on Heliotrope Lane&quot;, she says she is glad she &quot;hasn&#x27;t peed herself from being scared&quot;. This Nancy does not navigate the world of adults like previous versions of the character. The first-person narration reveals a juvenile voice with a passive role in the action and a lack of motivation in solving mysteries.

In book #12, &quot;The Sign in the Smoke&quot;, Nancy does not solve the mystery; a secondary character comes up with the solution. In several books, Nancy stumbles upon the solution to the &quot;mystery&quot; and acts amazed at the reveal. This is in contrast to the setup of the previous Nancy Drew series. Attempts to make Nancy&#x27;s character more modern and less perfect have resulted in a confusing and often conflicting representation of the iconic Nancy Drew character.

=== International publications ===
The main &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; series, &quot;The Nancy Drew Files&quot;, and the &quot;Girl Detective&quot; books have been translated into a number of languages besides English. Estimates vary from between 14 and 25 languages. Nancy Drew books have been published in many European countries (especially in Nordic countries and France) as well as in Latin America and Asia. The character of Nancy Drew seems to be more popular in some countries than others. Nancy Drew books have been in print in Norway since 1941 (the first country outside the United States), in Denmark since 1958, in France since 1955, and in Italy since 1970 by Arnoldo Mondadori Editore. Other countries, such as Estonia, have only recently begun printing Nancy Drew books.

Nancy&#x27;s name is often changed in translated editions: in France, she is known as Alice Roy; in Sweden, as Kitty Drew; in Finland, as Paula Drew; and in Norway, the book series has the name of &quot;Frøken Detektiv&quot; (&quot;Miss Detective&quot;), though the heroine&#x27;s name is still Nancy Drew inside the books. In Germany, Nancy is a German law student named Susanne Langen. George Fayne&#x27;s name is even more frequently changed, to Georgia, Joyce, Kitty, or Marion. Cover art and series order is often changed as well, and in many countries, only a limited number of Drew books are available in translation.

== Films ==
=== Bonita Granville ===
In 1937, Warner Bros. bought the rights to the &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; book series from the Stratemeyer Syndicate, for a reported $6,000. Warner Bros. wanted to make a series of B-films based on the character, to serve as a companion to their popular &quot;Torchy Blane&quot; B-film series, which starred Glenda Farrell, Barton MacLane, and Tom Kennedy. Adams sold the rights to Jack L. Warner without an agent or any consultation; thus, she sold all and any film rights to Warner Bros., a move she would later regret and that would later come into question by her publishers.

From 1938 to 1939, four films in the series were released. All of them were directed by William Clemens, written by &quot;Torchy Blane&quot; writer Kenneth Gamet, and featured the same primary cast: Bonita Granville as Nancy Drew, John Litel as Carson Drew, and Frankie Thomas as Ted Nickerson (changed from Ned Nickerson). Renie Riano and Frank Orth also appeared in some of the films as Effie Schneider and Captain Tweedy, respectively.

The four are as follows: 
*&quot;Nancy Drew... Detective&quot; (November 1938; loosely based on &quot;The Password to Larkspur Lane&quot;)
*&quot;Nancy Drew... Reporter&quot; (February 1939)
*&quot;Nancy Drew... Trouble Shooter&quot; (June 1939)
*&quot;Nancy Drew and the Hidden Staircase&quot; (September 1939; loosely based on &quot;The Hidden Staircase&quot;)

The series was announced by Warner Bros. in April 1938; production of the first film, &quot;Nancy Drew Gets the Passport&quot;, was set to begin production in June, directed by John Farrow with a screenplay from Robertson White. However, for unclear reasons, Farrow and White were replaced by Clemens and Gamet, and production was delayed to August. The first two films did well enough to allow Warner Bros. to expand the budgets for the third and fourth films; in early 1939, they announced the green-lighting of an additional four films, which would have brought the total up to eight.

After the second film, Warner Bros. assigned the third film, originally titled &quot;Nancy Drew Steps Out&quot;, to Eddie Anderson and Charles Perry; like White, they were replaced under unclear circumstances. Gamet was once again rehired to write for the series and completed writing the eight films. In late 1939, Warner Bros. decided to eliminate their double feature setup, thus canceling the &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; film series. Although it was initially announced that the &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; series would be converted into two-reelers, Warner Bros. canceled those plans days later. Gamet had at least written the fifth and sixth film, and the fifth may have been produced. Frankie Thomas stated that he believes he and Granville had made five films, not four, while Harriet Adams wrote in August 1939 to Mildred Wirt, the ghostwriter of the books at the time, that &quot;three have been shown in this area, and I have just heard that a fifth is in production.&quot; In addition, Gamet had reportedly written a sixth film.

Critical reaction to these films was mixed. Some found that the movies do not &quot;depict the true Nancy Drew&quot;, in part because Granville&#x27;s Nancy &quot;blatantly used her feminine wiles (and enticing bribes)&quot; to accomplish her goals. The films also portray Nancy as childish and easily flustered, a significant change from her portrayal in the books. Just as with the critics, both ghostwriter Mildred Wirt and editor Harriet Adams were also divided on the films&#x27; reception. Adams did not like the films and resented the studio for its treatment of the character; she did, however, keep a personalized autographed photo from Granville on her office desk for many years according to her employees and may have used John Litel&#x27;s portrayal of Carson Drew to revamp the character when she revised the books in the 1960s and 1970s. Contrary to Adams, Benson was said to have liked the films of the time, despite them being different from the character she wrote.

To promote the film, Warner Bros. created a Nancy Drew fan club that included a set of rules such as &quot;must have steady boy friend, in the sense of a &#x27;pal&#x27;&quot; and must &quot;take part in choosing own clothes.&quot; These rules were based on some research Warner Bros. had done on the habits and attitudes of &quot;typical&quot; teenage girls. Granville was the &quot;honorary president&quot; of the fan club, and a kit for the club came with autographed pictures of her.

The series became somewhat of a cult success after the films started appearing on cable channels such as Turner Classic Movies. The films were arguably ones in which all five cast members were notable for in their careers. Granville recalled making the films fondly and later called &quot;Nancy Drew… Trouble Shooter&quot; her favorite of the four. She and Litel would later reunite for the 1947 film &quot;The Guilty&quot;, produced by Granville&#x27;s husband Jack Wrather. Thomas would later go on to portray Carson Drew in a failed pilot for CBS.

=== Emma Roberts ===

A new film version of &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; had been in the works at Warner Bros. since the mid-1990s. However, nothing came to fruition until the mid-2000s. On June 15, 2007, Warner Bros. Pictures released a new film titled &quot;Nancy Drew&quot;, with Emma Roberts starring as Nancy, Max Thieriot as Ned Nickerson, and Tate Donovan as Carson Drew; Andrew Fleming directed and cowrote the film with Tiffany Paulsen, while Jerry Weintraub produced. This film sees Nancy move to Los Angeles with her father on an extended business trip and pick the house of a murdered movie star as their house to solve the cold case.

As with the earlier &quot;Drew&quot; films, reactions were mixed. Some see the film as an updated version of the basic character: &quot;Although it has been glammed up for the lucrative tween demographic, the movie retains the best parts of the books, including, of course, their intelligent main character.&quot; Others find the movie &quot;jolting&quot; because Nancy&#x27;s &quot;new classmates prefer shopping to sleuthing, and Nancy&#x27;s plaid skirt, penny loafers, and magnifying glass make her something of a dork, not the town hero she was in the Midwest.&quot; Before the release of the 2007 film, Roberts, Fleming, and Weintraub had signed on for two &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; sequels, but these films were never made.

=== Sophia Lillis ===

On April 20, 2018, Warner Bros. announced they were making a new &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; film series, starring Sophia Lillis as Nancy. The first film was adapted from &quot;The Hidden Staircase&quot;, with Ellen DeGeneres and Wendy Williams among the producers.

== Television ==
=== &quot;The Hardy Boys/Nancy Drew Mysteries&quot; ===

The first and most successful attempt at bringing Nancy Drew to life on television was &quot;The Hardy Boys/Nancy Drew Mysteries&quot;, which ran from 1977 to 1979 on ABC. Future &quot;Dynasty&quot; star Pamela Sue Martin starred as Nancy, with Jean Rasey and George O&#x27;Hanlon, Jr. as friends George and Ned, and William Schallert as Carson Drew.

The first season originally alternated with the Hardy Boys; the Hardy Boys was met with success, but the Drew episodes were met with mixed results. In the second season, the format shifted to present the Hardy Boys as the more prominent characters, with Nancy Drew mostly a character in crossover episodes.

The three &quot;solo&quot; episodes made that season featured Susan Buckner in the role of George, and focused on more bizarre cases. Following the thirteenth episode, Martin left the series, citing the changes made to the character and show. 19-year-old Janet Louise Johnson replaced Martin for her final four appearances, all of which were crossover episodes. When the series came back for a third season, Nancy Drew was dropped from the series, with it now focusing completely on the Hardy Boys; ABC canceled the series soon after this change.

Though the &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; aspect of the show received mixed reception, it is regarded as the most faithful adaptation of the character, with Martin often regarded by many fans as the best actress to portray her. The series was also faithful in its tone of smaller mysteries, such as haunted houses or theft.

=== &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; (1995 TV series) ===

The second &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; series, &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; aired in first-run syndication from September to December 1995. Produced by Nelvana, Tracy Ryan starred as Nancy Drew, who is now a 21-year-old criminology student, moving to New York City and living in an upscale apartment complex called the &quot;Callisto&quot;. Nancy solved various mysteries with Bess (Jhene Erwin), a gossip columnist at &quot;The Rag&quot;, and George (Joy Tanner), a mail carrier and amateur filmmaker. Scott Speedman recurred as Ned Nickerson, who works on charity missions in Africa. This &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; series was again partnered with a series based on &quot;The Hardy Boys&quot;, with Ryan appearing in two episodes of the latter series as Nancy.

The series was based on &quot;The Nancy Drew Files&quot; series, and the three stars were used on several of the series&#x27; covers to promote the show. Both shows were cancelled midway through their first seasons due to low ratings; the poorly syndicated half-hour shows aired in a slot outside of prime time on the newly launched The WB and UPN networks. The entire series has since been released on DVD, and has appeared on several online streaming sites, including the Retro Rerun YouTube channel.

==== List of episodes ====
==== &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; (2002 film) ====

On December 15, 2002, ABC aired &quot;Nancy Drew&quot;, starring Maggie Lawson and produced by Lawrence Bender. The movie was intended to be a pilot for a possible weekly series, which would see Nancy and her friends going off to college in a modern setting and Nancy pursuing a journalism degree. Like the 1930s films, this pilot also took a more mature turn, with the mystery being a drug bust and Nancy having a falling out with her father. The pilot aired as part of the &quot;Wonderful World of Disney&quot; series, with additional scripts being ordered and production contingent on the movie&#x27;s ratings and reception. The series was passed at ABC, and UPN also passed following Lawson being cast in another ABC series.

=== &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; (2019 TV series) ===

The third television series, &quot;Nancy Drew&quot;, premiered on The CW on October 9, 2019. Developed by Josh Schwartz and Stephanie Savage, this series stars Kennedy McMann as Nancy Drew, with co-stars including Leah Lewis as George and Scott Wolf as Carson Drew. This series revolves around Nancy as she heads off to college, only to have to stay back for another year after finding herself the prime suspect in a murder investigation. Like other adaptations of the character, it has received mixed reviews.

Much like fellow CW series &quot;Riverdale&quot;, the adaptation features serialized, soap opera-esque storylines. In addition to including more mature elements such as sex and violence, the series relies on supernatural elements, such as ghosts and extrasensory perception. In addition, it greatly diverges from several of the source material&#x27;s formula (e.g. race and personality changes of the main characters; Nancy, Bess, and George not being friends; Ned/&quot;Nick&quot; is a former criminal and an older, secret boyfriend), location (e.g. the main setting being the fictional seaside town of Horseshoe Bay, Maine, instead of the fictional Midwestern city of River Heights), and background (e.g., Carson Drew is not Nancy&#x27;s biological father, Nancy&#x27;s adoptive mother dying when she was an older teenager instead of a child).

=== Failed TV attempts ===
In 1957, Desilu and CBS developed a show, &quot;Nancy Drew, Detective&quot;, based on the movies from the 1930s. Roberta Shore was cast in the title role as Nancy Drew, with Tim Considine as Ned Nickerson, and Frankie Thomas, Jr. as Carson Drew. Thomas had previously starred in the film series in Considine&#x27;s role. Although a pilot was produced in April 1957, the series could not find a sponsor. With legal troubles and the disapproval of Harriet Adams, the idea of a series was eventually abandoned.

In October 1989, Canadian production company Nelvana began filming for a 13-episode Nancy Drew television series called &quot;Nancy Drew and Daughter&quot; for USA Network. Margot Kidder was cast as an adult Nancy Drew, and her daughter, Maggie McGuane, was cast as Nancy&#x27;s daughter. However, Kidder was seriously injured during filming of the first episode when the brakes failed on the car she was driving. The pilot was not finished, and the series was cancelled.

In October 2015, CBS announced it would be developing a new series based on an older version of Nancy. In January 2016, CBS ordered a pilot under the working title &quot;Drew&quot;, and that the character would be a non-Caucasian New York City police detective in her thirties. The pilot, written by Joan Rater and Tony Phelan, revolved around Nancy investigating the death of Bess Marvin, and reentering the NYPD after taking leave. Sarah Shahi was cast as Nancy Drew, with Vanessa Ferlito as George Fayne, Anthony Edwards as Carson Drew, Steve Kazee as Ned Nickerson, and Debra Monk as Hannah Gruen. The pilot was shot in location in New York City during March 2016, and was directed by James Strong. During this time, Phelan and Rater had another pilot, &quot;Doubt&quot;, which many television reporters often placed in competition for a series order with &quot;Drew&quot;. On May 14, 2016, it was announced that CBS decided to order &quot;Doubt&quot;, and pass on the &quot;Drew&quot; pilot, so CBS Studios could shop it to other networks for series consideration, though none did.

In October 2017, Phelan and Rater brought a redeveloped pilot to NBC, where the plot now revolved around a middle-aged Nancy who wrote her adventures into novels has to team up with her former friends to solve a murder mystery. However, the redeveloped plot never made it to pilot at the network, and Phelan and Rater have since left CBS Studios.

== Other media ==
=== Video games ===

Computer games publisher HeR Interactive began publishing an adventure game series based on the character in 1998. The games follow the popular &quot;point-and-click format&quot; with players playing as Nancy and using their mouse to move around a virtual environment to talk to suspects, pick up clues, solve puzzles, and eventually solve the crime. Many of the games are either directly or loosely adapted from novels in the various series, while some others are new storylines created by the company.

The series is generally designed for PC. The earliest releases were solely compatible with Microsoft Windows while later releases are also compatible with Mac OS. Some of the games have been ported to other systems, such as the Nintendo Wii and Game Boy Advance, and one was released on Interactive DVD. The games are aimed at a family audience, with the suggestion of &quot;ages 10 and up&quot;; most of the games have the ESRB rating of E, though &quot;Shadow at the Water&#x27;s Edge&quot; and &quot;The Captive Curse&quot; are rated E10+. Lani Minella voiced the Nancy character for thirty-two games from Her Interactive from 1998 until 2015. Following the release of &quot;Sea of Darkness&quot;, the company announced that Minella would not be returning to the series. She was replaced with Brittany Cox beginning with the release of &quot;Midnight in Salem&quot; in 2019.

The games and company overall have received recognition throughout its history for being a pioneer in female gaming, and have been dubbed into several different languages internationally. Her Interactive has also released two adventure game/hidden object hybrid games &quot;Lights, Camera, Curses&quot; (2008) and &quot;Resorting to Danger&quot; (2009) under the &quot;Nancy Drew Dossier&quot; series. The iOS game &quot;Nancy Drew: Codes &amp; Clues&quot; was released in May 2016, designed for younger audiences to develop skills in computer programming.

In addition to the games created by Her Interactive, Majesco Entertainment and Gorilla Systems Co. have released &quot;Nancy Drew: Deadly Secret of Olde World Park&quot; (2007) and &quot;Nancy Drew: The Mystery of the Clue Bender Society&quot; (2008) for the Nintendo DS. THQ has also released two games for the Nintendo DS, &quot;Nancy Drew: The Hidden Staircase&quot; (2008) and &quot;Nancy Drew: The Model Mysteries&quot; (2010).

=== Comic books ===
In March 2017, Dynamite Entertainment released Anthony Del Col and Werther Dell&#x27;Ederra&#x27;s reboot of classic characters Nancy Drew and the Hardy Boys with &quot;Nancy Drew &amp; the Hardy Boys: The Big Lie&quot;. Inspired by comics such as &quot;Afterlife with Archie&quot;, the series is a hardboiled noir take on the characters, and finds Nancy Drew as a femme fatale-esque character helping Frank and Joe Hardy clear their names in the murder of their father, Fenton Hardy. The series received positive reviews, with praise going toward its noir-themed tone. Del Col is set to release a sequel series &quot;Nancy Drew &amp; the Hardy Boys: The Death of Nancy Drew&quot;, with Joe Eisma replacing Dell&#x27;Ederra as the artist, with the first issue set to be released in May 2020.

From June to October 2018, Dynamite released another series titled &quot;Nancy Drew&quot;, written by Kelly Thompson and art by Jenn St-Onge. The series follows Nancy as she returns to Bayport after receiving a mysterious letter. She is joined by her friends Bess Marvin, George Fayne, and the Hardy Boys to solve the mystery. The series was released as a trade paperback titled &quot;Nancy Drew: The Palace of Wisdom&quot; in March 2019.

== Merchandising ==
A number of Nancy Drew products have been licensed over the years, primarily in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s. Parker Brothers produced a &quot;Nancy Drew Mystery Game&quot; in 1957 with the approval of the Stratemeyer Syndicate. In 1967 Madame Alexander produced a Nancy Drew doll. The doll carried binoculars and camera and was available in two outfits: with a plaid coat or a dress and short jacket. Harriet Adams disapproved of the doll&#x27;s design, believing Nancy&#x27;s face to be too childish, but the doll was marketed nonetheless. Various Nancy Drew coloring, activity, and puzzle books have also been published, as has a Nancy Drew puzzle. A Nancy Drew Halloween costume and a Nancy Drew lunchbox were produced in the 1970s as television show tie-ins.

== Cultural impact ==
According to commentators, the cultural impact of Nancy Drew has been enormous. The immediate success of the series led directly to the creation of numerous other girls&#x27; mysteries series, such as The Dana Girls mystery stories and the Kay Tracey mystery stories, and the phenomenal sales of the character Edward Stratemeyer feared was &quot;too flip&quot; encouraged publishers to market many other girls&#x27; mystery series, such as the Judy Bolton Series, and to request authors of series such as the Cherry Ames Nurse Stories to incorporate mystery elements into their works. The &quot;Nancy Drew Mystery Stories&quot; series and other girls&#x27; series books faced criticism for the formulaic nature of their plots and the poor quality of the actual books.

Many prominent and successful women cite Nancy Drew as an early formative influence whose character encouraged them to take on unconventional roles, including U.S. Supreme Court Justices Sandra Day O&#x27;Connor, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Sonia Sotomayor; TV personalities Oprah Winfrey and Barbara Walters; singers Barbra Streisand and Beverly Sills; mystery authors Sara Paretsky and Nancy Pickard; scholar Carolyn Heilbrun; actresses Ellen Barkin and Emma Roberts; former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton; former First Lady Laura Bush; and former president of the National Organization for Women Karen DeCrow. When the first Nancy Drew conference was held, at the University of Iowa, in 1993, conference organizers received a flood of calls from women who &quot;all had stories to tell about how instrumental Nancy had been in their lives, and about how she had inspired, comforted, entertained them through their childhoods, and, for a surprising number of women, well into adulthood.&quot;

Nancy Drew&#x27;s popularity continues unabated: In 2002, the first Nancy Drew book published, &quot;The Secret of the Old Clock&quot;, alone sold 150,000 copies, good enough for top-50 ranking in children&#x27;s books, and other books in the series sold over 100,000 copies each. Sales of the hardcover volumes of the original Nancy Drew series alone has surpassed sales of Agatha Christie titles, and newer titles in the Girl Detective series have reached &quot;The New York Times&quot; bestseller lists. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; ranked her seventeenth on its list of &quot;The Top 20 Heroes&quot; ahead of Batman, explaining that Drew is the &quot;first female hero embraced by most little girls… [Nancy lives] in an endless summer of never-ending adventures and unlimited potential.&quot; The magazine goes on to cite &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot;″s Velma Dinkley as well as Veronica Mars as Nancy Drew&#x27;s &quot;copycat descendants&quot;.

Many feminist critics have pondered the reason for the character&#x27;s iconic status. Nancy&#x27;s car, and her skill in driving and repairing it, are often cited. Melanie Rehak points to Nancy&#x27;s famous blue roadster (now a blue hybrid) as a symbol of &quot;ultimate freedom and independence&quot;. Not only does Nancy have the freedom to go where she pleases (a freedom other, similar characters such as The Dana Girls do not have), but she is also able to change a tire and fix a flawed distributor, prompting Paretsky to argue that in &quot;a nation where car mechanics still mock or brush off complaints by women Nancy remains a significant role model.&quot;

Nancy is also treated with respect: her decisions are rarely questioned and she is trusted by those around her. Male authority figures believe her statements, and neither her father nor Hannah Gruen, the motherly housekeeper, &quot;place… restrictions on her comings and goings.&quot; Nancy&#x27;s father not only imposes no restrictions on his daughter, but trusts her with both her own car and his gun (in the original version of &quot;The Hidden Staircase&quot; [1930]), asks her advice on a frequent basis, and accedes to all her requests. Some critics, such as Betsy Caprio and Ilana Nash, argue that Nancy&#x27;s relationship with her continually approving father is satisfying to girl readers because it allows them to vicariously experience a fulfilled Electra complex.

Unlike other girl detectives, Nancy does not go to school (for reasons that are never explained, but assuming because she has finished), and she thus has complete autonomy. Similar characters, such as Kay Tracey, do go to school, and not only lose a degree of independence but also of authority. The fact of a character&#x27;s being a school-girl reminds &quot;the reader, however fleetingly, of the prosaic realities of high-school existence, which rarely includes high adventures or an authoritative voice in the world of adults.&quot;

Some see in Nancy&#x27;s adventures a mythic quality. Nancy often explores secret passages, prompting Nancy Pickard to argue that Nancy Drew is a figure equivalent to the ancient Sumerian deity Inanna and that Nancy&#x27;s &quot;journeys into the &#x27;underground are, in psychological terms, explorations of the unconscious. Nancy is a heroic figure, undertaking her adventures not for the sake of adventure alone, but in order to help others, particularly the disadvantaged. For this reason, Nancy Drew has been called the modern embodiment of the character of &quot;Good Deeds&quot; in Everyman.

In the end, many critics agree that at least part of Nancy Drew&#x27;s popularity depends on the way in which the books and the character combine sometimes contradictory values, with Kathleen Chamberlain writing in &quot;The Secrets of Nancy Drew&quot;, &quot;For over 60 years, the Nancy Drew series has told readers that they can have the benefits of both dependence and independence without the drawbacks, that they can help the disadvantaged and remain successful capitalists, that they can be both elitist and democratic, that they can be both child and adult, and that they can be both &#x27;liberated&#x27; women and Daddy&#x27;s little girls.&quot; As another critic puts it, &quot;Nancy Drew &#x27;solved&#x27; the contradiction of competing discourses about American womanhood by entertaining them all.&quot;

==See also==

* The Hardy Boys
* Judy Bolton
* Trixie Belden

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* &quot;Sleuths Go Graphic&quot; (March 10, 2008). &quot;The Hindu (English) (Madras, India)&quot;. Accessed through Access World News on May 19, 2009.
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Nancy Drew Around The World—Information on international Nancy Drew editions
* Series-Books.com Nancy Drew Page—Information on the books in the &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; series
* Nancy Drew Unofficial Home Page—Information on the books and cover art in the &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; series
* Mildred Wirt Benson Collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1076932" start="0" end="10" title="Nancy Drew" label="Nancy Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="155" end="167" title="ghostwriter" label="ghostwritten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044648" start="236" end="249" title="Carolyn Keene" label="Carolyn Keene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293795" start="276" end="294" title="Edward Stratemeyer" label="Edward Stratemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471089" start="328" end="338" title="Hardy Boys" label="Hardy Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155002" start="397" end="423" title="Nancy Drew Mystery Stories" label="Nancy Drew Mystery Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554976" start="907" end="927" title="The Nancy Drew Files" label="The Nancy Drew Files"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1011" end="1037" title="Nancy Drew: Girl Detective" label="Nancy Drew: Girl Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083590" start="1076" end="1099" title="hybrid electric vehicle" label="hybrid electric vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133362" start="1592" end="1607" title="HeR Interactive" label="HeR Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139104" start="1965" end="1978" title="cultural icon" label="cultural icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="2048" end="2070" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court Justices"/>
<link wikidata="Q11132" start="2071" end="2095" title="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11107" start="2100" end="2115" title="Sonia Sotomayor" label="Sonia Sotomayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="2126" end="2144" title="United States Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="2145" end="2167" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Rodham Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="2179" end="2189" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q152019" start="2190" end="2200" title="Laura Bush" label="Laura Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495027" start="2202" end="2227" title="Feminist literary criticism" label="Feminist literary critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027564" start="2352" end="2368" title="wish fulfillment" label="wish fulfillment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906904" start="2630" end="2643" title="Titian hair" label="titian-haired"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539219" start="3929" end="3941" title="George Fayne" label="George Fayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986060" start="4315" end="4328" title="Ned Nickerson" label="Ned Nickerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335573" start="4343" end="4358" title="Emerson College" label="Emerson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934621" start="4458" end="4474" title="Bobbie Ann Mason" label="Bobbie Ann Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q859497" start="4527" end="4539" title="Miss America" label="Miss America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898793" start="4595" end="4608" title="Betty Crocker" label="Betty Crocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752900" start="4792" end="4819" title="The Mystery of the 99 Steps" label="The Mystery of the 99 Steps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="4834" end="4838" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723538" start="4848" end="4880" title="The Clue in the Crossword Cipher" label="The Clue in the Crossword Cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="4895" end="4902" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765842" start="4912" end="4939" title="The Spider Sapphire Mystery" label="The Spider Sapphire Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="4954" end="4962" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752847" start="4972" end="4996" title="The Mysterious Mannequin" label="The Mysterious Mannequin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036941" start="5028" end="5043" title="Captive Witness" label="Captive Witness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554976" start="5073" end="5090" title="The Runaway Bride (Nancy Drew)" label="The Runaway Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="5165" end="5171" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q828170" start="5324" end="5332" title="Roadster (automobile)" label="roadster"/>
<link wikidata="Q55989" start="5367" end="5378" title="Convertible (car)" label="convertible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564361" start="6099" end="6113" title="Girl Detective" label="Girl Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136974" start="6250" end="6260" title="role model" label="role model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293795" start="7118" end="7136" title="Edward Stratemeyer" label="Edward Stratemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621901" start="7153" end="7174" title="Stratemeyer Syndicate" label="Stratemeyer Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471089" start="7209" end="7219" title="The Hardy Boys" label="Hardy Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117078" start="7721" end="7741" title="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap" label="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814719" start="8200" end="8212" title="Mildred Benson" label="Mildred Wirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="8244" end="8254" title="Ghostwriter" label="ghostwrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044648" start="8307" end="8320" title="Carolyn Keene" label="Carolyn Keene"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="8397" end="8406" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q629269" start="8926" end="8937" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="9007" end="9027" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="&amp;quot; Fortune&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q193955" start="9448" end="9457" title="hardcover" label="hardcover"/>
<link wikidata="Q624903" start="9565" end="9571" title="Cover art" label="covers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906904" start="10329" end="10335" title="Titian hair" label="titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="10730" end="10746" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10847" end="10859" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596569" start="10921" end="10932" title="Housekeeper (domestic worker)" label="housekeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117078" start="11553" end="11573" title="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap" label="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040664" start="11661" end="11674" title="Harriet Adams" label="Harriet Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934621" start="12264" end="12280" title="Bobbie Ann Mason" label="Bobbie Ann Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q256898" start="12492" end="12496" title="White Anglo-Saxon Protestant" label="WASP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919997" start="12800" end="12812" title="Howard Johnson&amp;#x27;s" label="Ho-Jo&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117078" start="13875" end="13895" title="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap" label="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698964" start="13978" end="13996" title="Ethnic stereotype" label="racist stereotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739568" start="14359" end="14384" title="The Hidden Window Mystery" label="The Hidden Window Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="14427" end="14432" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="14439" end="14455" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726508" start="16075" end="16104" title="The Clue of the Tapping Heels" label="The Clue of the Tapping Heels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="16450" end="16470" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q858330" start="17008" end="17015" title="Romance novel" label="romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q653916" start="17188" end="17203" title="backdoor pilots" label="backdoor pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064997" start="18280" end="18302" title="sex-positive feminists" label="sex-positive feminists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873" start="19540" end="19558" title="sexual intercourse" label="sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q172275" start="19661" end="19671" title="chloroform" label="chloroform"/>
<link wikidata="Q172336" start="19719" end="19728" title="chokehold" label="chokehold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643994" start="20249" end="20262" title="Super Mystery" label="Super Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20379" end="20403" title="List of Hardy Boys books#The Hardy Boys Casefiles (1987–1998)" label="The Hardy Boys Casefiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962653" start="20469" end="20489" title="Nancy Drew on Campus" label="Nancy Drew on Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177103" start="20573" end="20590" title="Sweet Valley High" label="Sweet Valley High"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165309" start="21076" end="21085" title="date rape" label="date rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q18211193" start="21564" end="21586" title="MRS Degree" label="&amp;#x27;MRS&amp;#x27; degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q193075" start="22193" end="22203" title="Hybrid vehicle" label="hybrid car"/>
<link wikidata="Q616622" start="22260" end="22272" title="First-person narrative" label="first person"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606235" start="23668" end="23683" title="Stefan Petrucha" label="Stefan Petrucha"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="23703" end="23708" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883511" start="24740" end="24759" title="Undercover Brothers" label="Undercover Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="25731" end="25739" title="pen name" label="pen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="26323" end="26339" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545012" start="26616" end="26628" title="Walter Karig" label="Walter Karig"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155002" start="26688" end="26714" title="Nancy Drew Mystery Stories" label="Nancy Drew Mystery Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="26753" end="26772" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040664" start="27133" end="27146" title="Harriet Adams" label="Harriet Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726502" start="27266" end="27293" title="The Clue of the Velvet Mask" label="The Clue of the Velvet Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756872" start="27324" end="27338" title="Andrew Svenson" label="Andrew Svenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814719" start="27428" end="27447" title="Mildred Benson" label="Mildred Wirt Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545012" start="27479" end="27491" title="Walter Karig" label="Walter Karig"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27493" end="27511" title="George Waller, Jr." label="George Waller, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27513" end="27528" title="Margaret Scherf" label="Margaret Scherf"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27530" end="27547" title="Wilhelmina Rankin" label="Wilhelmina Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27549" end="27559" title="Alma Sasse" label="Alma Sasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q21176647" start="27561" end="27578" title="Charles S. Strong" label="Charles S. Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q95598027" start="27580" end="27591" title="Iris Vinton" label="Iris Vinton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27597" end="27610" title="Patricia Doll" label="Patricia Doll"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27641" end="27654" title="Nancy Axelrad" label="Nancy Axelrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q100348714" start="27656" end="27669" title="Sharon Wagner" label="Sharon Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q51305140" start="27675" end="27696" title="James Duncan Lawrence (author)" label="James Duncan Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27721" end="27730" title="Book Riot" label="Book Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044339" start="27738" end="27750" title="Carol Gorman" label="Carol Gorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365021" start="27752" end="27765" title="Ellen Steiber" label="Ellen Steiber"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27771" end="27789" title="Alison Hart Edward" label="Alison Hart Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="28344" end="28364" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q892972" start="28366" end="28379" title="Book packager" label="Book packager"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554976" start="28478" end="28498" title="The Nancy Drew Files" label="The Nancy Drew Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q235783" start="30184" end="30194" title="flashlight" label="flashlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381538" start="30251" end="30267" title="Russell H. Tandy" label="Russell H. Tandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483126" start="30439" end="30446" title="flapper" label="flapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884783" start="30455" end="30465" title="Mary Jane (shoe)" label="Mary Janes"/>
<link wikidata="Q741511" start="30508" end="30518" title="cloche hat" label="cloche hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434845" start="30553" end="30564" title="dust jacket" label="dust jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q14776796" start="30821" end="30830" title="pompadour (hairstyle)" label="pompadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q166849" start="31440" end="31456" title="magnifying glass" label="magnifying glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q965880" start="32452" end="32459" title="pageboy" label="pageboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19629209" start="34228" end="34264" title="Rudy Nappi" label="Joseph Rudolf &amp;quot;Rudy&amp;quot; Nappi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117078" start="34352" end="34372" title="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap" label="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q997545" start="34470" end="34486" title="Peter Pan collar" label="Peter Pan collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906904" start="34665" end="34671" title="Titian hair" label="titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117078" start="34977" end="34997" title="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap" label="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q365552" start="35489" end="35502" title="Line art" label="line drawings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726502" start="35966" end="35993" title="The Clue of the Velvet Mask" label="The Clue of the Velvet Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948830" start="36053" end="36064" title="bobby-soxer" label="bobby-soxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256213" start="36314" end="36332" title="Psychedelic era" label="psychedelic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q273492" start="37029" end="37046" title="Pamela Sue Martin" label="Pamela Sue Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766913" start="37214" end="37250" title="The Strange Message in the Parchment" label="The Strange Message in the Parchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383202" start="37583" end="37597" title="Ruth Sanderson" label="Ruth Sanderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564361" start="38856" end="38870" title="Girl Detective" label="Girl Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070626" start="39577" end="39604" title="The Secret of the Old Clock" label="The Secret of the Old Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q9048548" start="40299" end="40319" title="Nancy Drew Notebooks" label="Nancy Drew Notebooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962653" start="40336" end="40356" title="Nancy Drew on Campus" label="Nancy Drew on Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q719723" start="41458" end="41463" title="tween" label="tween"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="42854" end="42870" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q85355" start="43181" end="43206" title="Arnoldo Mondadori Editore" label="Arnoldo Mondadori Editore"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="43233" end="43240" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539219" start="43683" end="43695" title="George Fayne" label="George Fayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="43967" end="43979" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q223770" start="44135" end="44142" title="B movie" label="B-films"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825585" start="44214" end="44226" title="Torchy Blane" label="Torchy Blane"/>
<link wikidata="Q272083" start="44262" end="44276" title="Glenda Farrell" label="Glenda Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q577621" start="44278" end="44292" title="Barton MacLane" label="Barton MacLane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298666" start="44298" end="44309" title="Tom Kennedy (actor)" label="Tom Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q72614" start="44336" end="44350" title="Jack L. Warner" label="Jack L. Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568507" start="44623" end="44638" title="William Clemens (film director)" label="William Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q271696" start="44734" end="44750" title="Bonita Granville" label="Bonita Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181945" start="44766" end="44776" title="John Litel" label="John Litel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491081" start="44797" end="44811" title="Frankie Thomas" label="Frankie Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560501" start="44859" end="44870" title="Renie Riano" label="Renie Riano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443899" start="44875" end="44885" title="Frank Orth" label="Frank Orth"/>
<link wikidata="Q20949917" start="45008" end="45031" title="Nancy Drew... Detective" label="Nancy Drew... Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q3793676" start="45077" end="45106" title="The Password to Larkspur Lane" label="The Password to Larkspur Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962645" start="45121" end="45143" title="Nancy Drew... Reporter" label="Nancy Drew... Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q20949918" start="45173" end="45202" title="Nancy Drew... Trouble Shooter" label="Nancy Drew... Trouble Shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962649" start="45228" end="45263" title="Nancy Drew and the Hidden Staircase (1939 film)" label="Nancy Drew and the Hidden Staircase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836695" start="45310" end="45330" title="The Hidden Staircase" label="The Hidden Staircase"/>
<link wikidata="Q547495" start="45516" end="45527" title="John Farrow" label="John Farrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251417" start="46284" end="46298" title="double feature" label="double feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="46460" end="46470" title="two-reeler" label="two-reeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814719" start="46741" end="46753" title="Mildred Benson" label="Mildred Wirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13557472" start="48000" end="48008" title="fan club" label="fan club"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="48466" end="48478" title="Cult film" label="cult success"/>
<link wikidata="Q749719" start="48539" end="48560" title="Turner Classic Movies" label="Turner Classic Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738473" start="48841" end="48851" title="The Guilty (1947 film)" label="The Guilty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157345" start="48896" end="48908" title="Jack Wrather" label="Jack Wrather"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016302" start="49185" end="49206" title="Warner Bros. Pictures" label="Warner Bros. Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402883" start="49240" end="49250" title="Nancy Drew (2007 film)" label="Nancy Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q228598" start="49263" end="49275" title="Emma Roberts" label="Emma Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q703723" start="49295" end="49307" title="Max Thieriot" label="Max Thieriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q302650" start="49330" end="49342" title="Tate Donovan" label="Tate Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q504706" start="49359" end="49373" title="Andrew Fleming" label="Andrew Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q365844" start="49432" end="49447" title="Jerry Weintraub" label="Jerry Weintraub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888786" start="50086" end="50099" title="penny loafers" label="penny loafers"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048667" start="50490" end="50503" title="Sophia Lillis" label="Sophia Lillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836695" start="50552" end="50572" title="The Hidden Staircase" label="The Hidden Staircase"/>
<link wikidata="Q483325" start="50585" end="50600" title="Ellen DeGeneres" label="Ellen DeGeneres"/>
<link wikidata="Q618233" start="50605" end="50619" title="Wendy Williams" label="Wendy Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319749" start="50809" end="50844" title="The Hardy Boys/Nancy Drew Mysteries" label="The Hardy Boys/Nancy Drew Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="50883" end="50886" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q584025" start="50901" end="50908" title="Dynasty (1981 TV series)" label="Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q273492" start="50920" end="50937" title="Pamela Sue Martin" label="Pamela Sue Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171415" start="50961" end="50971" title="Jean Rasey" label="Jean Rasey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332676" start="51033" end="51050" title="William Schallert" label="William Schallert"/>
<link wikidata="Q628998" start="51438" end="51451" title="Susan Buckner" label="Susan Buckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153419" start="51631" end="51651" title="Janet Julian" label="Janet Louise Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q428457" start="52431" end="52438" title="Nelvana" label="Nelvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q19364592" start="52440" end="52450" title="Tracy Ryan (actress)" label="Tracy Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526352" start="52731" end="52741" title="Joy Tanner" label="Joy Tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q336131" start="52782" end="52796" title="Scott Speedman" label="Scott Speedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738898" start="52925" end="52969" title="The Hardy Boys (1995 TV series)" label="a series based on &amp;quot;The Hardy Boys&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554976" start="53069" end="53089" title="The Nancy Drew Files" label="The Nancy Drew Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q844972" start="53372" end="53378" title="The WB" label="The WB"/>
<link wikidata="Q206272" start="53383" end="53386" title="UPN" label="UPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q16580979" start="53654" end="53664" title="Nancy Drew (2002 film)" label="Nancy Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q285409" start="53681" end="53694" title="Maggie Lawson" label="Maggie Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q514913" start="53711" end="53726" title="Lawrence Bender" label="Lawrence Bender"/>
<link wikidata="Q206272" start="54278" end="54281" title="UPN" label="UPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q63612991" start="54430" end="54440" title="Nancy Drew (2019 TV series)" label="Nancy Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q728217" start="54501" end="54514" title="Josh Schwartz" label="Josh Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110353" start="54519" end="54535" title="Stephanie Savage" label="Stephanie Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928534" start="54555" end="54569" title="Kennedy McMann" label="Kennedy McMann"/>
<link wikidata="Q16229874" start="54609" end="54619" title="Leah Lewis" label="Leah Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q712009" start="54634" end="54644" title="Scott Wolf" label="Scott Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001951" start="54940" end="54949" title="Riverdale (American TV series)" label="Riverdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="54993" end="55003" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873" start="55076" end="55079" title="Sexual intercourse" label="sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q124490" start="55084" end="55092" title="violence" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="55115" end="55127" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q45529" start="55146" end="55151" title="ghost" label="ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q790024" start="55157" end="55180" title="extrasensory perception" label="extrasensory perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q844652" start="55790" end="55796" title="Desilu" label="Desilu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="55801" end="55804" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351538" start="55894" end="55907" title="Roberta Shore" label="Roberta Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528611" start="55955" end="55968" title="Tim Considine" label="Tim Considine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491081" start="55991" end="56010" title="Frankie Thomas" label="Frankie Thomas, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q428457" start="56335" end="56342" title="Nelvana" label="Nelvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="56450" end="56461" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q234471" start="56463" end="56476" title="Margot Kidder" label="Margot Kidder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205385" start="57063" end="57073" title="Joan Rater" label="Joan Rater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823169" start="57078" end="57089" title="Tony Phelan" label="Tony Phelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230530" start="57197" end="57208" title="Sarah Shahi" label="Sarah Shahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q233724" start="57238" end="57253" title="Vanessa Ferlito" label="Vanessa Ferlito"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539219" start="57257" end="57269" title="George Fayne" label="George Fayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q314924" start="57271" end="57286" title="Anthony Edwards (actor)" label="Anthony Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612991" start="57303" end="57314" title="Steve Kazee" label="Steve Kazee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986060" start="57318" end="57331" title="Ned Nickerson" label="Ned Nickerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q288404" start="57337" end="57347" title="Debra Monk" label="Debra Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11977967" start="57452" end="57464" title="James Strong (director)" label="James Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q24255831" start="57526" end="57531" title="Doubt (American TV series)" label="Doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="57916" end="57919" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133362" start="58263" end="58278" title="HeR Interactive" label="HeR Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="58299" end="58313" title="adventure game" label="adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="58486" end="58505" title="Virtual reality" label="virtual environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="58780" end="58782" title="Personal computer" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="58834" end="58851" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q43627" start="58898" end="58904" title="Mac OS" label="Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="58980" end="58983" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="58988" end="59004" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635956" start="59030" end="59045" title="Interactive film" label="Interactive DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q191458" start="59167" end="59171" title="Entertainment Software Rating Board" label="ESRB"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59182" end="59183" title="Entertainment Software Rating Board#Ratings" label="E"/>
<link wikidata="" start="59198" end="59229" title="Nancy Drew: Shadow at the Water&amp;#x27;s Edge" label="Shadow at the Water&amp;#x27;s Edge"/>
<link wikidata="" start="59246" end="59263" title="Nancy Drew: The Captive Curse" label="The Captive Curse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59280" end="59284" title="Entertainment Software Rating Board#Ratings" label="E10+"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409063" start="59286" end="59298" title="Lani Minella" label="Lani Minella"/>
<link wikidata="" start="59421" end="59436" title="Nancy Drew: Sea of Darkness" label="Sea of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59863" end="59876" title="Puzzle video game#Hidden object game" label="hidden object"/>
<link wikidata="" start="59896" end="59918" title="Nancy Drew Dossier: Lights, Camera, Curses" label="Lights, Camera, Curses"/>
<link wikidata="" start="59942" end="59961" title="Nancy Drew Dossier: Resorting to Danger" label="Resorting to Danger"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="60028" end="60031" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q403714" start="60233" end="60254" title="Majesco Entertainment" label="Majesco Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="60439" end="60450" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q965905" start="60649" end="60671" title="Dynamite Entertainment" label="Dynamite Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q22277545" start="60681" end="60696" title="Anthony Del Col" label="Anthony Del Col"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471089" start="60777" end="60791" title="the Hardy Boys" label="the Hardy Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203605" start="60888" end="60909" title="Afterlife with Archie" label="Afterlife with Archie"/>
<link wikidata="Q27063908" start="61529" end="61543" title="Kelly Thompson" label="Kelly Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501379" start="61996" end="62011" title="Parker Brothers" label="Parker Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621901" start="62092" end="62113" title="Stratemeyer Syndicate" label="Stratemeyer Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10575065" start="62123" end="62139" title="Alexander Doll Company" label="Madame Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040664" start="62288" end="62301" title="Harriet Adams" label="Harriet Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q134117" start="62874" end="62888" title="The Dana Girls" label="The Dana Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380300" start="62913" end="62923" title="Kay Tracey" label="Kay Tracey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304354" start="63117" end="63135" title="Judy Bolton Series" label="Judy Bolton Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962772" start="63182" end="63193" title="Cherry Ames" label="Cherry Ames"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="63601" end="63619" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11132" start="63629" end="63653" title="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11116" start="63655" end="63674" title="Ruth Bader Ginsburg" label="Ruth Bader Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11107" start="63680" end="63695" title="Sonia Sotomayor" label="Sonia Sotomayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="63714" end="63727" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q231417" start="63732" end="63747" title="Barbara Walters" label="Barbara Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="63757" end="63773" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q235517" start="63778" end="63791" title="Beverly Sills" label="Beverly Sills"/>
<link wikidata="Q438024" start="63809" end="63822" title="Sara Paretsky" label="Sara Paretsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q509515" start="63827" end="63840" title="Nancy Pickard" label="Nancy Pickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q272811" start="63850" end="63866" title="Carolyn Heilbrun" label="Carolyn Heilbrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q229234" start="63878" end="63890" title="Ellen Barkin" label="Ellen Barkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q228598" start="63895" end="63907" title="Emma Roberts" label="Emma Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="63916" end="63934" title="United States Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="63935" end="63957" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Rodham Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="63966" end="63976" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q152019" start="63977" end="63987" title="Laura Bush" label="Laura Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967556" start="64017" end="64048" title="National Organization for Women" label="National Organization for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369599" start="64049" end="64061" title="Karen DeCrow" label="Karen DeCrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q182973" start="64117" end="64135" title="University of Iowa" label="University of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070626" start="64547" end="64574" title="The Secret of the Old Clock" label="The Secret of the Old Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="64821" end="64836" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564361" start="64869" end="64883" title="Girl Detective" label="Girl Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="64910" end="64928" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="64959" end="64979" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="65063" end="65069" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q205683" start="65282" end="65292" title="Scooby-Doo" label="Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q929855" start="65301" end="65314" title="Velma Dinkley" label="Velma Dinkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283086" start="65326" end="65339" title="Veronica Mars (character)" label="Veronica Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="65400" end="65408" title="feminist" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083590" start="65630" end="65636" title="hybrid electric vehicle" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q134117" start="65806" end="65820" title="The Dana Girls" label="The Dana Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836695" start="66503" end="66523" title="The Hidden Staircase" label="The Hidden Staircase"/>
<link wikidata="Q324081" start="66826" end="66841" title="Electra complex" label="Electra complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380300" start="67045" end="67055" title="Kay Tracey" label="Kay Tracey"/>
<link wikidata="Q509515" start="67485" end="67498" title="Nancy Pickard" label="Nancy Pickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="67577" end="67583" title="Inanna" label="Inanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407143" start="67973" end="67981" title="Everyman" label="Everyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471089" start="68820" end="68834" title="The Hardy Boys" label="The Hardy Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304354" start="68837" end="68848" title="Judy Bolton Series" label="Judy Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563466" start="68851" end="68864" title="Trixie Belden" label="Trixie Belden"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54833" wikidata="Q3814719" url="?curid=54833" title="Mildred Benson">
<text>Mildred Augustine Wirt Benson (July 10, 1905 – May 28, 2002) was an American journalist and writer of children&#x27;s books. She wrote some of the earliest Nancy Drew mysteries and created the detective&#x27;s adventurous personality. Benson wrote under the Stratemeyer Syndicate pen name, Carolyn Keene, from 1929 to 1953 and contributed to 23 of the first 30 Nancy Drew mysteries, which were bestsellers.
==Early life==
Mildred Benson was born Mildred Augustine on July 10, 1905, in Ladora, Iowa, to Lillian and Dr. J. L. Augustine. Benson earned her degree in English from the University of Iowa in 1925 in just three years. She later returned to the university, and in 1927, became the first student there to earn a master&#x27;s degree in journalism.

==Writing career==
Benson began her career selling short stories to magazines such as &quot;St. Nicholas&quot; and &quot;Lutheran Young Folks&quot;. During her college years, she worked at &quot;The Daily Iowan&quot; under editor George Gallup, and after receiving her undergraduate degree, for the society pages of the &quot;Clinton Herald&quot;.

In addition to her work with the Stratemeyer Syndicate, Benson also wrote many other series both in her name and under other pseudonyms from the 1930s to the 1950s. She ultimately wrote under a dozen names and published more than 130 books. In 1930 and 1931, Benson wrote the Ruth Darrow series. Taking flying lessons and flying her own aircraft, Ruth wins a national cross-country race, lands on an aircraft carrier, helps the Forest Service in fighting forest fires, and alerts the Coast Guard of an immigrant-smuggling scheme. The series has been highlighted as unusual for its time, for both its generally authentic aeronautical lore, and the consistent and outspoken advocacy of women&#x27;s abilities and mechanical competence.

From 1939 to 1947, Benson wrote the Penny Parker books which were published under her own name. Parker was the daughter of a newspaper editor who sought to become a reporter herself, often becoming involved in mysteries and dangerous situations. Parker was modeled after both the Nancy Drew character and Benson herself, but also gave Benson creative control of the character and her stories that she did not have for the Nancy Drew series. Benson would later cite Parker as her favorite of the characters she wrote, and considered her to be &quot;a better Nancy Drew than Nancy is.&quot;

Benson began working at the &quot;Toledo Blade&quot; in 1944, and continued there for 58 years. After the death of her second husband in 1959, Benson focused on journalism. In the 1990s, she began writing a weekly column for the &quot;Toledo Blade&quot; titled &quot;On the Go&quot;. She continued this and writing obituaries full-time until a few months before her death.

===Stratemeyer Syndicate===
In the spring of 1926, literary publisher Edward Stratemeyer wrote an ad looking for ghostwriters for the Stratemeyer Syndicate. Benson applied with mentioning that she had plans to move to New York City where Stratemeyer&#x27;s offices were located. At his request, Benson sent Stratemeyer some of her work with which he was impressed. While vacationing, she met Stratemeyer in New York in July and was offered to undertake the Ruth Fielding series. Under the pseudonym of Alice B. Emerson, Benson wrote &quot;Ruth Fielding and Her Great Scenario&quot;. Stratemeyer credited Benson&#x27;s writing for reviving sales of the Fielding series.

Syndicate ghostwriters took the outlines supplied by Stratemeyer and wrote the novel based from an outline sent to them. After her initial meeting with Stratemeyer, Benson never saw him again; the work was done through correspondence. As with all Syndicate ghostwriters, under the terms of her contract, Benson was paid a flat fee of $125 to $250 for each Stratemeyer-outlined text, the equivalent of three months&#x27; pay for a newspaper reporter at that time. Ghostwriters signed away all rights to their texts and any claim to the Syndicate pseudonym used. Writers were, however, permitted to reveal that they wrote for the Syndicate. The Syndicate protected their pseudonyms to preserve series continuity as contributors to the series came and went.

In 1929, Stratemeyer developed a new series of detective novels with Benson in mind as the ghostwriter. He initially titled the heroine &quot;Stella Strong&quot;, though upon selling the series to Grosset &amp; Dunlap, they chose the alternative name &quot;Nan Drew&quot; and lengthened the name to Nancy Drew. While Stratemeyer supplied the outlines of the first four novels for Benson, she developed Nancy&#x27;s spunky, plucky personality, and her daring, adventurous spirit. Benson sought to make the heroine an unusually liberated woman for her time. She later said about writing the initial books, &quot;I always knew the series would be successful. I just never expected it to be the blockbuster that it has been. I&#x27;m glad that I had that much influence on people.&quot;

Shortly after finishing work on &quot;The Mystery at Lilac Inn&quot;, and only a few weeks after the launch of the series, Stratemeyer died. Under the terms of his will, all Syndicate ghostwriters, including Benson, were sent one-fifth of the equivalent of the royalties the Syndicate had received for each book series to which they had contributed. Stratemeyer&#x27;s daughters, Harriet Adams and Edna Stratemeyer, initially attempted to sell the company as per his wishes, but were unable to find a buyer due to the Great Depression. They ultimately continued their father&#x27;s work, and kept correspondence with Benson. Though Benson briefly quit the Nancy Drew series, she continued writing the Fielding books until the series was cancelled by its publisher in 1934. Upon returning to the Nancy Drew series in 1934, Adams and Stratemeyer were able to convince her to also write the Kay Tracey and Dana Girls series they had developed. The Dana Girls, which also used the Carolyn Keene pseudonym, had been written by The Hardy Boys ghostwriter Leslie McFarlane until he quit following the initial four books.

Benson continued writing for the Syndicate until the early 1950s, when the Syndicate underwent management changes. Beginning in 1959, Adams began revising and updating the Nancy Drew books written by Benson. Adams also made changes to Nancy&#x27;s personality that had been crafted by Benson, making her less assertive and spunky. In 1980, Grosset &amp; Dunlap called Benson as a witness during a lawsuit against the Syndicate for contracting new titles with their competitor Simon &amp; Schuster. Benson&#x27;s testimony revealed her identity to the public as a contributor to the Nancy Drew mystery stories. After the death of her sister in 1973, Adams claimed she had written the series since her father&#x27;s passing; she had received considerable publicity for this especially since both The Hardy Boys and Nancy Drew were adapted for television in the late 1970s. Since the revelation and subsequent research into Syndicate files, Benson has been acknowledged the creator of the original Nancy Drew along with Edward Stratemeyer. In 2001, Benson received a Special Edgar Award from the Mystery Writers of America for her contributions to the Nancy Drew series.

Benson&#x27;s favorite Nancy Drew story was &quot;The Hidden Staircase&quot;, the second mystery in the series. Whenever asked, she would gladly autograph copies of the Nancy Drew books, but only the titles she actually wrote.

==Personal life==
In 1928, she married Asa Wirt, a correspondent for the Associated Press. The couple had a daughter, Margaret &quot;Peggy&quot; Wirt, who was born in 1936. Asa Wirt died in 1947, following a long illness during which Mildred took care of him. In 1950, she married George A. Benson, her editor at the &quot;Toledo Blade&quot; newspaper. He died in 1959.

Benson was also known as a great adventurer. She made numerous trips to Central America, witnessing archaeological excavations and visiting Mayan sites. After her second husband&#x27;s death, Benson obtained her pilot&#x27;s license, and continued flying for several years.

Benson died in Toledo at the age of 96 on May 28, 2002.

==Selected bibliography==
===Non-series===
As Mildred A. Wirt or Mildred Benson:
* &quot;Sky Racers&quot;, 1935
* &quot;Carolina Castle&quot;, historical fiction within a frame story
* &quot;Courageous Wings&quot;, 1937
* &quot;Linda&quot;, 1940
* &quot;Pirate Brig&quot;, historical fiction, published 1950 by Scribners but written earlier.
* &quot;Dangerous Deadline&quot;, published by Dodd, Mead &amp; Co. in 1950, a winner of the Boys&#x27; Life—Dodd, Mead Prize Competition, and reprinted by Scholastic Book Services. 
* &quot;Quarry Ghost&quot; 1959, UK edition, 1960, &quot;Kristie at College&quot;

===A Mystery Book/Story for Girls series, Cupples &amp; Leon, as Mildred A. Wirt===
* &quot;The Twin Ring Mystery&quot;, 1935
* &quot;The Clue at Crooked Lane&quot;, 1936
* &quot;The Hollow Wall Mystery&quot;, 1936
* &quot;The Shadow Stone&quot;, 1937
* &quot;The Wooden Shoe Mystery&quot;, 1938
* &quot;Through the Moon-Gate Door&quot;, 1938
* &quot;Ghost Gables&quot;, 1939
* &quot;Painted Shield&quot;, 1939

===Stratemeyer Syndicate Series===
====Nancy Drew (as Carolyn Keene)====
*1. &quot;The Secret of the Old Clock&quot;, 1930
*2. &quot;The Hidden Staircase&quot;, 1930
*3. &quot;The Bungalow Mystery&quot;, 1930
*4. &quot;The Mystery at Lilac Inn&quot;, 1930
*5. &quot;The Secret at Shadow Ranch&quot;, 1931
*6. &quot;The Secret of Red Gate Farm&quot;, 1931
*7. &quot;The Clue in the Diary&quot;, 1932
*11. &quot;The Clue of the Broken Locket&quot;, 1934
*12. &quot;The Message in the Hollow Oak&quot;, 1935
*13. &quot;The Mystery of the Ivory Charm&quot;, 1936
*14. &quot;The Whispering Statue&quot;, 1937
*15. &quot;The Haunted Bridge&quot;, 1937
*16. &quot;The Clue of the Tapping Heels&quot;, 1939
*17. &quot;The Mystery of the Brass-Bound Trunk&quot;, 1940
*18. &quot;The Mystery at the Moss-Covered Mansion&quot;, 1941
*19. &quot;The Quest of the Missing Map&quot;, 1942
*20. &quot;The Clue in the Jewel Box&quot;, 1943
*21. &quot;The Secret in the Old Attic&quot;, 1944
*22. &quot;The Clue in the Crumbling Wall&quot;, 1945
*23. &quot;The Mystery of the Tolling Bell&quot;, 1946
*24. &quot;The Clue in the Old Album&quot;, 1947
*25. &quot;The Ghost of Blackwood Hall&quot;, 1948
*30. &quot;The Clue of the Velvet Mask&quot;, 1953

====Kay Tracey (as Frances K. Judd)====
*3. &quot;The Mystery of the Swaying Curtains&quot;, 1935
*4. &quot;The Shadow on the Door&quot;, 1935
*5. &quot;The Six-Fingered Glove Mystery&quot;, 1936
*6. &quot;The Green Cameo Mystery&quot;, 1936
*7. &quot;The Secret at the Windmill&quot;, 1937
*8. &quot;Beneath the Crimson Briar Bush&quot;, 1937
*9. &quot;The Message in the Sand Dunes&quot;, 1938
*10. &quot;The Murmuring Portrait&quot;, 1938
*11. &quot;When the Key Turned&quot;, 1939
*12. &quot;In the Sunken Garden&quot;, 1939
*14. &quot;The Sacred Feather&quot;, 1940

====Penny Parker (as Mildred A. Wirt)====
*1. &quot;Tale of the Witch Doll&quot;, 1939
*2. &quot;The Vanishing Houseboat&quot;, 1939
*3. &quot;Danger at the Drawbridge&quot;, 1940
*4. &quot;Behind the Green Door&quot;, 1940
*5. &quot;Clue of the Silken Ladder&quot;, 1941
*6. &quot;The Secret Pact&quot;, 1941
*7. &quot;The Clock Strikes Thirteen&quot;, 1942 
*8. &quot;The Wishing Well&quot;, 1942
*9. &quot;Saboteurs on the River&quot;, 1943
*10. &quot;Ghost Beyond the Gate&quot;, 1943
*11. &quot;Hoofbeats on the Turnpike&quot;, 1944
*12. &quot;Voice from the Cave&quot;, 1944
*13. &quot;Guilt of the Brass Thieves&quot;, 1945
*14. &quot;Signal in the Dark&quot;, 1946
*15. &quot;Whispering Walls&quot;, 1946
*16. &quot;Swamp Island&quot;, 1947
*17. &quot;The Cry at Midnight&quot;, 1947
*18. Unpublished Title, would have been 1948

====Dana Girls (as Carolyn Keene)====
*5. &quot;The Secret at the Hermitage&quot;, 1936
*6. &quot;The Circle of Footprints&quot;, 1937
*7. &quot;The Mystery of the Locked Room&quot;, 1938
*8. &quot;The Clue in the Cobweb&quot;, 1939
*9. &quot;The Secret at the Gatehouse&quot;, 1940
*10. &quot;The Mysterious Fireplace&quot;, 1941
*11. &quot;The Clue of the Rusty Key&quot;, 1942
*12. &quot;The Portrait in the Sand&quot;, 1943
*14. &quot;The Clue in the Ivy&quot;, 1952
*15. &quot;The Secret of the Jade Ring&quot;, 1953
*16. &quot;Mystery at the Crossroads&quot;, 1954

====Penny Nichols (as Joan Clark)====
*1. &quot;Penny Nichols Finds a Clue&quot;, 1937
*2. &quot;Penny Nichols and the Mystery of the Lost Key&quot;, 1936
*3. &quot;Penny Nichols and the Black Imp&quot;, 1936
*4. &quot;Penny Nichols and the Knob Hill Mystery&quot;, 1939

====Connie Carl (as Joan Clark)====
*1. &quot;Connie Carl at Rainbow Ranch&quot;, 1939
*2. &quot;Connie Carl on Skis&quot;, would have been 1939 (made into Penny Parker #4)
*3. Untitled Third volume, would have been 1939

====Madge Sterling (as Ann Wirt)====
*1. &quot;The Missing Formula&quot;, 1932
*2. &quot;The Deserted Yacht&quot;, 1932
*3. &quot;The Secret of the Sundial&quot;, 1932

====Ruth Darrow (as Mildred A. Wirt)====
*1 Ruth Darrow in the Air Derby, 1930
*2 Ruth Darrow in the Fire Patrol, 1930
*3. Ruth Darrow in Yucatán, 1931
*4. Ruth Darrow in the Coast Guard, 1931

====Dan Carter Cub Scout (as Mildred A. Wirt)====
*1. &quot;Dan Carter Cub Scout&quot;, 1949
*2. &quot;Dan Carter and the River Camp&quot;, 1949
*3. &quot;Dan Carter and the Money Box&quot;, 1950
*4. &quot;Dan Carter and the Haunted Castle&quot;, 1951
*5. &quot;Dan Carter and the Great Carved Face&quot;, 1952
*6. &quot;Dan Carter and the Cub Honor&quot;, 1953

====Ruth Fielding (as Alice B. Emerson), a 30-book series====
*23. &quot;Ruth Fielding and her Great Scenario&quot;, 1927
*24. &quot;Ruth Fielding at Cameron Hall&quot;, 1928
*25. &quot;Ruth Fielding Clearing Her Name&quot;, 1929
*26. &quot;Ruth Fielding in Talking Pictures&quot;, 1930
*27. &quot;Ruth Fielding and Baby June&quot;, 1931
*28. &quot;Ruth Fielding and Her Double&quot;, 1932
*29. &quot;Ruth Fielding and Her Greatest Triumph&quot;, 1933
*30. &quot;Ruth Fielding and Her Crowning Victory&quot;, 1934

====Doris Force (as Julia K. Duncan), a four-book series====
*1. &quot;Doris Force at Locked Gates&quot;, 1931
*2. &quot;Doris Force at Cloudy Cove&quot;, 1931

==References==
== External links ==
* Guide to the Mildred Wirt Collection. Special Collections and Archives, The UC Irvine Libraries, Irvine, California.
* The Mildred Wirt Benson Collection (archived): digitized scrapbooks, correspondence, photographs and other artifacts donated by Benson to The University of Iowa Libraries.
* The Mildred Wirt Benson Website: biography, book lists, photographs and more, at the NancyDrewSleuth.com archive.
* Who was Carolyn Keene? An interview with Mildred Wirt Benson, the original ghostwriter for the Nancy Drew mystery novels. (October 1999)
* The case of the girl detective With the passing of Nancy Drew&#x27;s first author, the mystery of the teenage sleuth&#x27;s true identity only deepens. (June 2002)
* The Storied Life of Millie Benson at WGTE-TV

===Electronic editions===
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3814719" start="0" end="29" title="Mildred Benson" label="Mildred Augustine Wirt Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076932" start="156" end="166" title="Nancy Drew" label="Nancy Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621901" start="258" end="279" title="Stratemeyer Syndicate" label="Stratemeyer Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044648" start="290" end="303" title="Carolyn Keene" label="Carolyn Keene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928777" start="485" end="497" title="Ladora, Iowa" label="Ladora, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q182973" start="580" end="598" title="University of Iowa" label="University of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590838" start="849" end="861" title="St. Nicholas (magazine)" label="St. Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728663" start="952" end="967" title="The Daily Iowan" label="The Daily Iowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q315542" start="987" end="1000" title="George Gallup" label="George Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134134" start="1083" end="1097" title="Clinton Herald" label="Clinton Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621901" start="1139" end="1160" title="Stratemeyer Syndicate" label="Stratemeyer Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="1506" end="1522" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="1534" end="1548" title="United States Forest Service" label="Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="1590" end="1601" title="United States Coast Guard" label="Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164414" start="1877" end="1889" title="Penny Parker" label="Penny Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q442288" start="2465" end="2477" title="The Blade (Toledo, Ohio)" label="Toledo Blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q309481" start="2746" end="2756" title="Obituary" label="obituaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293795" start="2875" end="2893" title="Edward Stratemeyer" label="Edward Stratemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="2918" end="2930" title="ghostwriters" label="ghostwriters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621901" start="2939" end="2960" title="Stratemeyer Syndicate" label="Stratemeyer Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3023" end="3036" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q48850762" start="3262" end="3275" title="Ruth Fielding" label="Ruth Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725727" start="3307" end="3323" title="Alice B. Emerson" label="Alice B. Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48850762" start="3338" end="3386" title="Ruth Fielding" label="&amp;quot;Ruth Fielding and Her Great Scenario&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076932" start="4530" end="4540" title="Nancy Drew" label="Nancy Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836720" start="5053" end="5077" title="The Mystery at Lilac Inn" label="The Mystery at Lilac Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040664" start="5395" end="5408" title="Harriet Adams" label="Harriet Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="5533" end="5549" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380300" start="5903" end="5913" title="Kay Tracey" label="Kay Tracey"/>
<link wikidata="Q134117" start="5918" end="5928" title="Dana Girls" label="Dana Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471089" start="6037" end="6051" title="The Hardy Boys" label="The Hardy Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q14767574" start="6064" end="6080" title="Leslie McFarlane" label="Leslie McFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="6606" end="6626" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319749" start="6959" end="6981" title="The Hardy Boys/Nancy Drew Mysteries" label="adapted for television"/>
<link wikidata="Q833154" start="7202" end="7213" title="Edgar Award" label="Edgar Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720621" start="7223" end="7249" title="Mystery Writers of America" label="Mystery Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836695" start="7349" end="7369" title="The Hidden Staircase" label="The Hidden Staircase"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="7600" end="7616" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q442288" start="7850" end="7862" title="Toledo Blade" label="Toledo Blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q959782" start="7998" end="8024" title="Excavation (archaeology)" label="archaeological excavations"/>
<link wikidata="Q45914" start="8038" end="8043" title="Maya peoples" label="Mayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505819" start="8401" end="8412" title="frame story" label="frame story"/>
<link wikidata="Q845617" start="8541" end="8550" title="Charles Scribner&amp;#x27;s Sons" label="Scribners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287721" start="8619" end="8639" title="Dodd, Mead &amp;amp; Co." label="Dodd, Mead &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q5194566" start="8880" end="8898" title="Cupples &amp;amp; Leon" label="Cupples &amp;amp; Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621901" start="9253" end="9274" title="Stratemeyer Syndicate" label="Stratemeyer Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070626" start="9333" end="9360" title="The Secret of the Old Clock" label="The Secret of the Old Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836695" start="9383" end="9403" title="The Hidden Staircase" label="The Hidden Staircase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836694" start="9426" end="9446" title="The Bungalow Mystery" label="The Bungalow Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836720" start="9469" end="9493" title="The Mystery at Lilac Inn" label="The Mystery at Lilac Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836696" start="9516" end="9542" title="The Secret at Shadow Ranch" label="The Secret at Shadow Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836721" start="9565" end="9592" title="The Secret of Red Gate Farm" label="The Secret of Red Gate Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8199988" start="9615" end="9636" title="The Clue in the Diary" label="The Clue in the Diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3794610" start="9660" end="9689" title="The Clue of the Broken Locket" label="The Clue of the Broken Locket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751136" start="9713" end="9742" title="The Message in the Hollow Oak" label="The Message in the Hollow Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814670" start="9766" end="9796" title="The Mystery of the Ivory Charm" label="The Mystery of the Ivory Charm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774440" start="9820" end="9841" title="The Whispering Statue" label="The Whispering Statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739000" start="9865" end="9883" title="The Haunted Bridge" label="The Haunted Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726508" start="9907" end="9936" title="The Clue of the Tapping Heels" label="The Clue of the Tapping Heels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752904" start="9960" end="9996" title="The Mystery of the Brass Bound Trunk" label="The Mystery of the Brass-Bound Trunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752877" start="10020" end="10059" title="The Mystery at the Moss-Covered Mansion" label="The Mystery at the Moss-Covered Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759061" start="10083" end="10111" title="The Quest of the Missing Map" label="The Quest of the Missing Map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076932" start="10135" end="10160" title="The Clue in the Jewel Box" label="The Clue in the Jewel Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763121" start="10184" end="10211" title="The Secret in the Old Attic" label="The Secret in the Old Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723539" start="10235" end="10265" title="The Clue in the Crumbling Wall" label="The Clue in the Crumbling Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836719" start="10289" end="10320" title="The Mystery of the Tolling Bell" label="The Mystery of the Tolling Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723543" start="10344" end="10369" title="The Clue in the Old Album" label="The Clue in the Old Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736318" start="10393" end="10420" title="The Ghost of Blackwood Hall" label="The Ghost of Blackwood Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726502" start="10444" end="10471" title="The Clue of the Velvet Mask" label="The Clue of the Velvet Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949958" start="15152" end="15159" title="WGTE-TV" label="WGTE-TV"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54835" wikidata="Q1044648" url="?curid=54835" title="Carolyn Keene">
<text>Carolyn Keene is the pseudonym of the authors of the Nancy Drew mystery stories and &quot;The Dana Girls&quot; mystery stories, both produced by the Stratemeyer Syndicate. In addition, the Keene pen name is credited with the Nancy Drew spin-off, &quot;River Heights, and the &quot;Nancy Drew Notebooks&quot;.

Edward Stratemeyer, the founder of the Syndicate, hired writers, beginning with Mildred Wirt (later Mildred Benson), to write the manuscripts for the Nancy Drew books. The writers were paid $125 for each book and were required by their contract to give up all rights to the work and to maintain confidentiality.

Benson is credited as the primary writer of Nancy Drew books under the pseudonym Carolyn Keene. Harriet Adams (Stratemeyer&#x27;s daughter) rewrote the original books and added new titles after the withdrawal of Benson.

Other ghostwriters who used this name to write Nancy Drew mysteries included Leslie McFarlane, James Duncan Lawrence, Walter Karig, Nancy Axelrad, Patricia Doll, Charles S. Strong, Alma Sasse, Wilhelmina Rankin, George Waller Jr., Margaret Fischer, and Susan Wittig Albert. Also involved in the Nancy Drew writing process were Harriet Stratemeyer Adams&#x27;s daughters, who gave input on the series and sometimes helped to choose book titles; the Syndicate&#x27;s secretary, Harriet Otis Smith, who invented the characters of Nancy&#x27;s friends Bess and George; and the editors at Grosset &amp; Dunlap.

In 1979, the Stratemeyer Syndicate changed publishers to Simon &amp; Schuster, a move that the former publishers, Grosset &amp; Dunlap, went to court to prevent, claiming a breach of contract. The decision was made in favor of the Syndicate, stating that they could choose which publisher they would like to use for subsequent entries in the series.

In 1985, the Syndicate was bought by publishers Simon &amp; Schuster; the Drew books are now handled by Mega-Books, a New York book packager.

==Ghostwriters==

===Nancy Drew===


==See also==

* Franklin W. Dixon
* Nancy Drew Mystery Stories
* J. K. Rowling

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1044648" start="0" end="13" title="Carolyn Keene" label="Carolyn Keene"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="21" end="30" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076932" start="53" end="63" title="Nancy Drew" label="Nancy Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q134117" start="90" end="104" title="The Dana Girls" label="The Dana Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621901" start="149" end="170" title="Stratemeyer Syndicate" label="Stratemeyer Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="195" end="203" title="pen name" label="pen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186399" start="236" end="244" title="Spin-off (media)" label="spin-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337495" start="246" end="265" title="River Heights (Nancy Drew)" label="&amp;quot;River Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q9048548" start="281" end="301" title="Nancy Drew Notebooks" label="Nancy Drew Notebooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293795" start="310" end="328" title="Edward Stratemeyer" label="Edward Stratemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814719" start="390" end="402" title="Mildred Benson" label="Mildred Wirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040664" start="719" end="732" title="Harriet Adams" label="Harriet Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q14767574" start="921" end="937" title="Leslie McFarlane" label="Leslie McFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q51305140" start="939" end="960" title="James Duncan Lawrence (author)" label="James Duncan Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545012" start="962" end="974" title="Walter Karig" label="Walter Karig"/>
<link wikidata="Q21176647" start="1006" end="1023" title="Charles S. Strong" label="Charles S. Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648548" start="1097" end="1116" title="Susan Wittig Albert" label="Susan Wittig Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117078" start="1428" end="1448" title="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap" label="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="1508" end="1528" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q892972" start="1929" end="1942" title="book packager" label="book packager"/>
<link wikidata="Q369206" start="1998" end="2015" title="Franklin W. Dixon" label="Franklin W. Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155002" start="2018" end="2044" title="Nancy Drew Mystery Stories" label="Nancy Drew Mystery Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="2047" end="2060" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54836" wikidata="Q701165" url="?curid=54836" title="Maquis (World War II)">
<text>The Maquis () were rural guerrilla bands of French and Belgian Resistance fighters, called &quot;maquisards&quot;, during World War II. Initially, they were composed of young, mostly working-class, men who had escaped into the mountains and woods to avoid conscription into Vichy France&#x27;s (STO; &#x27;Compulsory Work Service&#x27;) which provided forced labor for Germany. To avoid capture and deportation to Germany, they became increasingly organized into active resistance groups.

They had an estimated to members in autumn of 1943 and approximately members in June 1944.

==Meaning==
The maquis made up one component of the mosaic of the resistance in France and Belgium. The maquis refers to the organization of bands of resistance guerrillas which emerged in rural France, mainly in the south. The maquis were emergent in 1943 and were also active in 1944.

Originally the word came from the kind of terrain in which the armed resistance groups hid, high ground in southeastern France covered with scrub growth called &quot;maquis&quot; (scrubland).

The term &quot;maquis&quot; signified both the group of fighters and their rural location. Members of those bands were called &quot;maquisards&quot;. Their image was that of a committed and voluntary fighter, a , as opposed to the previous (; &#x27;unmanageable&#x27;). The term became an honorific meaning &quot;armed resistance fighter&quot;. The Maquis came to symbolize the French Resistance and was used to describe resistance groups that fought in France before the Allied invasion of Normandy in 1944. Once the Allies had secured a foothold in France, the government of Free France attempted to unite the separate groups of Maquis under the banner of the French Forces of the Interior (FFI).

The national denomination given to all Maquis forces during the war is , known as the &quot;FFI&quot;; in English, the French Forces of the Interior. This large corp of about 400,000 active members (in 1944) is divided in three major sections, corresponding to three political or professional inclinations:
* The &quot;Francs-Tireurs et Partisans&quot; (FTP), a para-military organism created and controlled by the , the French Communist Party.
* The (the AS; ), mostly led by French army officers and with a right-wing tilt.
* The (the ORA; &#x27;Resistance organisation of the army&#x27;), formally created in January 1943 as a more &quot;official&quot; and apolitical organism for the continuation of armed struggle by ex-French military personnel in the &quot;Zone libre&quot; (southern half of metropolitan France).

All three groups were deemed &quot;terrorists&quot; by the Vichy regime of the French State and by German authorities and other neighbouring fascist regimes. Other (rare) local groups did not affiliate with these organisations.

==Operations==

Most maquisards operated in the remote or mountainous areas of Brittany and southern France, especially in the Alps and in Limousin. They relied on guerrilla tactics to harass the (the Vichy militia) and German occupation troops. The Maquis also aided the escape of downed Allied airmen, Jews and others pursued by the Vichy and German authorities. Maquisards usually relied on some degree of sympathy or cooperation from the local populace. Most of the Maquis cells—like the Maquis du Limousin or the Maquis du Vercors—took names after the area they were operating in. The size of these cells varied from tens to thousands of men and women.

In March 1944, with the Allies gaining ascendancy, Maquis groups intensified their operations. In reaction to their weakening power, the occupiers and Vichy collaborationists began a terror campaign throughout France, enacted by German military units and the . This included reprisals by SS troops against civilians living in areas where the French resistance was active, such as the Oradour-sur-Glane, the Maillé and the Tulle massacres. The Maquisards exacted their revenge, both at the time with reactive atrocities and later in the (: &#x27;savage&#x27; or &#x27;wild&#x27; intended to indicate it was undertaken before the rule of law was reestablished) that took place after the war&#x27;s end.

In French Indochina, the local resistance fighting the Japanese since 1941 was backed up by a special forces airborne commando unit created by de Gaulle in 1943, and known as the Corps Léger d&#x27;Intervention (CLI). They were supplied by airlifts of the British Force 136.

==Politics==
Politically, the Maquis included right-wing nationalists, liberals, socialists, communists, and anarchists. Some Maquis bands that operated in southwest France were composed entirely of left-wing Spanish veterans of the Spanish Civil War. Spanish Civil War veteran Carlos Romero Giménez was a centrist republican operating from Bordeaux.

According to Matthew Cobb, the Communist Maquis groups adopted more active and immediate guerrilla tactics to combat the Nazis, while the groups affiliated with De Gaulle were asked to wait for a larger attack later in the war. Thus, some maquis joined Communist groups simply to be part of a more active resistance movement and not because of their politics. Georges Guingouin was one of the most active Communist Maquis leaders.

The British Special Operations Executive (SOE) helped the Maquis who were affiliated with the Free French with supplies and agents, help which was not extended to the Communist Maquis groups. The American Office of Strategic Services (OSS) also began to send its own agents to France in cooperation with the SOE and the French BCRA agents, as part of Operation Jedburgh.

The Maquis had many different sub groups with their own objectives and political affiliations. In 1944, an OSS agent, Robert R. Kehoe, was embedded within a group of Maquis and described the organization as &quot;fractured&quot;, observing that &quot;the various components were quite independent, with members loyal to their own leaders and to the political forces behind them&quot;. Different ideologies within the subgroups created tensions that had to be put aside at times during the war but prosecuted those of the far right after. People like Georges Loustaunau-Lacau and Marie-Madeleine Fourcade, leaders of the French Resistance group Alliance, were both questioned about their loyalty during and after the war. This came as no surprise as both were from far-right political backgrounds, that didn’t favor the dominant Gaullist narrative. Lacau suffered the most, all the way up to his death by being put in jail several times, and accused by communist colleagues of siding with the Germans, while Fourcade was able to suffer fewer accusations by switching to Gaullism.

Examples of the independence of separate Maquis groups can be found all throughout France during the Second World War. For example, Maquis groups in Brittany often did not speak French and were focused on the expulsion of German forces from their region and not from France as a whole. As they did not operate like a normal resistance organization due to their lack of centralization, the Maquis would not be able to accomplish as much as the Allied nations had hoped.

==History==

Prior to the inception of the Maquis, small resistance groups were created in the occupied and unoccupied zones of France. In northern and western France, movements like &quot;Organisation civile et militaire&quot;, &quot;Libération-Nord&quot;, &quot;Ceux de la Libération&quot;, &quot;Ceux de la Résistance&quot; survived through clandestine pamphlets or newspapers, to build up a solidarity of attitudes and disparate actions and to &#x27;taunt the Germans&#x27; (). Some of these movements also began to hide weapons and plot sabotage. In the Zone Libre, movements were created as early as in the north and west but did not face decimating raids by the authorities, which allowed movements like &quot;Combat&quot;, &quot;Libération-Sud&quot; and &quot;Franc-Tireur&quot; to have a more expansive character.

Resistance groups in the occupied zone eventually became linked to the Free French in London or the Special Operations Executive (SOE) set up by Britain to undermine Nazi-occupied Europe with specially trained agents. By May 1941, the northern movements, who specialized in sabotage and espionage and the southern movements, who focused on planning escape routes, developed the only major movement common to both, the &quot;Front National&quot;. Resistance became closely linked with the effects of the occupation and Vichy legislation and as the working class became alienated &quot;resisters and people on the run could be harboured with a degree of safety&quot; in the rural areas of France, resistance had a role and justification in the lives of many people &quot;who had no ambition to hold a gun, or memorize a coded message, though as the occupation grew in its violence the pressure on the French people to defend themselves by force intensified, and the military nature of resistance came to predominate&quot;.The connection between the Vichy government and armed resistance paved the way for the eventual formation of the Maquis.

The &quot;Service du travail obligatoire&quot; (STO; compulsory labor service) was enacted on 16 February 1943 but underwent various refinements and classifications. It required young men born between 1920 and 1922 to register at their (town halls), whereupon the authorities &quot;listed several categories of workers, divided them into those who were exempt, those who would be liable for compulsory service in Germany, and those who would have to work for German industries in France&quot;. In the first few months, reports suggest that there were many who refused STO and went into hiding, mostly in areas where people hid Jews and resisters. These first few months of refusal of STO, and the &quot;embryonic camps and groupings that resulted&quot; contributed to the eventual emergence of the mystique and discourse of &quot;le maquis&quot;.

Politically motivated anti-fascists, immigrant workers on the run, the and Spanish Civil War veterans, along with the leniency of the Vichy administration&#x27;s pursuit of , contributed to the emergence of an aggressive movement, with a combative discourse and a romantic mystique of rural revolt. The speed with which the term &quot;maquis&quot; spread was astonishing, since the concept did not exist in January 1943. By June, talk of the &quot;maquis&quot; made its way from south-eastern France to the plains of northern France. The Maquis eventually became the national service, due to the large influx of young people in revolt against the STO. This unification was due, in part, to Michel Brault, a Parisian lawyer, who headed the organization of the resisters in April 1943, and to the drafted circulars establishing the Maquis&#x27;s charter. Within one month, 20,000 copies of the text — which did not exceed the size of a playing card — were distributed throughout the southern zone&quot;. Brault, in a report sent to London on 14 February 1944, listed the various elements available for action to the Allies and described the Maquis as &quot;youths who have rebelled against the STO as well as men of all ages who have given up trying to live a normal life[...]. They totalled about 48,000.&quot;

==Role==
The &quot;Maquis de l&#x27;Ain&quot;, captained by Henri Petit (alias Romans), organized a network of camps in the dense forests in the mountainous regions of the &quot;Bugey&quot; and the lower regions of La Bresse, without creating a fixed camp. This gave The enemy would not be able to surprise the Maquis because the views from the mountains were extensive, but some enjoyed this advantage and stayed in the same sites for months, defying their own rules of mobility. Guerrilla warfare practised by the Maquis &quot;created a psychosis of fear within the enemy [...], giving an impression of numbers and strength which was more illusory than real&quot;. 

The Maquis de l&#x27;Ain&#x27;s effectiveness was honed at the training school they opened at Gorges above Mongriffon in June 1943. Captain Romans described the situation: 

In the control for rural areas, the maquisards, in their role as the hunted, &quot;gradually made the terrain of the hunt unpredictable for the hunters&quot;, and eventually dangerous. The Maquis&#x27;s goal was to destabilize Vichy authority, and they did this by simultaneously making themselves, as well as Vichy authorities, the &#x27;hunters&#x27; and the &#x27;hunted&#x27;.

During the Allied invasion of Normandy, Operation Overlord, the Maquis and other groups played some role in delaying the German mobilization. The French Resistance (FFI for , &#x27;French Forces of the Interior&#x27;) blew up railroad tracks and repeatedly attacked German Army equipment and garrison trains on their way to the Atlantic coast. Coded messages transmitted over , broadcast from the BBC, alerted the Maquis of the impending D-Day with seemingly meaningless messages such as &quot;the crow will sing three times in the morning&quot; read in a continuous flow over the British airwaves. As Allied troops advanced, the French Resistance rose against the Nazi occupation forces and their garrisons en masse. For example, Nancy Wake&#x27;s group of 7,000 maquisards was involved in a pitched battle with 22,000 Germans on 20 June 1944. Some Maquis groups took no prisoners so some German soldiers preferred to surrender to Allied soldiers rather than maquisards.

The Allied offensive was slowed and the Germans were able to counterattack in southeast France. On the Vercors Massif, the Maquis du Vercors rose up with some 4,000 soldiers against the German occupiers, but was defeated with 600 casualties.

When General De Gaulle dismissed resistance organizations after the liberation of Paris, many maquisards returned to their homes though many also joined the new French army.

==Equipment==

Although the Maquis used whatever arms they could get, the groups affiliated with the Free French relied heavily on airdrops of weapons and explosives from the British SOE. SOE parachuted agents in with wireless sets (for radio communication) and dropped containers with various munitions including Sten guns, pencil detonators, plastic explosives, Welrod pistols (a silenced specialized assassination weapon favored by covert operatives) and assorted small arms such as pistols, rifles and sub-machine guns. The Maquis would listen to coded broadcasts by the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) the night before each supply drop. The information they would receive included the amount of supply boxes that would be dropped and when to light the fire signals that mark the drop zones. The Maquis had to confirm through radio if they received the message in order to lessen the risk of the supplies getting into German hands.

The Maquis also used German weapons captured throughout the occupation; the Mauser 98k rifle and MP 40 submachine gun were very common. The French Militia (&quot;Milice française&quot;), which was well equipped by the French State, was also a target of Maquis actions wherever available.

==Customs==
The Maquis were clandestine groups which did not wear uniforms, so as to blend in the population. However, over time many started wearing the Basque beret because it was common enough not to arouse suspicion, but distinctive enough to be effective. 

In leadership and the more technical aspects of leading a resistance group women were often more involved in the Maquis than men, helping the front line fighters. It was very common for young educated women to be used as couriers from one Maquis group to another. Young women were chosen because they were more inconspicuous than men and could often pass through German checkpoints without being stopped or questioned. Allied operatives working with the Maquis described the women of the Maquis helping of the fighters as &quot;the lifeblood of the resistance, furnishing information, passing instructions, and arranging for food and supplies.&quot;

== Controversy ==

After the war, many individuals claimed membership in the Maquis to escape being labeled Nazi collaborators. Operations carried out by the Maquis were often inefficient and meant to grab attention, not destroy key military targets. Allied intelligence received reports that the Maquis would use explosives on targets that did not require them, to make their actions heard. Lack of centralization led to groups taking action to garner attention so that more members would join and they would receive more supplies from the Allied war effort. Some actions taken by these splintered groups were not always in favor of the larger war effort. Another controversy was their harsh punishment of German prisoners and French collaborators. In one instance recorded by an American OSS agent embedded in the Maquis, a group of fighters had captured three French men accused of collaborating with the Germans and giving them information about the Maquis location. The agent describes one man&#x27;s punishment saying, &quot;he was tied up in public before he was subsequently beaten and shot.&quot; There are also reports of French Maquis units which executed German prisoners.

==Notable maquis==

* Maquis de l&#x27;Ain et du Haut-Jura
* Maquis de Corrèze
* Maquis de Fontjun in the Hérault
* Georges Guingouin, Maquis du Limousin
* Maquis des Glières in the French Alps
* Maquis de l&#x27;Oisans in the French Alps
* Maquis du Grésivaudan in the French Alps
* Maquis du Vercors in the French Alps
* Maquis du Limousin in the Massif Central
* Maquis de Lozère directed by the German antifascist Otto Kühne
* Maquis du Mont Mouchet in the Auvergne
* in the Aude
* Maquis de Saffré in Loire Atlantique
* Maquis de Saint-Marcel in Brittany
* Corps Franc du Sidobre (Tarn)
* Maquis La Tourette in the Hérault created by Jean Bène
* Maquis de Vabre (Tarn)
* Maquis Vallier (Var)
* Maquis des Vosges
* Maquis de Rieumes in the Haute-Garonne
* Corps Franc de la Montagne Noire in the Montagne Noire (Aude, Tarn, Haute-Garonne)
* Mèo Maquis in Indochina, of which Vang Pao was a notable Hmong member operating in Laos. (The Hmong were formerly known by the exonym &quot;Meo&quot;)

==See also==
* Chant des Partisans
* Francs-tireurs
* Free France
* Maquis (Star Trek): a group of colonists in the &quot;Star Trek&quot; franchise that named themselves after the World War II fighters.
* Military history of France during World War II
* Organisation de résistance de l&#x27;armée
* Resistance during World War II
* Spanish Maquis
* Thiaroye massacre
* Zone libre
* Grenoble&#x27;s Saint-Bartholomew

== References ==

=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
 its chapter: 


=== Citations ===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q701165" start="4" end="10" title="Maquis (World War II)" label="Maquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="25" end="34" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="44" end="50" title="French Resistance" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987815" start="55" end="73" title="Belgian Resistance" label="Belgian Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="122" end="134" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="256" end="268" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="274" end="286" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="352" end="376" title="forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="forced labor for Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q667552" start="1036" end="1042" title="Maquis shrubland" label="maquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="1535" end="1562" title="Allied invasion of Normandy" label="Allied invasion of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="1581" end="1587" title="Allies (World War II)" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="1640" end="1651" title="Free France" label="Free France"/>
<link wikidata="Q186595" start="1725" end="1754" title="French Forces of the Interior" label="French Forces of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731766" start="2082" end="2109" title="Francs-Tireurs et Partisans" label="Francs-Tireurs et Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q192821" start="2184" end="2206" title="French Communist Party" label="French Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="2240" end="2251" title="French army" label="French army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575913" start="2527" end="2537" title="Zone libre" label="Zone libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q212429" start="2562" end="2581" title="metropolitan France" label="metropolitan France"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="2664" end="2676" title="French State" label="French State"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="2893" end="2901" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="2941" end="2945" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q55597938" start="2953" end="2961" title="Limousin (province)" label="Limousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="2978" end="2995" title="Guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="3118" end="3122" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="3149" end="3154" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy"/>
<link wikidata="Q597448" start="3306" end="3324" title="Maquis du Limousin" label="Maquis du Limousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287307" start="3332" end="3349" title="Maquis du Vercors" label="Maquis du Vercors"/>
<link wikidata="Q836897" start="3853" end="3874" title="Oradour-sur-Glane massacre" label="the Oradour-sur-Glane"/>
<link wikidata="Q324215" start="3876" end="3886" title="Maillé massacre" label="the Maillé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798534" start="3895" end="3909" title="Tulle massacre" label="Tulle massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="4178" end="4194" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172566" start="4354" end="4385" title="Corps Léger d&amp;#x27;Intervention" label="Corps Léger d&amp;#x27;Intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750809" start="4439" end="4448" title="Force 136" label="Force 136"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="4497" end="4507" title="right-wing" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="4508" end="4520" title="Nationalism" label="nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="4522" end="4530" title="Liberalism" label="liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="4532" end="4542" title="Socialism" label="socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="4544" end="4554" title="Communism" label="communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="4560" end="4570" title="Anarchism" label="anarchists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551347" start="4650" end="4676" title="Spanish Maquis" label="left-wing Spanish veterans"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="4684" end="4701" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815571" start="4729" end="4750" title="Carlos Romero Giménez" label="Carlos Romero Giménez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="4792" end="4800" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q41702276" start="4816" end="4828" title="Matthew Cobb" label="Matthew Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102839" start="5163" end="5180" title="Georges Guingouin" label="Georges Guingouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="5247" end="5275" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="5329" end="5340" title="Free French" label="Free French"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="5440" end="5468" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q564422" start="5562" end="5566" title="Bureau Central de Renseignements et d&amp;#x27;Action" label="BCRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628983" start="5586" end="5604" title="Operation Jedburgh" label="Operation Jedburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="5714" end="5717" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="OSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103122" start="6157" end="6181" title="Georges Loustaunau-Lacau" label="Georges Loustaunau-Lacau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292123" start="6186" end="6210" title="Marie-Madeleine Fourcade" label="Marie-Madeleine Fourcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q770215" start="6435" end="6443" title="Gaullism" label="Gaullist"/>
<link wikidata="Q770215" start="6676" end="6684" title="Gaullism" label="Gaullism"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="6836" end="6844" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="7130" end="7144" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355964" start="7346" end="7378" title="Organisation civile et militaire" label="Organisation civile et militaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q443312" start="7392" end="7407" title="Libération-Nord" label="Libération-Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947154" start="7421" end="7442" title="Ceux de la Libération" label="Ceux de la Libération"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947157" start="7456" end="7477" title="Ceux de la Résistance" label="Ceux de la Résistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q573162" start="7874" end="7880" title="Combat (French Resistance)" label="Combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q829453" start="7894" end="7908" title="Libération-Sud" label="Libération-Sud"/>
<link wikidata="Q329691" start="7925" end="7937" title="Franc-Tireur" label="Franc-Tireur"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="8081" end="8109" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q525212" start="9133" end="9163" title="Service du travail obligatoire" label="Service du travail obligatoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287291" start="11301" end="11321" title="Maquis de l&amp;#x27;Ain et du Haut-Jura" label="Maquis de l&amp;#x27;Ain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131943" start="11342" end="11353" title="Henri Romans-Petit" label="Henri Petit"/>
<link wikidata="Q642490" start="11460" end="11465" title="Bugey" label="Bugey"/>
<link wikidata="Q819875" start="11497" end="11506" title="La Bresse" label="La Bresse"/>
<link wikidata="Q649588" start="12058" end="12068" title="Nivollet-Montgriffon" label="Mongriffon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="12547" end="12565" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q186595" start="12688" end="12717" title="French Forces of the Interior" label="French Forces of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q188686" start="13177" end="13194" title="military occupation" label="occupation forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q234134" start="13238" end="13248" title="Nancy Wake" label="Nancy Wake"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="13397" end="13403" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435063" start="13583" end="13597" title="Vercors Massif" label="Vercors Massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287307" start="13603" end="13620" title="Maquis du Vercors" label="Maquis du Vercors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="13728" end="13745" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="General De Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13880" end="13895" title="French First Army#1944–1945" label="new French army"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="13999" end="14010" title="Free French" label="Free French"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="14081" end="14084" title="Special Operations Executive" label="SOE"/>
<link wikidata="Q211782" start="14212" end="14216" title="Sten" label="Sten"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993955" start="14223" end="14240" title="pencil detonators" label="pencil detonators"/>
<link wikidata="Q898359" start="14242" end="14260" title="plastic explosives" label="plastic explosives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935356" start="14262" end="14268" title="Welrod" label="Welrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q60134" start="14918" end="14928" title="Karabiner 98k" label="Mauser 98k"/>
<link wikidata="Q151044" start="14939" end="14944" title="MP 40" label="MP 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q178550" start="14945" end="14959" title="submachine gun" label="submachine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q579564" start="14982" end="14996" title="French Militia" label="French Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="15060" end="15072" title="French State" label="French State"/>
<link wikidata="Q211718" start="15292" end="15297" title="beret" label="beret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342294" start="16153" end="16170" title="Collaboration with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy" label="Nazi collaborator"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="16773" end="16793" title="French collaborators" label="French collaborators"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287291" start="17253" end="17289" title="Maquis de l&amp;#x27;Ain et du Haut-Jura" label="Maquis de l&amp;#x27;Ain et du Haut-Jura"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17292" end="17309" title="Maquis de Corrèze" label="Maquis de Corrèze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287280" start="17312" end="17329" title="Maquis de Fontjun" label="Maquis de Fontjun"/>
<link wikidata="Q12545" start="17337" end="17344" title="Hérault" label="Hérault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102839" start="17347" end="17364" title="Georges Guingouin" label="Georges Guingouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q931676" start="17387" end="17405" title="Maquis des Glières" label="Maquis des Glières"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630884" start="17413" end="17424" title="French Alps" label="French Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q96119106" start="17427" end="17450" title="Maquis de l&amp;#x27;Oisans" label="Maquis de l&amp;#x27;Oisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287307" start="17515" end="17532" title="Maquis du Vercors" label="Maquis du Vercors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630884" start="17540" end="17551" title="French Alps" label="French Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q597448" start="17554" end="17572" title="Maquis du Limousin" label="Maquis du Limousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190695" start="17580" end="17594" title="Massif Central" label="Massif Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q91778" start="17649" end="17659" title="Otto Kühne" label="Otto Kühne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890796" start="17662" end="17684" title="Maquis du Mont Mouchet" label="Maquis du Mont Mouchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152" start="17692" end="17700" title="Auvergne (region)" label="Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207" start="17710" end="17714" title="Aude" label="Aude"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287286" start="17717" end="17733" title="Maquis de Saffré" label="Maquis de Saffré"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068" start="17737" end="17753" title="Loire Atlantique" label="Loire Atlantique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287289" start="17756" end="17778" title="Maquis de Saint-Marcel" label="Maquis de Saint-Marcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="17782" end="17790" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12772" start="17817" end="17821" title="Tarn (department)" label="Tarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287302" start="17825" end="17843" title="Maquis La Tourette" label="Maquis La Tourette"/>
<link wikidata="Q12545" start="17851" end="17858" title="Hérault" label="Hérault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287285" start="17882" end="17897" title="Maquis de Vabre" label="Maquis de Vabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q12772" start="17899" end="17903" title="Tarn (department)" label="Tarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q656818" start="17907" end="17921" title="Maquis Vallier" label="Maquis Vallier"/>
<link wikidata="Q12789" start="17923" end="17926" title="Var (department)" label="Var"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287297" start="17930" end="17947" title="Maquis des Vosges" label="Maquis des Vosges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287282" start="17950" end="17967" title="Maquis de Rieumes" label="Maquis de Rieumes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12538" start="17975" end="17988" title="Haute-Garonne" label="Haute-Garonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q19952222" start="17991" end="18023" title="Corps Franc de la Montagne Noire" label="Corps Franc de la Montagne Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509963" start="18031" end="18045" title="Montagne Noire" label="Montagne Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207" start="18047" end="18051" title="Aude" label="Aude"/>
<link wikidata="Q12772" start="18053" end="18057" title="Tarn (department)" label="Tarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12538" start="18059" end="18072" title="Haute-Garonne" label="Haute-Garonne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18076" end="18086" title="Mèo Maquis" label="Mèo Maquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="18090" end="18099" title="Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q772637" start="18110" end="18118" title="Vang Pao" label="Vang Pao"/>
<link wikidata="Q219205" start="18133" end="18138" title="Hmong people" label="Hmong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754741" start="18243" end="18262" title="Chant des Partisans" label="Chant des Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q329691" start="18265" end="18279" title="Francs-tireurs" label="Francs-tireurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="18282" end="18293" title="Free France" label="Free France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070917" start="18296" end="18314" title="Maquis (Star Trek)" label="Maquis (Star Trek)"/>
<link wikidata="Q686876" start="18327" end="18336" title="space colonization" label="colonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672037" start="18433" end="18479" title="Military history of France during World War II" label="Military history of France during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q119169" start="18482" end="18524" title="Organisation de résistance de l&amp;#x27;armée" label="Organisation de résistance de l&amp;#x27;armée"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094191" start="18527" end="18557" title="Resistance during World War II" label="Resistance during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551347" start="18560" end="18574" title="Spanish Maquis" label="Spanish Maquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q303059" start="18577" end="18594" title="Thiaroye massacre" label="Thiaroye massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575913" start="18597" end="18607" title="Zone libre" label="Zone libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461853" start="18610" end="18643" title="Grenoble&amp;#x27;s Saint-Bartholomew" label="Grenoble&amp;#x27;s Saint-Bartholomew"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54837" wikidata="Q7621901" url="?curid=54837" title="Stratemeyer Syndicate">
<text>The Stratemeyer Syndicate was an American publishing company that produced a number of mystery book series for children, including Nancy Drew, The Hardy Boys, the various Tom Swift series, the Bobbsey Twins, the Rover Boys, and others. It published and contracted the many pseudonymous authors who wrote the series from 1899 to 1987, when it was sold to Simon &amp; Schuster.

== History ==
Created by Edward Stratemeyer, the Stratemeyer Syndicate was the first book packager to have its books aimed at children, rather than adults. The Syndicate was wildly successful; at one time it was believed that the overwhelming majority of the books children read in the United States were Stratemeyer Syndicate books, based on a 1922 study of over 36,000 American children.

Stratemeyer&#x27;s business acumen was in realizing that there was a huge, untapped market for children&#x27;s books. The Stratemeyer Syndicate specialized in producing books that were meant primarily to be entertaining. In Stratemeyer&#x27;s view, it was the thrill of feeling grown-up and the desire for a series of stories that made such reading attractive to children. Stratemeyer believed that this desire could be harnessed for profit. He founded the Stratemeyer Syndicate to produce books in an efficient, assembly-line fashion and to write them in such a way as to maximize their popularity.

The first series that Stratemeyer created was &quot;The Rover Boys&quot;, published under the pseudonym Arthur M. Winfield in 30 volumes between 1899 and 1926, which sold over five million copies. &quot;The Bobbsey Twins&quot; first appeared in 1904 under the pseudonym Laura Lee Hope, and &quot;Tom Swift&quot; in 1910 under the pseudonym Victor Appleton.

Stratemeyer published a number of books under his own name, but the books published under pseudonyms sold better. Stratemeyer realized that &quot;he could offer more books each year if he dealt with several publishers and had the books published under a number of pseudonyms which he controlled.&quot; Stratemeyer explained his strategy to a publisher, writing that &quot;[a] book brought out under another name would, I feel satisfied, do better than another Stratemeyer book. If this was brought out under my own name, the trade on new Stratemeyer books would simply be cut into four parts instead of three.&quot;

Some time in the first decade of the twentieth century Stratemeyer realized that he could no longer juggle multiple volumes of multiple series, and he began hiring ghostwriters, such as Mildred Benson, Josephine Lawrence, Howard R. Garis and Leslie McFarlane. Stratemeyer continued to write some books, while writing plot outlines for others.

While mystery elements were occasionally present in these early series, the Syndicate later specialized in children&#x27;s mystery series. This trend began in 1911, when Stratemeyer wrote and published &quot;The Mansion of Mystery&quot;, under the pseudonym Chester K. Steele. Five more books were published in that mystery series, the last in 1928. These books were aimed at a somewhat older audience than his previous series. After that, the Syndicate focused on mystery series aimed at its younger base: &quot;The Hardy Boys&quot;, which first appeared in 1927, ghostwritten by Leslie McFarlane and others; and &quot;Nancy Drew&quot;, which first appeared in 1930, ghostwritten by Mildred Wirt Benson, Walter Karig, and others. Both series were immediate financial successes.

In 1930, Stratemeyer died, and the Syndicate was inherited by his two daughters, Harriet Stratemeyer Adams and Edna Stratemeyer Squier. Stratemeyer Squier sold her share to her sister Harriet within a few years. Harriet Stratemeyer introduced such series as &quot;The Dana Girls&quot; (1934), &quot;Tom Swift Jr.&quot;, &quot;The Happy Hollisters&quot;, and many others. In the 1950s, Harriet began substantially revising old volumes in &quot;The Hardy Boys&quot; and &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; series, updating them by removing references to outdated cultural elements, such as &quot;roadster&quot;. Racial slurs and stereotypes were also removed, and in some cases (such as &quot;The Secret at Shadow Ranch&quot; and &quot;The Mystery at the Moss-Covered Mansion)&quot; entire plots were cast off and replaced with new ones. In part, these changes were motivated by a desire to make the books more up-to-date. Grosset &amp; Dunlap, the primary publisher of Stratemeyer Syndicate books, requested that the books&#x27; racism be excised, a project that Adams felt was unnecessary. Grosset &amp; Dunlap held firm; it had received an increasing number of letters from parents who were offended by the stereotypes present in the books, particularly in &quot;The Hardy Boys&quot; publications.

In the late 1970s, Adams decided it was time for Nancy and the Hardys to go into paperback, as the hardcover market was no longer what it had been. Grosset &amp; Dunlap sued, citing &quot;breach of contract, copyright infringement, and unfair competition&quot;. The ensuing case let the world know, for the first time, that the Syndicate existed; the Syndicate had always gone to great lengths to hide its existence from the public, and ghostwriters were contractually obliged never to reveal their authorship.

Grosset &amp; Dunlap was awarded the rights to &quot;The Hardy Boys&quot; and &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; volumes that it had published, but the Syndicate was judged free to take subsequent volumes elsewhere. Subsequent volumes were published by Simon &amp; Schuster.

Adams died in 1982. In 1984, Simon &amp; Schuster purchased the syndicate from its partners — Edward Stratemeyer Adams, Camilla Adams McClave, Patricia Adams Harr, Nancy Axelrod and Lilo Wuenn — and turned to Mega-Books, a book packager, to handle the writing process for new volumes.

==Writing guidelines==
All Stratemeyer Syndicate books were written under certain guidelines, based on practices Stratemeyer began with his first series, the &quot;Rover Boys&quot;.

* All books would be part of a series.
* To establish more quickly if a series was likely to be successful, the first several volumes would be published at once. These first volumes are often called &quot;breeders&quot;.
* The books would be written under a pseudonym. This would provide apparent continuity of authorship, even when an author died, and would disguise the fact that series were written by multiple ghostwriters and plot-outliners.
* The books would look as much like contemporary adult books as possible, with similar bindings and typefaces.
* The books would be of a predictable length.
* Chapters and pages should end mid-situation, to increase the reader&#x27;s desire to keep reading.
* Each book would begin with a quick recap of all previous books in that series, in order to promote those books.
* Books might also end with a preview of the next volume in the series: &quot;Nancy ... could not help but wonder when she might encounter as strange a mystery as the recent one. Such a case was to confront her soon, &quot;The Clue of the Whistling Bagpipes&quot;&quot;.
* The books would be priced at 50 cents, rather than the more common 75 cents, $1.00, or $1.25.
* Characters should not age or marry. Protagonists of early series such as the &quot;Rover Boys&quot;, &quot;Tom Swift&quot;, and &quot;Ruth Fielding&quot; grew up and married, and sales dropped afterward, prompting this rule.

==Criticism==
For decades, libraries refused to carry any Syndicate books, considering them to be unworthy trash. Series books were considered to &quot;cause &#x27;mental laziness,&#x27; induce a &#x27;fatal sluggishness,&#x27; and &#x27;intellectual torpor. Series books were considered to ruin a child&#x27;s chances for gaining an appreciation of good literature (which was subsequently shown by one study not to be the case), and to undermine respect for authority: &quot;Much of the contempt for social conventions ... is due to the reading of this poisonous sort of fiction.&quot;

Franklin K. Mathiews, chief librarian for the Boy Scouts of America, wrote that series books were a method, according to the title of one of his articles, for &quot;Blowing Out the Boys&#x27; Brains&quot;, and psychologist G. Stanley Hall articulated one of the most common concerns by asserting that series books would ruin girls in particular by giving them &quot;false views of [life] ... which will cloud her life with discontent in the future&quot;.

None of this hurt sales and Stratemeyer was unperturbed, even when his books were banned from the Newark Public Library as early as 1901, writing to a publisher: &quot;Personally it does not matter much to me. ... Taking them out of the Library has more than tripled the sales in Newark.&quot;

==Foreign publications==

Some syndicate series were also reprinted in foreign countries. An early foreign version was a Ted Scott Flying Stories book, published in Germany in 1930 as &quot;Ted Scott Der Ozeanflieger.&quot; The artwork was generally changed when reprinted in other countries, and sometimes character names and other details were as well. For example, in Norway, translations of the Nancy Drew books were first published in 1941, the first European market to introduce the girl detective. “The translators changed the color of Nancy&#x27;s car, shortened the text, and made the language easier to read; but they made no substantive changes” to the stories. By the 1970s, Nancy Drew stories had “been translated into Spanish, Swedish, French, German, Dutch, Italian, Danish, Finnish, Norwegian, and Icelandic.

Other series reprinted outside the States include &quot;The Dana Girls&quot;, &quot;The Hardy Boys&quot; and the &quot;Bobbsey Twins&quot; (in Australia, France, Sweden, and the UK). These other series first appeared around the 1950s outside the United States.

The second Stratemeyer Syndicate series to be reprinted outside the United States appears to have been the first two books in the Don Sturdy series, although exact dates of printing are unknown. Those were &quot;The Desert of Mystery&quot; and &quot;The Big Snake Hunters&quot;. There are two British versions known of the latter book; both were printed by The Children&#x27;s Press, one in the 1930s and the second, with different cover art, in the 1950s.

==See also==
* List of Stratemeyer Syndicate series

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* Klemesrud, Judy (4 April 1968). &quot;100 Books - and Not a Hippie in Them.&quot; &quot;The New York Times&quot;, p. 52. Accessed through ProQuest Historical Newspapers on 22 May 2009.
* 
* 
==External links==

* Edward Stratemeyer &amp; the Stratemeyer Syndicate – (c)2000 by James D. Keeline
* 

=== Project Gutenberg ebooks online ===
* Edward Stratemeyer
Victor Appleton; 
Richard Barnum;
Gerald Breckenridge;
Nicholas Carter;
Lester Chadwick;
Allen Chapman;
Alice B. Emerson; 
Howard Roger Garis;
Mabel C. Hawley;
Laura Lee Hope; 
Gertrude W. Morrison;
Margaret Penrose;
Homer Randall;
Roy Rockwood;
Frank V. Webster;
Arthur M. Winfield;
Mildred A. Wirt (Benson);
Clarence Young
&lt;br&gt;Not found 2023 as Gutenberg authors: Franklin W. Dixon; Carolyn Keene; Eugene Martin

=== Archival collections ===
* Stratemeyer Syndicate records at U. of Oregon (guide) at ArchivesWest
* Stratemeyer Syndicate records (guide) at New York Public Library 
* Stratemeyer Syndicate records (guide) at Archives at Yale </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7621901" start="4" end="25" title="Stratemeyer Syndicate" label="Stratemeyer Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076932" start="131" end="141" title="Nancy Drew" label="Nancy Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471089" start="143" end="157" title="The Hardy Boys" label="The Hardy Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493809" start="171" end="180" title="Tom Swift" label="Tom Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520046" start="193" end="206" title="Bobbsey Twins" label="Bobbsey Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371689" start="212" end="222" title="Rover Boys" label="Rover Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="354" end="374" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293795" start="402" end="420" title="Edward Stratemeyer" label="Edward Stratemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q892972" start="462" end="475" title="Book packaging" label="book packager"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371689" start="1425" end="1435" title="Rover Boys" label="Rover Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293795" start="1473" end="1491" title="Edward Stratemeyer" label="Arthur M. Winfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520046" start="1572" end="1589" title="Bobbsey Twins" label="The Bobbsey Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499118" start="1639" end="1653" title="Laura Lee Hope" label="Laura Lee Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493809" start="1665" end="1674" title="Tom Swift" label="Tom Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557128" start="1709" end="1724" title="Victor Appleton" label="Victor Appleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="2508" end="2519" title="ghostwriter" label="ghostwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814719" start="2530" end="2544" title="Mildred Benson" label="Mildred Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288403" start="2546" end="2564" title="Josephine Lawrence" label="Josephine Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920671" start="2566" end="2581" title="Howard R. Garis" label="Howard R. Garis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14767574" start="2586" end="2602" title="Leslie McFarlane" label="Leslie McFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093618" start="2946" end="2963" title="Chester K. Steele" label="Chester K. Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471089" start="3201" end="3215" title="The Hardy Boys" label="The Hardy Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076932" start="3308" end="3318" title="Nancy Drew" label="Nancy Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814719" start="3372" end="3391" title="Mildred Benson" label="Mildred Wirt Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545012" start="3393" end="3405" title="Walter Karig" label="Walter Karig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040664" start="3549" end="3574" title="Harriet Adams" label="Harriet Stratemeyer Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q134117" start="3732" end="3746" title="The Dana Girls" label="The Dana Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817736" start="3767" end="3780" title="Tom Swift Jr." label="Tom Swift Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7738819" start="3794" end="3814" title="The Happy Hollisters" label="The Happy Hollisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836696" start="4146" end="4172" title="The Secret at Shadow Ranch" label="The Secret at Shadow Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752877" start="4189" end="4228" title="The Mystery at the Moss-Covered Mansion" label="The Mystery at the Moss-Covered Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758354" start="4243" end="4247" title="Plot (narrative)" label="plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117078" start="4376" end="4396" title="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap" label="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="5508" end="5528" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q48850762" start="7322" end="7335" title="Ruth Fielding" label="Ruth Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="8048" end="8069" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q309675" start="8225" end="8240" title="G. Stanley Hall" label="G. Stanley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q22732" start="8717" end="8734" title="Streisand effect" label="tripled the sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693714" start="8874" end="8898" title="Ted Scott Flying Stories" label="Ted Scott Flying Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293579" start="9971" end="9981" title="Don Sturdy" label="Don Sturdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598498" start="10314" end="10350" title="List of Stratemeyer Syndicate series" label="List of Stratemeyer Syndicate series"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="11309" end="11332" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54838" wikidata="Q171076" url="?curid=54838" title="Biogas">
<text>Biogas is a gaseous renewable energy source produced from raw materials such as agricultural waste, manure, municipal waste, plant material, sewage, green waste, wastewater, and food waste. Biogas is produced by anaerobic digestion with anaerobic organisms or methanogens inside an anaerobic digester, biodigester or a bioreactor.
The gas composition is primarily methane () and carbon dioxide () and may have small amounts of hydrogen sulfide (), moisture and siloxanes. The methane can be combusted or oxidized with oxygen. This energy release allows biogas to be used as a fuel; it can be used in fuel cells and for heating purpose, such as in cooking. It can also be used in a gas engine to convert the energy in the gas into electricity and heat.

After removal of carbon dioxide and hydrogen sulfide it can be compressed in the same way as natural gas and used to power motor vehicles. In the United Kingdom, for example, biogas is estimated to have the potential to replace around 17% of vehicle fuel. It qualifies for renewable energy subsidies in some parts of the world. Biogas can be cleaned and upgraded to natural gas standards, when it becomes bio-methane. Biogas is considered to be a renewable resource because its production-and-use cycle is continuous, and it generates no net carbon dioxide. From a carbon perspective, as much carbon dioxide is absorbed from the atmosphere in the growth of the primary bio-resource as is released, when the material is ultimately converted to energy.

==Production==
Biogas is produced by microorganisms, such as methanogens and sulfate-reducing bacteria, performing anaerobic respiration. Biogas can refer to gas produced naturally and industrially.

===Natural===

In soil, methane is produced in anaerobic environments by methanogens, but is mostly consumed in aerobic zones by methanotrophs. Methane emissions result when the balance favors methanogens. Wetland soils are the main natural source of methane. Other sources include oceans, forest soils, termites, and wild ruminants.

===Industrial===

The purpose of industrial biogas production is the collection of biomethane, usually for fuel. Industrial biogas is produced either;
* As landfill gas (LFG), which is produced by the decomposition of biodegradable waste inside a landfill due to chemical reactions and microbes, or
* As digested gas, produced inside an anaerobic digester.

==== Bio-gas Plants ====
A &quot;biogas plant&quot; is the name often given to an anaerobic digester that treats farm wastes or energy crops. It can be produced using anaerobic digesters (air-tight tanks with different configurations). These plants can be fed with energy crops such as maize silage or biodegradable wastes including sewage sludge and food waste. During the process, the micro-organisms transform biomass waste into biogas (mainly methane and carbon dioxide) and digestate. Higher quantities of biogas can be produced when the wastewater is co-digested with other residuals from the dairy industry, sugar industry, or brewery industry. For example, while mixing 90% of wastewater from beer factory with 10% cow whey, the production of biogas was increased by 2.5 times compared to the biogas produced by wastewater from the brewery only.

Manufacturing of biogas from intentionally planted maize has been described as being unsustainable and harmful due to very concentrated, intense and soil eroding character of these plantations.

==== Key processes ====
There are two key processes: mesophilic and thermophilic digestion which is dependent on temperature. In experimental work at University of Alaska Fairbanks, a 1000-litre digester using psychrophiles harvested from &quot;mud from a frozen lake in Alaska&quot; has produced 200–300 liters of methane per day, about 20–30% of the output from digesters in warmer climates.

==== Dangers ====
The air pollution produced by biogas is similar to that of natural gas as when methane (a major constituent of biogas) is ignited for its usage as an energy source, Carbon dioxide is made as a product which is a greenhouse gas ( as described by this equation: + 2 → + 2 ). The content of toxic hydrogen sulfide presents additional risks and has been responsible for serious accidents. Leaks of unburned methane are an additional risk, because methane is a potent greenhouse gas. A facility may leak 2% of the methane.

Biogas can be explosive when mixed in the ratio of one part biogas to 8–20 parts air. Special safety precautions have to be taken for entering an empty biogas digester for maintenance work. It is important that a biogas system never has negative pressure as this could cause an explosion. Negative gas pressure can occur if too much gas is removed or leaked; Because of this biogas should not be used at pressures below one column inch of water, measured by a pressure gauge.

Frequent smell checks must be performed on a biogas system. If biogas is smelled anywhere windows and doors should be opened immediately. If there is a fire the gas should be shut off at the gate valve of the biogas system.

== Landfill gas ==

Landfill gas is produced by wet organic waste decomposing under anaerobic conditions in a similar way to biogas.

The waste is covered and mechanically compressed by the weight of the material that is deposited above. This material prevents oxygen exposure thus allowing anaerobic microbes to thrive. Biogas builds up and is slowly released into the atmosphere if the site has not been engineered to capture the gas. Landfill gas released in an uncontrolled way can be hazardous since it can become explosive when it escapes from the landfill and mixes with oxygen. The lower explosive limit is 5% methane and the upper is 15% methane.

The methane in biogas is 28 times more potent a greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide. Therefore, uncontained landfill gas, which escapes into the atmosphere may significantly contribute to the effects of global warming. In addition, volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in landfill gas contribute to the formation of photochemical smog.

===Technical===
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) is a measure of the amount of oxygen required by aerobic micro-organisms to decompose the organic matter in a sample of material being used in the biodigester as well as the BOD for the liquid discharge allows for the calculation of the daily energy output from a biodigester.

Another term related to biodigesters is effluent dirtiness, which tells how much organic material there is per unit of biogas source. Typical units for this measure are in mg BOD/litre. As an example, effluent dirtiness can range between 800 and 1200 mg BOD/litre in Panama.

From 1 kg of decommissioned kitchen bio-waste, 0.45 m3 of biogas can be obtained. The price for collecting biological waste from households is approximately €70 per ton.

== Composition ==
The composition of biogas varies depending upon the substrate composition, as well as the conditions within the anaerobic reactor (temperature, pH, and substrate concentration). Landfill gas typically has methane concentrations around 50%. Advanced waste treatment technologies can produce biogas with 55–75% methane, which for reactors with free liquids can be increased to 80–90% methane using in-situ gas purification techniques. As produced, biogas contains water vapor. The fractional volume of water vapor is a function of biogas temperature; correction of measured gas volume for water vapour content and thermal expansion is easily done via simple mathematics which yields the standardized volume of dry biogas.

For 1000 kg (wet weight) of input to a typical biodigester, total solids may be 30% of the wet weight while volatile suspended solids may be 90% of the total solids. Protein would be 20% of the volatile solids, carbohydrates would be 70% of the volatile solids, and finally fats would be 10% of the volatile solids.

=== Contaminants ===
==== Sulfur compounds ====
Toxic, corrosive and foul smelling hydrogen sulfide () is the most common contaminant in biogas. If not separated, combustion will produce sulfur dioxide () and sulfuric acid (), which are corrosive and environmentally hazardous., Other sulfur-containing compounds, such as thiols may be present.

==== Ammonia ====
Ammonia () is produced from organic compounds containing nitrogen, such as the amino acids in proteins. If not separated from the biogas, combustion results in  emissions.

==== Siloxanes ====
In some cases, biogas contains siloxanes. They are formed from the anaerobic decomposition of materials commonly found in soaps and detergents. During combustion of biogas containing siloxanes, silicon is released and can combine with free oxygen or other elements in the combustion gas. Deposits are formed containing mostly silica () or silicates () and can contain calcium, sulfur, zinc, phosphorus. Such &quot;white mineral&quot; deposits accumulate to a surface thickness of several millimeters and must be removed by chemical or mechanical means.

Practical and cost-effective technologies to remove siloxanes and other biogas contaminants are available.

==Benefits of manure derived biogas==

High levels of methane are produced when manure is stored under anaerobic conditions. During storage and when manure has been applied to the land, nitrous oxide is also produced as a byproduct of the denitrification process. Nitrous oxide () is 320 times more aggressive as a greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide and methane 25 times more than carbon dioxide.
By converting cow manure into methane biogas via anaerobic digestion, the millions of cattle in the United States would be able to produce 100 billion kilowatt hours of electricity, enough to power millions of homes across the United States. One cow can produce enough manure in one day to generate 3 kilowatt hours of electricity. Furthermore, by converting cattle manure into methane biogas instead of letting it decompose, global warming gases could be reduced by 99 million metric tons or 4%.

==Applications==
Biogas can be used for electricity production on sewage works, in a CHP gas engine, where the waste heat from the engine is conveniently used for heating the digester; cooking; space heating; water heating; and process heating. If compressed, it can replace compressed natural gas for use in vehicles, where it can fuel an internal combustion engine or fuel cells and is a much more effective displacer of carbon dioxide than the normal use in on-site CHP plants.

===Biogas upgrading===
Raw biogas produced from digestion is roughly 60% methane and 39% with trace elements of : inadequate for use in machinery. The corrosive nature of alone is enough to destroy the mechanisms.

Methane in biogas can be concentrated via a biogas upgrader to the same standards as fossil natural gas, which itself has to go through a cleaning process, and becomes &quot;biomethane&quot;. If the local gas network allows, the producer of the biogas may use their distribution networks. Gas must be very clean to reach pipeline quality and must be of the correct composition for the distribution network to accept. Carbon dioxide, water, hydrogen sulfide, and particulates must be removed if present.

There are four main methods of upgrading: water washing, pressure swing absorption, selexol absorption, and amine gas treating. In addition to these, the use of membrane separation technology for biogas upgrading is increasing, and there are already several plants operating in Europe and USA.

The most prevalent method is water washing where high pressure gas flows into a column where the carbon dioxide and other trace elements are scrubbed by cascading water running counter-flow to the gas. This arrangement could deliver 98% methane with manufacturers guaranteeing maximum 2% methane loss in the system. It takes roughly between 3% and 6% of the total energy output in gas to run a biogas upgrading system.

===Biogas gas-grid injection===
Gas-grid injection is the injection of biogas into the methane grid (natural gas grid). Until the breakthrough of micro combined heat and power two-thirds of all the energy produced by biogas power plants was lost (as heat). Using the grid to transport the gas to consumers, the energy can be used for on-site generation, resulting in a reduction of losses in the transportation of energy. Typical energy losses in natural gas transmission systems range from 1% to 2%; in electricity transmission they range from 5% to 8%.

Before being injected in the gas grid, biogas passes a cleaning process, during which it is upgraded to natural gas quality. During the cleaning process trace components harmful to the gas grid and the final users are removed.

===Biogas in transport===

If concentrated and compressed, it can be used in vehicle transportation. Compressed biogas is becoming widely used in Sweden, Switzerland, and Germany. A biogas-powered train, named Biogaståget Amanda (The Biogas Train Amanda), has been in service in Sweden since 2005. Biogas powers automobiles. In 1974, a British documentary film titled &quot;Sweet as a Nut&quot; detailed the biogas production process from pig manure and showed how it fueled a custom-adapted combustion engine. In 2007, an estimated 12,000 vehicles were being fueled with upgraded biogas worldwide, mostly in Europe.

Biogas is part of the wet gas and condensing gas (or air) category that includes mist or fog in the gas stream. The mist or fog is predominately water vapor that condenses on the sides of pipes or stacks throughout the gas flow. Biogas environments include wastewater digesters, landfills, and animal feeding operations (covered livestock lagoons).

Ultrasonic flow meters are one of the few devices capable of measuring in a biogas atmosphere. Most of thermal flow meters are unable to provide reliable data because the moisture causes steady high flow readings and continuous flow spiking, although there are single-point insertion thermal mass flow meters capable of accurately monitoring biogas flows with minimal pressure drop. They can handle moisture variations that occur in the flow stream because of daily and seasonal temperature fluctuations, and account for the moisture in the flow stream to produce a dry gas value.

=== Biogas generated heat/electricity ===
Biogas can be used in different types of internal combustion engines, such as the Jenbacher or Caterpillar gas engines. Other internal combustion engines such as gas turbines are suitable for the conversion of biogas into both electricity and heat. The digestate is the remaining inorganic matter that was not transformed into biogas. It can be used as an agricultural fertiliser.

Biogas can be used as the fuel in the system of producing biogas from agricultural wastes and co-generating heat and electricity in a combined heat and power (CHP) plant. Unlike the other green energy such as wind and solar, the biogas can be quickly accessed on demand. The global warming potential can also be greatly reduced when using biogas as the fuel instead of fossil fuel.

However, the and eutrophication potentials produced by biogas are 25 and 12 times higher respectively than fossil fuel alternatives. This impact can be reduced by using correct combination of feedstocks, covered storage for digesters and improved techniques for retrieving escaped material. Overall, the results still suggest that using biogas can lead to significant reduction in most impacts compared to fossil fuel alternative. The balance between environmental damage and green house gas emission should still be considered while implicating the system.

== Technological advancements ==
Projects such as NANOCLEAN are nowadays developing new ways to produce biogas more efficiently, using iron oxide nanoparticles in the processes of organic waste treatment. This process can triple the production of biogas.

=== Biogas and Sanitation ===
Faecal Sludge is a product of onsite sanitation systems. Post collection and transportation, Faecal sludge can be treated with sewage in a conventional treatment plant, or otherwise it can be treated independently in a faecal sludge treatment plant. Faecal sludge can also be co-treated with organic solid waste in composting or in an anaerobic digestion system. Biogas can be generated through anaerobic digestion in the treatment of faecal sludge.

The appropriate management of excreta and its valorisation through the production of biogas from faecal sludge helps mitigate the effects of poorly managed excreta such as waterborne diseases and water and environmental pollution.

The Resource Recovery and Reuse (RRR) ) is a subprogram of the CGIAR Research Program on Water, Land and Ecosystems (WLE) dedicated to applied research on the safe recovery of water, nutrients and energy from domestic and agro-industrial waste streams. They believe using waste as energy would be good financially and would tackle sanitation, health and environmental issues.

==Legislation==
===European Union===
The European Union has legislation regarding waste management and landfill sites called the Landfill Directive.

Countries such as the United Kingdom and Germany now have legislation in force that provides farmers with long-term revenue and energy security.

The EU mandates that internal combustion engines with biogas have ample gas pressure to optimize combustion, and within the European Union ATEX centrifugal fan units built in accordance with the European directive 2014–34/EU (previously 94/9/EG) are obligatory. These centrifugal fan units, for example Combimac, Meidinger AG or Witt &amp; Sohn AG are suitable for use in Zone 1 and 2 .

===United States===
The United States legislates against landfill gas as it contains VOCs. The United States Clean Air Act and Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) requires landfill owners to estimate the quantity of non-methane organic compounds (NMOCs) emitted. If the estimated NMOC emissions exceeds 50 tonnes per year, the landfill owner is required to collect the gas and treat it to remove the entrained NMOCs. That usually means burning it.
Because of the remoteness of landfill sites, it is sometimes not economically feasible to produce electricity from the gas.

There are a variety of grants and loans the support the development of anaerobic digestor systems. The Rural Energy for American Program provides loan financing and grant funding for biogas systems, as does the Environmental Quality Incentives Program, Conservation Stewardship Program, and Conservation Loan Program.

==Global developments==
=== United States ===
With the many benefits of biogas, it is starting to become a popular source of energy and is starting to be used in the United States more. In 2003, the United States consumed of energy from &quot;landfill gas&quot;, about 0.6% of the total U.S. natural gas consumption. Methane biogas derived from cow manure is being tested in the U.S. According to a 2008 study, collected by the &quot;Science and Children&quot; magazine, methane biogas from cow manure would be sufficient to produce 100 billion kilowatt hours enough to power millions of homes across America. Furthermore, methane biogas has been tested to prove that it can reduce 99 million metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions or about 4% of the greenhouse gases produced by the United States.

The number of farm-based digesters increased by 21% in 2021 according to the American Biogas Council. In Vermont biogas generated on dairy farms was included in the CVPS Cow Power program. The program was originally offered by Central Vermont Public Service Corporation as a voluntary tariff and now with a recent merger with Green Mountain Power is now the GMP Cow Power Program. Customers can elect to pay a premium on their electric bill, and that premium is passed directly to the farms in the program. In Sheldon, Vermont, Green Mountain Dairy has provided renewable energy as part of the Cow Power program. It started when the brothers who own the farm, Bill and Brian Rowell, wanted to address some of the manure management challenges faced by dairy farms, including manure odor, and nutrient availability for the crops they need to grow to feed the animals. They installed an anaerobic digester to process the cow and milking center waste from their 950 cows to produce renewable energy, a bedding to replace sawdust, and a plant-friendly fertilizer. The energy and environmental attributes are sold to the GMP Cow Power program. On average, the system run by the Rowells produces enough electricity to power 300 to 350 other homes. The generator capacity is about 300 kilowatts.

In Hereford, Texas, cow manure is being used to power an ethanol power plant. By switching to methane biogas, the ethanol power plant has saved 1000 barrels of oil a day. Over all, the power plant has reduced transportation costs and will be opening many more jobs for future power plants that will rely on biogas.

In Oakley, Kansas, an ethanol plant considered to be one of the largest biogas facilities in North America is using integrated manure utilization system (IMUS) to produce heat for its boilers by utilizing feedlot manure, municipal organics and ethanol plant waste. At full capacity the plant is expected to replace 90% of the fossil fuel used in the manufacturing process of ethanol and methanol.

In California, the Southern California Gas Company has advocated for mixing biogas into existing natural gas pipelines. However, California state officials have taken the position that biogas is &quot;better used in hard-to-electrify sectors of the economy-- like aviation, heavy industry and long-haul trucking&quot;.

=== Europe ===

The level of development varies greatly in Europe. While countries such as Germany, Austria, Sweden and Italy are fairly advanced in their use of biogas, there is a vast potential for this renewable energy source in the rest of the continent, especially in Eastern Europe. MT-Energie is a German biogas technology company operating in the field of renewable energies. Different legal frameworks, education schemes and the availability of technology are among the prime reasons behind this untapped potential. Another challenge for the further progression of biogas has been negative public perception.

In February 2009, the European Biogas Association (EBA) was founded in Brussels as a non-profit organisation to promote the deployment of sustainable biogas production and use in Europe. EBA&#x27;s strategy defines three priorities: establish biogas as an important part of Europe&#x27;s energy mix, promote source separation of household waste to increase the gas potential, and support the production of biomethane as vehicle fuel. In July 2013, it had 60 members from 24 countries across Europe.

==== UK ====
, there are about 130 non-sewage biogas plants in the UK. Most are on-farm, and some larger facilities exist off-farm, which are taking food and consumer wastes.

On 5 October 2010, biogas was injected into the UK gas grid for the first time. Sewage from over 30,000 Oxfordshire homes is sent to Didcot sewage treatment works, where it is treated in an anaerobic digestor to produce biogas, which is then cleaned to provide gas for approximately 200 homes.

In 2015 the Green-Energy company Ecotricity announced their plans to build three grid-injecting digesters.

==== Italy ====
In Italy the biogas industry first started in 2008, thanks to the introduction of advantageous feed tariffs. They were later replaced by feed-in premiums and the preference was given to by products and farming waste and leading to stagnation in biogas production and derived heat and electricity since 2012., in Italy there are more than 200 biogas plants with a production of about 1.2 GW

==== Germany ====
Germany is Europe&#x27;s biggest biogas producer and the market leader in biogas technology. In 2010 there were 5,905 biogas plants operating throughout the country: Lower Saxony, Bavaria, and the eastern federal states are the main regions. Most of these plants are employed as power plants. Usually the biogas plants are directly connected with a CHP which produces electric power by burning the bio methane. The electrical power is then fed into the public power grid. In 2010, the total installed electrical capacity of these power plants was 2,291 MW. The electricity supply was approximately 12.8 TWh, which is 12.6% of the total generated renewable electricity.

Biogas in Germany is primarily extracted by the co-fermentation of energy crops (called &#x27;NawaRo&#x27;, an abbreviation of &quot;nachwachsende Rohstoffe&quot;, German for renewable resources) mixed with manure. The main crop used is corn. Organic waste and industrial and agricultural residues such as waste from the food industry are also used for biogas generation. In this respect, biogas production in Germany differs significantly from the UK, where biogas generated from landfill sites is most common.

Biogas production in Germany has developed rapidly over the last 20 years. The main reason is the legally created frameworks. Government support of renewable energy started in 1991 with the Electricity Feed-in Act (&quot;StrEG&quot;). This law guaranteed the producers of energy from renewable sources the feed into the public power grid, thus the power companies were forced to take all produced energy from independent private producers of green energy. In 2000 the Electricity Feed-in Act was replaced by the Renewable Energy Sources Act (&quot;EEG&quot;). This law even guaranteed a fixed compensation for the produced electric power over 20 years. The amount of around 8¢/kWh gave farmers the opportunity to become energy suppliers and gain a further source of income.

The German agricultural biogas production was given a further push in 2004 by implementing the so-called NawaRo-Bonus. This is a special payment given for the use of renewable resources, that is, energy crops. In 2007 the German government stressed its intention to invest further effort and support in improving the renewable energy supply to provide an answer on growing climate challenges and increasing oil prices by the &#x27;Integrated Climate and Energy Programme&#x27;.

This continual trend of renewable energy promotion induces a number of challenges facing the management and organisation of renewable energy supply that has also several impacts on the biogas production. The first challenge to be noticed is the high area-consuming of the biogas electric power supply. In 2011 energy crops for biogas production consumed an area of circa 800,000 ha in Germany. This high demand of agricultural areas generates new competitions with the food industries that did not exist hitherto. Moreover, new industries and markets were created in predominately rural regions entailing different new players with an economic, political and civil background. Their influence and acting has to be governed to gain all advantages this new source of energy is offering. Finally biogas will furthermore play an important role in the German renewable energy supply if good governance is focused.

===Developing countries===
Domestic biogas plants convert livestock manure and night soil into biogas and slurry, the fermented manure. This technology is feasible for small-holders with livestock producing 50 kg manure per day, an equivalent of about 6 pigs or 3 cows. This manure has to be collectable to mix it with water and feed it into the plant. Toilets can be connected. Another precondition is the temperature that affects the fermentation process. With an optimum at 36 °C the technology especially applies for those living in a (sub) tropical climate. This makes the technology for small holders in developing countries often suitable.
Depending on size and location, a typical brick made fixed dome biogas plant can be installed at the yard of a rural household with the investment between US$300 to $500 in Asian countries and up to $1400 in the African context. A high quality biogas plant needs minimum maintenance costs and can produce gas for at least 15–20 years without major problems and re-investments. For the user, biogas provides clean cooking energy, reduces indoor air pollution, and reduces the time needed for traditional biomass collection, especially for women and children. The slurry is a clean organic fertilizer that potentially increases agricultural productivity. In developing countries, it was also determined that the use of biogas leads to a 20% reduction in GHG emissions compared with GHG emissions due to firewood. Moreover, GHG emissions of 384.1 kg CO2-eq·y−1 per animal could be prevented.

Energy is an important part of modern society and can serve as one of the most important indicators of socio-economic development. As much as there have been advancements in technology, even so, some three billion people, primarily in the rural areas of developing countries, continue to access their energy needs for cooking through traditional means by burning biomass resources like firewood, crop residues and animal dung in crude traditional stoves.

Domestic biogas technology is a proven and established technology in many parts of the world, especially Asia. Several countries in this region have embarked on large-scale programmes on domestic biogas, such as China and India.

The Netherlands Development Organisation, SNV, supports national programmes on domestic biogas that aim to establish commercial-viable domestic biogas sectors in which local companies market, install and service biogas plants for households. In Asia, SNV is working in Nepal, Vietnam, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Cambodia, Lao PDR, Pakistan and Indonesia, and in Africa; Rwanda, Senegal, Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Tanzania, Uganda, Kenya, Benin and Cameroon.

In South Africa a prebuilt Biogas system is manufactured and sold. One key feature is that installation requires less skill and is quicker to install as the digester tank is premade plastic.

==== India ====
Biogas in India has been traditionally based on dairy manure as feed stock and these &quot;gobar&quot; gas plants have been in operation for a long period of time, especially in rural India. In the last 2–3 decades, research organisations with a focus on rural energy security have enhanced the design of the systems resulting in newer efficient low cost designs such as the Deenabandhu model.

The Deenabandhu Model is a new biogas-production model popular in India. (&quot;Deenabandhu&quot; means &quot;friend of the helpless&quot;.) The unit usually has a capacity of 2 to 3 cubic metres. It is constructed using bricks or by a ferrocement mixture. In India, the brick model costs slightly more than the ferrocement model; however, India&#x27;s Ministry of New and Renewable Energy offers some subsidy per model constructed.

Biogas which is mainly methane/natural gas can also be used for generating protein rich cattle, poultry and fish feed in villages economically by cultivating &quot;Methylococcus capsulatus&quot; bacteria culture with tiny land and water foot print. The carbon dioxide gas produced as by product from these plants can be put to use in cheaper production of algae oil or spirulina from algaculture particularly in tropical countries like India which can displace the prime position of crude oil in near future. Union government of India is implementing many schemes to utilise productively the agro waste or biomass in rural areas to uplift rural economy and job potential. With these plants, the non-edible biomass or waste of edible biomass is converted in to high value products without any water pollution or green house gas (GHG) emissions.

LPG (Liquefied Petroleum Gas) is a key source of cooking fuel in urban India and its prices have been increasing along with the global fuel prices. Also the heavy subsidies provided by the successive governments in promoting LPG as a domestic cooking fuel has become a financial burden renewing the focus on biogas as a cooking fuel alternative in urban establishments. This has led to the development of prefabricated digester for modular deployments as compared to RCC and cement structures which take a longer duration to construct. Renewed focus on process technology like the Biourja process model has enhanced the stature of medium and large scale anaerobic digester in India as a potential alternative to LPG as primary cooking fuel.

In India, Nepal, Pakistan and Bangladesh biogas produced from the anaerobic digestion of manure in small-scale digestion facilities is called gobar gas; it is estimated that such facilities exist in over 2 million households in India, 50,000 in Bangladesh and thousands in Pakistan, particularly North Punjab, due to the thriving population of livestock. The digester is an airtight circular pit made of concrete with a pipe connection. The manure is directed to the pit, usually straight from the cattle shed. The pit is filled with a required quantity of wastewater. The gas pipe is connected to the kitchen fireplace through control valves. The combustion of this biogas has very little odour or smoke. Owing to simplicity in implementation and use of cheap raw materials in villages, it is one of the most environmentally sound energy sources for rural needs. One type of these system is the Sintex Digester. Some designs use vermiculture to further enhance the slurry produced by the biogas plant for use as compost.

In Pakistan, the Rural Support Programmes Network is running the Pakistan Domestic Biogas Programme which has installed 5,360 biogas plants and has trained in excess of 200 masons on the technology and aims to develop the Biogas Sector in Pakistan.

In Nepal, the government provides subsidies to build biogas plant at home.

====China====
As of at least 2023, China is both the world&#x27;s largest producer and largest consumer of household biogas.

The Chinese have experimented with the applications of biogas since 1958. Around 1970, China had installed 6,000,000 digesters in an effort to make agriculture more efficient. During the last few years, technology has met high growth rates. This seems to be the earliest developments in generating biogas from agricultural waste.

The rural biogas construction in China has shown an increased development trend. The exponential growth of energy supply caused by rapid economic development and severe haze condition in China have led biogas to become the better eco-friendly energy for the rural areas. In Qing county, Hebei Province, the technology of using crop straw as a main material to generate biogas is currently developing.

China had 26.5 million biogas plants, with an output of 10.5 billion cubic meter biogas until 2007. The annual biogas output has increased to 248 billion cubic meter in 2010. The Chinese government had supported and funded rural biogas projects. As of 2023, more than 30 million rural Chinese households use biogas digesters.

During the winter, the biogas production in northern regions of China is lower. This is caused by the lack of heat control technology for digesters thus the co-digestion of different feedstock failed to complete in the cold environment.

==== Zambia ====
Lusaka, the capital city of Zambia, has two million inhabitants with over half of the population residing in peri-urban areas. The majority of this population use pit latrines as toilets generating approximately 22,680 tons of fecal sludge per annum. This sludge is inadequately managed: Over 60% of the generated faecal sludge remains within the residential environment thereby compromising both the environment and public health.

In the face of research work and implementation of biogas having started as early as in the 1980s, Zambia is lagging behind in the adoption and use of biogas in the sub-Saharan Africa. Animal manure and crop residues are required for the provision of energy for cooking and lighting. Inadequate funding, absence of policy, regulatory framework and strategies on biogas, unfavorable investor monetary policy, inadequate expertise, lack of awareness of the benefits of biogas technology among leaders, financial institutions and locals, resistance to change due cultural and traditions of the locals, high installation and maintenance costs of biogas digesters, inadequate research and development, improper management and lack of monitoring of installed digesters, complexity of the carbon market, lack of incentives and social equity are among the challenges that have impeded the acquiring and sustainable implementation of domestic biogas production in Zambia.

== Associations ==
* World Biogas Association (https://www.worldbiogasassociation.org/)
* Anaerobic Digestion and Bioresources Association (United Kingdom) (https://adbioresources.org/)
* American Biogas Council (https://americanbiogascouncil.org/)
* Canadian Biogas Association (https://www.biogasassociation.ca/)
* European Biogas Association
* German Biogas Association
* Indian Biogas Association

== Society and culture ==
In the 1985 Australian film &quot;Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome&quot; the post-apocalyptic settlement Barter town is powered by a central biogas system based upon a piggery. As well as providing electricity, methane is used to power Barter&#x27;s vehicles.

&quot;Cow Town&quot;, written in the early 1940s, discusses the travails of a city vastly built on cow manure and the hardships brought upon by the resulting methane biogas. Carter McCormick, an engineer from a town outside the city, is sent in to figure out a way to utilize this gas to help power, rather than suffocate, the city.

Contemporary biogas production provides new opportunities for skilled employment, drawing on the development of new technologies.

==See also==
*
*
*
*
*
* (municipal solid waste and landfill gas)
*
*
*


==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Updated Guidebook on Biogas Development&quot;. United Nations, New York, (1984) Energy Resources Development Series No. 27. p. 178, 30 cm.
* Book: Biogas from Waste and Renewable Resources. WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &amp; Co. KGaA, (2008) Dieter Deublein and Angelika Steinhauser
* A Comparison between Shale Gas in China and Unconventional Fuel Development in the United States: Health, Water and Environmental Risks by Paolo Farah and Riccardo Tremolada. This is a paper presented at the Colloquium on Environmental Scholarship 2013 hosted by Vermont Law School (11 October 2013)
*Woodhead Publishing Series. (2013). &quot;The Biogas Handbook: Science, Production and Applications.&quot; 
*Lazenby, Ruthie (15 August 2022). &quot;Rethinking Manure Biogas: Policy Considerations to Promote Equity and Protect the Climate and Environment&quot; (PDF). Retrieved 19 October 2022.
* 

==External links==
*European Biogas Association
*Biogas Portal on Energypedia
*American Biogas Council
*An Introduction to Biogas, University of Adelaide</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171076" start="0" end="6" title="Biogas" label="Biogas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="20" end="36" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47161559" start="80" end="98" title="agricultural waste" label="agricultural waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q185716" start="100" end="106" title="manure" label="manure"/>
<link wikidata="Q18538" start="108" end="123" title="municipal waste" label="municipal waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q968604" start="125" end="139" title="plant material" label="plant material"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966166" start="141" end="147" title="sewage" label="sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603620" start="149" end="160" title="green waste" label="green waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q20127660" start="162" end="172" title="Wastewater treatment" label="wastewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q18919" start="178" end="188" title="food waste" label="food waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q555853" start="212" end="231" title="anaerobic digestion" label="anaerobic digestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q189790" start="237" end="255" title="anaerobic organism" label="anaerobic organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169785" start="260" end="270" title="methanogen" label="methanogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q555853" start="282" end="300" title="Anaerobic digestion" label="anaerobic digester"/>
<link wikidata="Q555853" start="302" end="313" title="biodigester" label="biodigester"/>
<link wikidata="Q864699" start="319" end="329" title="bioreactor" label="bioreactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="427" end="443" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q426680" start="461" end="469" title="siloxane" label="siloxane"/>
<link wikidata="Q42501" start="576" end="580" title="fuel" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180253" start="600" end="609" title="fuel cell" label="fuel cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q720050" start="816" end="826" title="compressed natural gas" label="compressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="846" end="857" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8449254" start="876" end="890" title="Alternative fuel vehicle" label="motor vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377219" start="1036" end="1052" title="energy subsidies" label="energy subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169785" start="1566" end="1577" title="methanogens" label="methanogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q648314" start="1582" end="1607" title="sulfate-reducing bacteria" label="sulfate-reducing bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633954" start="1834" end="1846" title="methanotroph" label="methanotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q30672844" start="1849" end="1866" title="Methane emissions" label="Methane emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191614" start="2196" end="2208" title="landfill gas" label="landfill gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q864214" start="2258" end="2277" title="biodegradable waste" label="biodegradable waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q555853" start="2377" end="2395" title="anaerobic digestion" label="anaerobic digester"/>
<link wikidata="Q555853" start="2480" end="2498" title="anaerobic digester" label="anaerobic digester"/>
<link wikidata="Q660071" start="2690" end="2696" title="silage" label="silage"/>
<link wikidata="Q864214" start="2700" end="2719" title="biodegradable waste" label="biodegradable waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q900279" start="2877" end="2886" title="digestate" label="digestate"/>
<link wikidata="Q669652" start="3501" end="3511" title="mesophilic" label="mesophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q834023" start="3516" end="3528" title="thermophilic" label="thermophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285262" start="3598" end="3628" title="University of Alaska Fairbanks" label="University of Alaska Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q913343" start="3658" end="3671" title="psychrophiles" label="psychrophiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="3865" end="3878" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="3920" end="3931" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="3940" end="3947" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="4011" end="4017" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="4026" end="4040" title="Carbon dioxide" label="Carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="4073" end="4087" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="4155" end="4171" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="4324" end="4338" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="4394" end="4403" title="explosive" label="explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q899502" start="5678" end="5693" title="explosive limit" label="explosive limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430548" start="5930" end="5955" title="effects of global warming" label="effects of global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="5970" end="5995" title="volatile organic compound" label="volatile organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6051" end="6069" title="Smog#Photochemical smog" label="photochemical smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q215624" start="6088" end="6113" title="Biochemical oxygen demand" label="Biochemical oxygen demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191614" start="7041" end="7053" title="Landfill gas" label="Landfill gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q216681" start="7259" end="7266" title="in-situ" label="in-situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939995" start="7692" end="7717" title="volatile suspended solids" label="volatile suspended solids"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="7984" end="8000" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="8088" end="8102" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="8110" end="8123" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q220410" start="8223" end="8229" title="thiols" label="thiols"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="8265" end="8272" title="Ammonia" label="Ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="8344" end="8355" title="amino acids" label="amino acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="8359" end="8367" title="proteins" label="proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="8425" end="8425" title="NOx" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q426680" start="8489" end="8498" title="siloxanes" label="siloxanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q555853" start="8525" end="8548" title="anaerobic decomposition" label="anaerobic decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="8652" end="8659" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="8730" end="8744" title="combustion gas" label="combustion gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="8784" end="8790" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130787" start="8797" end="8806" title="silicates" label="silicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="8826" end="8833" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="8835" end="8841" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="8843" end="8847" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="8849" end="8859" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="9174" end="9181" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="9306" end="9319" title="nitrous oxide" label="nitrous oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q555853" start="9566" end="9585" title="anaerobic digestion" label="anaerobic digestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q221620" start="10100" end="10103" title="Cogeneration" label="CHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q114704" start="10104" end="10114" title="gas engine" label="gas engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q288706" start="10126" end="10136" title="waste heat" label="waste heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q27098513" start="10224" end="10237" title="water heating" label="water heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q720050" start="10290" end="10312" title="compressed natural gas" label="compressed natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="10355" end="10381" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180253" start="10385" end="10394" title="fuel cell" label="fuel cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q864324" start="10756" end="10771" title="biogas upgrader" label="biogas upgrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="10804" end="10815" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="11129" end="11143" title="Carbon dioxide" label="Carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="11145" end="11150" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="11152" end="11168" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="11174" end="11185" title="particulate" label="particulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q471875" start="11324" end="11342" title="amine gas treating" label="amine gas treating"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841394" start="12018" end="12030" title="methane grid" label="methane grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841394" start="12032" end="12048" title="natural gas grid" label="natural gas grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q128151" start="12077" end="12106" title="micro combined heat and power" label="micro combined heat and power"/>
<link wikidata="Q555853" start="12148" end="12166" title="Anaerobic digestion" label="biogas power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q861135" start="12265" end="12283" title="Distributed generation" label="on-site generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q673314" start="14389" end="14398" title="Jenbacher" label="Jenbacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q459965" start="14402" end="14413" title="Caterpillar Inc" label="Caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q221620" start="14783" end="14796" title="Cogeneration" label="co-generating"/>
<link wikidata="Q221620" start="14848" end="14851" title="Cogeneration" label="CHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q901028" start="14964" end="14988" title="global warming potential" label="global warming potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="15058" end="15069" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q156698" start="15089" end="15103" title="eutrophication" label="eutrophication"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="15179" end="15190" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="15548" end="15563" title="Greenhouse gas" label="green house gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q61231" start="15777" end="15789" title="nanoparticle" label="nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q26838173" start="15917" end="15930" title="Fecal sludge management" label="Faecal Sludge"/>
<link wikidata="Q212254" start="16232" end="16239" title="compost" label="compost"/>
<link wikidata="Q555853" start="16252" end="16271" title="anaerobic digestion" label="anaerobic digestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q376643" start="17106" end="17124" title="Landfill Directive" label="Landfill Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q298816" start="17412" end="17416" title="ATEX directive" label="ATEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498398" start="17429" end="17432" title="Fan (machine)" label="fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q298816" start="17487" end="17497" title="ATEX directive" label="2014–34/EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q30524220" start="17576" end="17584" title="Combimac" label="Combimac"/>
<link wikidata="Q298816" start="17645" end="17657" title="ATEX directive" label="Zone 1 and 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="17746" end="17750" title="Volatile organic compound" label="VOCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978744" start="17770" end="17783" title="Clean Air Act (United States)" label="Clean Air Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810081" start="17788" end="17831" title="Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations" label="Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465257" start="18351" end="18384" title="Rural Energy for America Program" label="Rural Energy for American Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381159" start="18459" end="18499" title="Environmental Quality Incentives Program" label="Environmental Quality Incentives Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162935" start="18501" end="18533" title="Conservation Stewardship Program" label="Conservation Stewardship Program"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18539" end="18564" title="Conservation Loan Program" label="Conservation Loan Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q182098" start="19112" end="19125" title="kilowatt hour" label="kilowatt hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973448" start="19878" end="19894" title="Sheldon, Vermont" label="Sheldon, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q981218" start="20660" end="20675" title="Hereford, Texas" label="Hereford, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q194361" start="20714" end="20727" title="ethanol fuel" label="ethanol power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931400" start="20976" end="20990" title="Oakley, Kansas" label="Oakley, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999381" start="21089" end="21125" title="integrated manure utilization system" label="integrated manure utilization system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569714" start="21390" end="21421" title="Southern California Gas Company" label="Southern California Gas Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881907" start="21980" end="21990" title="MT-Energie" label="MT-Energie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="22055" end="22073" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energies"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="23126" end="23142" title="sewage treatment" label="sewage treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333901" start="23314" end="23324" title="Ecotricity" label="Ecotricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q314496" start="25509" end="25537" title="German Renewable Energy Sources Act" label="Renewable Energy Sources Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q106936195" start="28215" end="28228" title="clean cooking" label="clean cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q905504" start="28245" end="28265" title="indoor air quality" label="indoor air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333812" start="29388" end="29424" title="SNV Netherlands Development Organisation" label="Netherlands Development Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333812" start="29635" end="29638" title="SNV Netherlands Development Organisation" label="SNV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438447" start="30673" end="30684" title="ferrocement" label="ferrocement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948565" start="31035" end="31059" title="Methylococcus capsulatus" label="Methylococcus capsulatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q111913861" start="31227" end="31236" title="algae oil" label="algae oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q285335" start="31240" end="31249" title="Spirulina (dietary supplement)" label="spirulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464672" start="31255" end="31266" title="algaculture" label="algaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="31682" end="31697" title="green house gas" label="green house gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q185716" start="32547" end="32553" title="manure" label="manure"/>
<link wikidata="Q336191" start="33015" end="33025" title="wastewater" label="wastewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q108730588" start="33354" end="33360" title="Sintex" label="Sintex"/>
<link wikidata="Q900747" start="33388" end="33400" title="vermiculture" label="vermiculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="34081" end="34092" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q643546" start="34433" end="34437" title="haze" label="haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196723" start="34538" end="34549" title="Qing County" label="Qing county"/>
<link wikidata="Q21208" start="34551" end="34556" title="Hebei" label="Hebei"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="34596" end="34601" title="straw" label="straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097999" start="35411" end="35422" title="pit latrine" label="pit latrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26838173" start="35562" end="35575" title="Fecal sludge management" label="faecal sludge"/>
<link wikidata="Q426663" start="37107" end="37133" title="Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome" label="Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54840" wikidata="Q156698" url="?curid=54840" title="Eutrophication">
<text>Eutrophication is a general term describing a process in which nutrients accumulate in a body of water, resulting in an increased growth of organisms that may deplete the oxygen in the water. Eutrophication may occur naturally or as a result of human actions. Manmade, or cultural, eutrophication occurs when sewage, industrial wastewater, fertilizer runoff, and other nutrient sources are released into the environment. Such nutrient pollution usually causes algal blooms and bacterial growth, resulting in the depletion of dissolved oxygen in water and causing substantial environmental degradation.

Approaches for prevention and reversal of eutrophication include minimizing point source pollution from sewage and agriculture as well as other nonpoint pollution sources. Additionally, the introduction of bacteria and algae-inhibiting organisms such as shellfish and seaweed can also help reduce nitrogen pollution, which in turn controls the growth of cyanobacteria, the main source of harmful algae blooms.

== History and terminology==

The term &quot;eutrophication&quot; comes from the Greek &quot;eutrophos&quot;, meaning &quot;well-nourished&quot;. Water bodies with very low nutrient levels are termed oligotrophic and those with moderate nutrient levels are termed mesotrophic. Advanced eutrophication may also be referred to as dystrophic and hypertrophic conditions. Thus, eutrophication has been defined as &quot;degradation of water quality owing to enrichment by nutrients which results in excessive plant (principally algae) growth and decay.&quot; 

Eutrophication was recognized as a water pollution problem in European and North American lakes and reservoirs in the mid-20th century. Breakthrough research carried out at the Experimental Lakes Area (ELA) in Ontario, Canada, in the 1970s provided the evidence that freshwater bodies are phosphorus-limited. ELA uses the whole ecosystem approach and long-term, whole-lake investigations of freshwater focusing on cultural eutrophication. 

==Causes==
Eutrophication is caused by excessive concentrations of nutrients, most commonly phosphates and nitrates, although this varies with location. Prior to their being phasing out in the 1970&#x27;s, phosphate-containing detergents contributed to eutrophication. Since then, sewage and agriculture have emerged as the dominant phosphate sources. The main sources of nitrogen pollution are from agricultural runoff containing fertilizers and animal wastes, from sewage, and from atmospheric deposition of nitrogen originating from combustion or animal waste.

The limitation of productivity in any aquatic system varies with the rate of supply (from external sources) and removal (flushing out) of nutrients from the body of water. This means that some nutrients are more prevalent in certain areas than others and different ecosystems and environments have different limiting factors. Phosphorus is the limiting factor for plant growth in most freshwater ecosystems, and because phosphate adheres tightly to soil particles and sinks in areas such as wetlands and lakes, due to its prevalence nowadays more and more phosphorus is accumulating inside freshwater bodies. In marine ecosystems, nitrogen is the primary limiting nutrient; nitrous oxide (created by the combustion of fossil fuels) and its deposition in the water from the atmosphere has led to an increase in nitrogen levels, and also the heightened levels of eutrophication in the ocean.

===Cultural eutrophication===
Cultural or anthropogenic eutrophication is the process that causes eutrophication because of human activity. The problem became more apparent following the introduction of chemical fertilizers in agriculture (green revolution of the mid-1900s). Phosphorus and nitrogen are the two main nutrients that cause cultural eutrophication as they enrich the water, allowing for some aquatic plants, especially algae to grow rapidly and bloom in high densities. Algal blooms can shade out benthic plants thereby altering the overall plant community. When algae die off, their degradation by bacteria removes oxygen, potentially, generating anoxic conditions. This anoxic environment kills off aerobic organisms (e.g. fish and invertebrates) in the water body. This also affects terrestrial animals, restricting their access to affected water (e.g. as drinking sources). Selection for algal and aquatic plant species that can thrive in nutrient-rich conditions can cause structural and functional disruption to entire aquatic ecosystems and their food webs, resulting in loss of habitat and species biodiversity.

There are several sources of excessive nutrients from human activity including run-off from fertilized fields, lawns, and golf courses, untreated sewage and wastewater and internal combustion of fuels creating nitrogen pollution. Cultural eutrophication can occur in fresh water and salt water bodies, shallow waters being the most susceptible. In shore lines and shallow lakes, sediments are frequently resuspended by wind and waves which can result in nutrient release from sediments into the overlying water, enhancing eutrophication. The deterioration of water quality caused by cultural eutrophication can therefore negatively impact human uses including potable supply for consumption, industrial uses and recreation.
=== Natural eutrophication ===
Eutrophication can be a natural process and occurs naturally through the gradual accumulation of sediment and nutrients. Naturally, eutrophication is usually caused by the natural accumulation of nutrients from dissolved phosphate minerals and dead plant matter in water.

Natural eutrophication has been well-characterized in lakes. Paleolimnologists now recognise that climate change, geology, and other external influences are also critical in regulating the natural productivity of lakes. A few artificial lakes also demonstrate the reverse process (meiotrophication), becoming less nutrient rich with time as nutrient poor inputs slowly elute the nutrient richer water mass of the lake. This process may be seen in artificial lakes and reservoirs which tend to be highly eutrophic on first filling but may become more oligotrophic with time. The main difference between natural and anthropogenic eutrophication is that the natural process is very slow, occurring on geological time scales.

== Effects ==

=== Ecological effects ===
Eutrophication can have the following ecological effects: increased biomass of phytoplankton, changes in macrophyte species composition and biomass, dissolved oxygen depletion, increased incidences of fish kills, loss of desirable fish species.

==== Decreased biodiversity ====
When an ecosystem experiences an increase in nutrients, primary producers reap the benefits first. In aquatic ecosystems, species such as algae experience a population increase (called an algal bloom). Algal blooms limit the sunlight available to bottom-dwelling organisms and cause wide swings in the amount of dissolved oxygen in the water. Oxygen is required by all aerobically respiring plants and animals and it is replenished in daylight by photosynthesizing plants and algae. Under eutrophic conditions, dissolved oxygen greatly increases during the day, but is greatly reduced after dark by the respiring algae and by microorganisms that feed on the increasing mass of dead algae. When dissolved oxygen levels decline to hypoxic levels, fish and other marine animals suffocate. As a result, creatures such as fish, shrimp, and especially immobile bottom dwellers die off. In extreme cases, anaerobic conditions ensue, promoting growth of bacteria. Zones where this occurs are known as dead zones.

==== New species invasion ====
Eutrophication may cause competitive release by making abundant a normally limiting nutrient. This process causes shifts in the species composition of ecosystems. For instance, an increase in nitrogen might allow new, competitive species to invade and out-compete original inhabitant species. This has been shown to occur in New England salt marshes. In Europe and Asia, the common carp frequently lives in naturally eutrophic or hypereutrophic areas, and is adapted to living in such conditions. The eutrophication of areas outside its natural range partially explain the fish&#x27;s success in colonizing these areas after being introduced.

==== Toxicity ====
Some harmful algal blooms resulting from eutrophication, are toxic to plants and animals. Freshwater algal blooms can pose a threat to livestock. When the algae die or are eaten, neuro- and hepatotoxins are released which can kill animals and may pose a threat to humans. An example of algal toxins working their way into humans is the case of shellfish poisoning. Biotoxins created during algal blooms are taken up by shellfish (mussels, oysters), leading to these human foods acquiring the toxicity and poisoning humans. Examples include paralytic, neurotoxic, and diarrhoetic shellfish poisoning. Other marine animals can be vectors for such toxins, as in the case of ciguatera, where it is typically a predator fish that accumulates the toxin and then poisons humans.

There are five types of toxins associated with Harmful Algal Blooms (HABs). They include Domoic Acid, Ciguatoxin, Okadaic Acid, Brevetoxins, and Saxitoxins. All of these toxins, with the exception of Ciguatoxin, involved different types of shellfish poisoning. Domoic Acid is associated with amnesic shellfish poisoning; Okadaic Acid is associated with diarrhetic shellfish poisoning; Brevetoxins are associated with neurotoxic shellfish poisoning; and Saxitoxins are associated with paralytic shellfish poisoning. Different species of algae are associated with the different toxins. For example, Alexandrium, Pyrodinium, and Gymnodinium generate saxitoxins. Saxitoxin is known to be 50 times more lethal than strychnine and 10,000 times more lethal than cyanide.
=== Economic effects ===
Eutrophication and harmful algal blooms can have economic impacts due to increasing water treatment costs, commercial fishing and shellfish losses, recreational fishing losses (reductions in harvestable fish and shellfish), and reduced tourism income (decreases in perceived aesthetic value of the water body). Water treatment costs can be increased due to decreases in water transparency (increased turbidity). There can also be issues with color and smell during drinking water treatment.

=== Health impacts ===
Human health effects of eutrophication derive from two main issues excess nitrate in drinking water and exposure to toxic algae. Nitrates in drinking water can cause blue baby syndrome in infants and can react with chemicals used to treat water to create disinfection by-products in drinking water. Getting direct contact with toxic algae through swimming or drinking can cause rashes, stomach or liver illness, and respiratory or neurological problems .
== Causes and effects for different types of water bodies ==
=== Freshwater systems ===

One response to added amounts of nutrients in aquatic ecosystems is the rapid growth of microscopic algae, creating an algal bloom. In freshwater ecosystems, the formation of floating algal blooms are commonly nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria (blue-green algae). This outcome is favored when soluble nitrogen becomes limiting and phosphorus inputs remain significant. Nutrient pollution is a major cause of algal blooms and excess growth of other aquatic plants leading to overcrowding competition for sunlight, space, and oxygen. Increased competition for the added nutrients can cause potential disruption to entire ecosystems and food webs, as well as a loss of habitat, and biodiversity of species.

When overproduced macrophytes and algae die in eutrophic water, their decompose further consumes dissolved oxygen. The depleted oxygen levels in turn may lead to fish kills and a range of other effects reducing biodiversity. Nutrients may become concentrated in an anoxic zone, often in deeper waters cut off by stratification of the water column and may only be made available again during autumn turn-over in temperate areas or in conditions of turbulent flow. The dead algae and organic load carried by the water inflows into a lake settle to the bottom and undergo anaerobic digestion releasing greenhouse gases such as methane and CO2. Some of the methane gas may be oxidised by anaerobic methane oxidation bacteria such as &quot;Methylococcus capsulatus&quot;, which in turn may provide a food source for zooplankton. Thus a self-sustaining biological process can take place to generate primary food source for the phytoplankton and zooplankton depending on the availability of adequate dissolved oxygen in the water body.

Enhanced growth of aquatic vegetation, phytoplankton and algal blooms disrupts normal functioning of the ecosystem, causing a variety of problems such as a lack of oxygen which is needed for fish and shellfish to survive. The growth of dense algae in surface waters can shade the deeper water and reduce the viability of benthic shelter plants with resultant impacts on the wider ecosystem. Eutrophication also decreases the value of rivers, lakes and aesthetic enjoyment. Health problems can occur where eutrophic conditions interfere with drinking water treatment.

Phosphorus is often regarded as the main culprit in cases of eutrophication in lakes subjected to &quot;point source&quot; pollution from sewage pipes. The concentration of algae and the trophic state of lakes correspond well to phosphorus levels in water. Studies conducted in the Experimental Lakes Area in Ontario have shown a relationship between the addition of phosphorus and the rate of eutrophication. Later stages of eutrophication lead to blooms of nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria limited solely by the phosphorus concentration. Phosphorus-base eutrophication in fresh water lakes has been addressed in several cases.

===Coastal waters===

Eutrophication is a common phenomenon in coastal waters, where nitrogenous sources are the main culprit. In coastal waters, nitrogen is commonly the key limiting nutrient of marine waters (unlike the freshwater systems where phosphorus is often the limiting nutrient). Therefore, nitrogen levels are more important than phosphorus levels for understanding and controlling eutrophication problems in salt water. Estuaries, as the interface between freshwater and saltwater, can be both phosphorus and nitrogen limited and commonly exhibit symptoms of eutrophication. Eutrophication in estuaries often results in bottom water hypoxia or anoxia, leading to fish kills and habitat degradation. Upwelling in coastal systems also promotes increased productivity by conveying deep, nutrient-rich waters to the surface, where the nutrients can be assimilated by algae.

Examples of anthropogenic sources of nitrogen-rich pollution to coastal waters include sea cage fish farming and discharges of ammonia from the production of coke from coal. In addition to runoff from land, wastes from fish farming and industrial ammonia discharges, atmospheric fixed nitrogen can be an important nutrient source in the open ocean. This could account for around one third of the ocean&#x27;s external (non-recycled) nitrogen supply, and up to 3% of the annual new marine biological production.

Coastal waters embrace a wide range of marine habitats from enclosed estuaries to the open waters of the continental shelf. Phytoplankton productivity in coastal waters depends on both nutrient and light supply, with the latter an important limiting factor in waters near to shore where sediment resuspension often limits light penetration.

Nutrients are supplied to coastal waters from land via river and groundwater and also via the atmosphere. There is also an important source from the open ocean, via mixing of relatively nutrient rich deep ocean waters. Nutrient inputs from the ocean are little changed by human activity, although climate change may alter the water flows across the shelf break. By contrast, inputs from land to coastal zones of the nutrients nitrogen and phosphorus have been increased by human activity globally. The extent of increases varies greatly from place to place depending on human activities in the catchments. A third key nutrient, dissolved silicon, is derived primarily from sediment weathering to rivers and from offshore and is therefore much less affected by human activity.

==== Effects of coastal eutrophication ====
These increasing nitrogen and phosphorus nutrient inputs exert eutrophication pressures on coastal zones. These pressures vary geographically depending on the catchment activities and associated nutrient load. The geographical setting of the coastal zone is another important factor as it controls dilution of the nutrient load and oxygen exchange with the atmosphere. The effects of these eutrophication pressures can be seen in several different ways:

# There is evidence from satellite monitoring that the amounts of chlorophyll as a measure of overall phytoplankton activity are increasing in many coastal areas worldwide due to increased nutrient inputs.
# The phytoplankton species composition may change due to increased nutrient loadings and changes in the proportions of key nutrients. In particular the increases in nitrogen and phosphorus inputs, along with much smaller changes in silicon inputs, create changes in the ratio of nitrogen and phosphorus to silicon. These changing nutrient ratios drive changes in phytoplankton species composition, particularly disadvantaging silica rich phytoplankton species like diatoms compared to other species. This process leads to the development of nuisance algal blooms in areas such as the North Sea (see also OSPAR Convention) and the Black Sea. In some cases nutrient enrichment can lead to harmful algal blooms (HABs). Such blooms can occur naturally, but there is good evidence that these are increasing as a result of nutrient enrichment, although the causal linkage between nutrient enrichment and HABs is not straightforward.
# Oxygen depletion has existed in some coastal seas such as the Baltic for thousands of years. In such areas the density structure of the water column severely restricts water column mixing and associated oxygenation of deep water. However, increases in the inputs of bacterially degradable organic matter to such isolated deep waters can exacerbate such oxygen depletion in oceans. These areas of lower dissolved oxygen have increased globally in recent decades. They are usually connected with nutrient enrichment and resulting algal blooms. Climate change will generally tend to increase water column stratification and so exacerbate this oxygen depletion problem. An example of such coastal oxygen depletion is in the Gulf of Mexico where an area of seasonal anoxia more than 5000 square miles in area has developed since the 1950s. The increased primary production driving this anoxia is fueled by nutrients supplied by the Mississippi river. A similar process has been documented in the Black Sea.
# Hypolimnetic oxygen depletion can lead to summer &quot;kills&quot;. During summer stratification, inputs or organic matter and sedimentation of primary producers can increase rates of respiration in the hypolimnion. If oxygen depletion becomes extreme, aerobic organisms (such as fish) may die, resulting in what is known as a &quot;summer kill&quot;.

== Extent of the problem ==
Surveys showed that 54% of lakes in Asia are eutrophic; in Europe, 53%; in North America, 48%; in South America, 41%; and in Africa, 28%. In South Africa, a study by the CSIR using remote sensing has shown more than 60% of the reservoirs surveyed were eutrophic.

The World Resources Institute has identified 375 hypoxic coastal zones in the world, concentrated in coastal areas in Western Europe, the Eastern and Southern coasts of the US, and East Asia, particularly Japan.

==Prevention==
As a society, there are certain steps we can take to ensure the minimization of eutrophication, thereby reducing its harmful effects on humans and other living organisms in order to sustain a healthy norm of living, some of which are as follows:

=== Minimizing pollution from sewage ===

There are multiple different ways to fix cultural eutrophication with raw sewage being a point source of pollution. For example, sewage treatment plants can be upgraded for biological nutrient removal so that they discharge much less nitrogen and phosphorus to the receiving water body. However, even with good secondary treatment, most final effluents from sewage treatment works contain substantial concentrations of nitrogen as nitrate, nitrite or ammonia. Removal of these nutrients is an expensive and often difficult process.

Laws regulating the discharge and treatment of sewage have led to dramatic nutrient reductions to surrounding ecosystems. As a major contributor to the nonpoint source nutrient loading of water bodies is untreated domestic sewage, it is necessary to provide treatment facilities to highly urbanized areas, particularly those in developing countries, in which treatment of domestic waste water is a scarcity. The technology to safely and efficiently reuse wastewater, both from domestic and industrial sources, should be a primary concern for policy regarding eutrophication.

=== Minimizing nutrient pollution by agriculture ===
There are many ways to help fix cultural eutrophication caused by agriculture. Some recommendations issued by the U.S. Department of Agriculture include:
# Nutrient management techniques - Anyone using fertilizers should apply fertilizer in the correct amount, at the right time of year, with the right method and placement. Organically fertilized fields can &quot;significantly reduce harmful nitrate leaching&quot; compared to conventionally fertilized fields. Eutrophication impacts are in some cases higher from organic production than they are from conventional production. In Japan the amount of nitrogen produced by livestock is adequate to serve the fertilizer needs for the agriculture industry.
# Year-round ground cover - a cover crop will prevent periods of bare ground thus eliminating erosion and runoff of nutrients even after the growing season has passed.
# Planting field buffers - Planting trees, shrubs and grasses along the edges of fields can help catch the runoff and absorb some nutrients before the water makes it to a nearby water body. Riparian buffer zones are interfaces between a flowing body of water and land, and have been created near waterways in an attempt to filter pollutants; sediment and nutrients are deposited here instead of in water. Creating buffer zones near farms and roads is another possible way to prevent nutrients from traveling too far. 
# Conservation tillage - By reducing frequency and intensity of tilling, the land will enhance the chance of nutrients absorbing into the ground.
===Policy===
The United Nations framework for Sustainable Development Goals recognizes the damaging effects of eutrophication for marine environments. It has established a timeline for creating an Index of Coastal Eutrophication and Floating Plastic Debris Density (ICEP) within Sustainable Development Goal 14 (life below water). SDG 14 specifically has a target to: &quot;by 2025, prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds, in particular from land-based activities, including marine debris and nutrient pollution&quot;.

Policy and regulations are a set of tools to minimize causes of eutrophication. Nonpoint sources of pollution are the primary contributors to eutrophication, and their effects can be minimized through common agricultural practices. Reducing the amount of pollutants that reach a watershed can be achieved through the protection of its forest cover, reducing the amount of erosion leeching into a watershed. Also, through the efficient, controlled use of land using sustainable agricultural practices to minimize land degradation, the amount of soil runoff and nitrogen-based fertilizers reaching a watershed can be reduced. Waste disposal technology constitutes another factor in eutrophication prevention.

Because a body of water can have an effect on a range of people reaching far beyond that of the watershed, cooperation between different organizations is necessary to prevent the intrusion of contaminants that can lead to eutrophication. Agencies ranging from state governments to those of water resource management and non-governmental organizations, going as low as the local population, are responsible for preventing eutrophication of water bodies. In the United States, the most well known inter-state effort to prevent eutrophication is the Chesapeake Bay.

== Reversal and remediation ==
Reducing nutrient inputs is a crucial precondition for restoration. Still, there are two caveats: Firstly, it can take a long time, mainly because of the storage of nutrients in sediments. Secondly, restoration may need more than a simple reversal of inputs since there are sometimes several stable but very different ecological states. Recovery of eutrophicated lakes is slow, often requiring several decades.

In environmental remediation, nutrient removal technologies include biofiltration, which uses living material to capture and biologically degrade pollutants. Examples include green belts, riparian areas, natural and constructed wetlands, and treatment ponds.

===Algae bloom forecasting===
The National Oceanic Atmospheric Admiration in the United States has created a forecasting tool for regions such as the Great Lakes, the Gulf of Maine, and The Gulf of Mexico. Shorter term predictions can help to show the intensity, location, and trajectory of blooms in order to warn more directly affected communities. Longer term tests in specific regions and bodies help to predict larger scale factors like scale of future blooms and factors that could lead to more adverse effects.

===Nutrient bioextraction===
Nutrient bioextraction is bioremediation involving cultured plants and animals. Nutrient bioextraction or bioharvesting is the practice of farming and harvesting shellfish and seaweed to remove nitrogen and other nutrients from natural water bodies.

==== Shellfish in estuaries ====

It has been suggested that nitrogen removal by oyster reefs could generate net benefits for sources facing nitrogen emission restrictions, similar to other nutrient trading scenarios. Specifically, if oysters maintain nitrogen levels in estuaries below thresholds, then oysters effectively stave off an enforcement response, and compliance costs parties responsible for nitrogen emission would otherwise incur. Several studies have shown that oysters and mussels can dramatically impact nitrogen levels in estuaries. Filter feeding activity is considered beneficial to water quality by controlling phytoplankton density and sequestering nutrients, which can be removed from the system through shellfish harvest, buried in the sediments, or lost through denitrification. Foundational work toward the idea of improving marine water quality through shellfish cultivation was conducted by Odd Lindahl et al., using mussels in Sweden. In the United States, shellfish restoration projects have been conducted on the East, West and Gulf coasts.

====Seaweed farming====
Studies have demonstrated seaweed&#x27;s potential to improve nitrogen levels. Seaweed aquaculture offers an opportunity to mitigate, and adapt to climate change. Seaweed, such as kelp, also absorbs phosphorus and nitrogen and is thus helpful to remove excessive nutrients from polluted parts of the sea. Some cultivated seaweeds have very high productivity and could absorb large quantities of N, P, , producing large amounts of having an excellent effect on decreasing eutrophication. It is believed that seaweed cultivation in large scale should be a good solution to the eutrophication problem in coastal waters.

===Geo-engineering===

Another technique for combatting hypoxia/eutrophication in localized situations is direct injection of compressed air, a technique used in the restoration of the Salford Docks area of the Manchester Ship Canal in England. For smaller-scale waters such as aquaculture ponds, pump aeration is standard.

===Chemical removal of phosphorus===

Removing phosphorus can remediate eutrophication. Of the several phosphate sorbents, alum (aluminium sulfate) is of practical interest.) Many materials have been investigated. The phosphate sorbent is commonly applied in the surface of the water body and it sinks to the bottom of the lake reducing phosphate, such sorbents have been applied worldwide to manage eutrophication and algal bloom (for example under the commercial name Phoslock). In a large-scale study, 114 lakes were monitored for the effectiveness of alum at phosphorus reduction. Across all lakes, alum effectively reduced the phosphorus for 11 years. While there was variety in longevity (21 years in deep lakes and 5.7 years in shallow lakes), the results express the effectiveness of alum at controlling phosphorus within lakes. Alum treatment is less effective in deep lakes, as well as lakes with substantial external phosphorus loading.

Finnish phosphorus removal measures started in the mid-1970s and have targeted rivers and lakes polluted by industrial and municipal discharges. These efforts have had a 90% removal efficiency. Still, some targeted point sources did not show a decrease in runoff despite reduction efforts.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* International Nitrogen Initiative

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q156698" start="0" end="14" title="Eutrophication" label="Eutrophication"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="63" end="71" title="nutrient" label="nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="171" end="177" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966166" start="309" end="315" title="sewage" label="sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592216" start="317" end="338" title="Industrial wastewater treatment" label="industrial wastewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693979" start="340" end="357" title="fertilizer runoff" label="fertilizer runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q12203192" start="426" end="444" title="nutrient pollution" label="nutrient pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q326139" start="460" end="471" title="algal bloom" label="algal bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294669" start="525" end="541" title="dissolved oxygen" label="dissolved oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="575" end="600" title="environmental degradation" label="environmental degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735963" start="679" end="701" title="point source pollution" label="point source pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736556" start="747" end="765" title="Nonpoint source pollution" label="nonpoint pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="857" end="866" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442281" start="871" end="878" title="Seaweed farming" label="seaweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="957" end="970" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869728" start="991" end="1011" title="Harmful algal bloom" label="harmful algae blooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1095" end="1100" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q45279" start="1214" end="1226" title="oligotrophic" label="oligotrophic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1278" end="1289" title="Trophic state index#Mesotrophic" label="mesotrophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496214" start="1342" end="1352" title="Dystrophic lake" label="dystrophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="1605" end="1620" title="water pollution" label="water pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707870" start="1747" end="1770" title="Experimental Lakes Area" label="Experimental Lakes Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858927" start="1898" end="1916" title="ecosystem approach" label="ecosystem approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="2103" end="2113" title="phosphate" label="phosphates"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="2118" end="2126" title="nitrate" label="nitrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304561" start="3188" end="3204" title="marine ecosystem" label="marine ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="3250" end="3263" title="nitrous oxide" label="nitrous oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="3294" end="3305" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="3509" end="3522" title="Human impact on the environment" label="anthropogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="4044" end="4049" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q568324" start="4129" end="4135" title="Anoxic waters" label="anoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550690" start="5691" end="5708" title="paleolimnology" label="Paleolimnologists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5911" end="5927" title="meiotrophication" label="meiotrophication"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="6474" end="6487" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="6500" end="6510" title="macrophyte" label="macrophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738459" start="6511" end="6530" title="species composition" label="species composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="6535" end="6542" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294669" start="6544" end="6560" title="Oxygen saturation" label="dissolved oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420425" start="6596" end="6605" title="fish kill" label="fish kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q131427" start="6730" end="6746" title="primary producer" label="primary producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="6812" end="6817" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q326139" start="6862" end="6873" title="algal bloom" label="algal bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q472287" start="7055" end="7064" title="Respiration (physiology)" label="respiring"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="7121" end="7138" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641506" start="7403" end="7410" title="hypoxia (environmental)" label="hypoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230015" start="7434" end="7448" title="Marine life" label="marine animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q189790" start="7572" end="7581" title="Anaerobic organism" label="anaerobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236263" start="7667" end="7677" title="Dead zone (ecology)" label="dead zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036718" start="7786" end="7803" title="Limiting factor" label="limiting nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738459" start="7839" end="7858" title="species composition" label="species composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="7929" end="7948" title="invasive species" label="competitive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="8036" end="8047" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q29925" start="8048" end="8058" title="salt marsh" label="salt marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q81110" start="8086" end="8097" title="common carp" label="common carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869728" start="8379" end="8398" title="harmful algal bloom" label="harmful algal bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="8435" end="8440" title="toxic" label="toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q407752" start="8553" end="8558" title="neurotoxin" label="neuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349821" start="8564" end="8576" title="hepatotoxins" label="hepatotoxins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="8718" end="8727" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="8804" end="8810" title="mussel" label="mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q107411" start="8813" end="8819" title="oyster" label="oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="8914" end="8923" title="paralysis" label="paralytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="8941" end="8952" title="Diarrhoea" label="diarrhoetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q107994" start="9002" end="9009" title="Vector (epidemiology)" label="vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q181831" start="9045" end="9054" title="ciguatera" label="ciguatera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058719" start="10020" end="10035" title="water treatment" label="water treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="10148" end="10157" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q898574" start="10336" end="10345" title="turbidity" label="turbidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568913" start="10617" end="10635" title="blue baby syndrome" label="blue baby syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282238" start="10706" end="10730" title="Disinfection by-product" label="disinfection by-products"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289906" start="11041" end="11058" title="aquatic ecosystem" label="aquatic ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q326139" start="11114" end="11125" title="algal bloom" label="algal bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890135" start="11130" end="11150" title="freshwater ecosystem" label="freshwater ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="11221" end="11234" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12203192" start="11360" end="11378" title="Nutrient pollution" label="Nutrient pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="11714" end="11724" title="macrophyte" label="macrophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420425" start="11858" end="11867" title="fish kill" label="fish kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q555853" start="12265" end="12284" title="anaerobic digestion" label="anaerobic digestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="12295" end="12311" title="greenhouse gases" label="greenhouse gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633954" start="12390" end="12416" title="Methanotroph" label="methane oxidation bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948565" start="12431" end="12455" title="Methylococcus capsulatus" label="Methylococcus capsulatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q842627" start="12507" end="12518" title="zooplankton" label="zooplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q515905" start="12589" end="12608" title="Primary production" label="primary food source"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="12617" end="12630" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="12890" end="12896" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="12926" end="12935" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q156698" start="13231" end="13240" title="eutrophic" label="eutrophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058719" start="13276" end="13291" title="water treatment" label="water treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="13294" end="13304" title="Phosphorus" label="Phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599066" start="13481" end="13494" title="Trophic state index" label="trophic state"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="13984" end="13998" title="coastal waters" label="coastal waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="14117" end="14130" title="Seawater" label="marine waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="14223" end="14231" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="14354" end="14363" title="Estuary" label="Estuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="14797" end="14802" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q209894" start="14901" end="14913" title="fish farming" label="fish farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="14932" end="14939" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192795" start="14963" end="14967" title="Coke (fuel)" label="coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q272467" start="15084" end="15098" title="Nitrogen fixation" label="fixed nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764288" start="15356" end="15371" title="marine habitats" label="marine habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="15386" end="15395" title="Estuary" label="estuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q191468" start="15403" end="15414" title="Pelagic zone" label="open waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="15956" end="15970" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="16297" end="16304" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="16341" end="16351" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q854845" start="16960" end="16980" title="Earth observation satellite" label="satellite monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q43177" start="17001" end="17012" title="chlorophyll" label="chlorophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="17037" end="17050" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738459" start="17161" end="17180" title="species composition" label="species composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928254" start="17746" end="17762" title="OSPAR Convention" label="OSPAR Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="17772" end="17781" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869728" start="17829" end="17848" title="harmful algal bloom" label="harmful algal bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641506" start="18071" end="18087" title="Hypoxia (environmental)" label="Oxygen depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852724" start="18133" end="18162" title="Baltic Sea hypoxia" label="Baltic for thousands of years"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076135" start="18424" end="18450" title="Ocean deoxygenation" label="oxygen depletion in oceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="18791" end="18805" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="18998" end="19015" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi river"/>
<link wikidata="Q932011" start="19075" end="19087" title="Hypolimnion" label="Hypolimnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12718601" start="19157" end="19171" title="Stratification (water)" label="stratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q635485" start="19202" end="19215" title="sedimentation" label="sedimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131427" start="19219" end="19235" title="primary producer" label="primary producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q472287" start="19259" end="19270" title="Respiration (physiology)" label="respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q932011" start="19278" end="19289" title="hypolimnion" label="hypolimnion"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="19492" end="19496" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="19515" end="19521" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="19531" end="19544" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="19554" end="19567" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="19581" end="19587" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="19637" end="19651" title="remote sensing" label="remote sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q976978" start="19724" end="19749" title="World Resources Institute" label="World Resources Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641506" start="19769" end="19776" title="Hypoxia (environmental)" label="hypoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="19901" end="19910" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="19925" end="19930" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552709" start="20326" end="20338" title="point source" label="point source"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="20366" end="20389" title="Sewage treatment" label="sewage treatment plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908586" start="20548" end="20567" title="secondary treatment" label="secondary treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="21098" end="21118" title="Developing country" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267830" start="21219" end="21235" title="Reclaimed water" label="reuse wastewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360049" start="22462" end="22483" title="riparian" label="Riparian buffer zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="22614" end="22622" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="22953" end="22967" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="22982" end="23011" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q53581239" start="23215" end="23246" title="Sustainable Development Goal 14" label="Sustainable Development Goal 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497778" start="23992" end="24008" title="land degradation" label="land degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="24735" end="24749" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="24961" end="24969" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019586" start="25198" end="25223" title="environmental remediation" label="environmental remediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q864323" start="25263" end="25276" title="biofiltration" label="biofiltration"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360049" start="25383" end="25391" title="riparian" label="riparian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="26165" end="26174" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q237169" start="26179" end="26186" title="seaweed" label="seaweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q742637" start="27041" end="27056" title="denitrification" label="denitrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="27199" end="27206" title="mussels" label="mussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442281" start="27430" end="27449" title="Seaweed farming" label="Seaweed aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="27952" end="27966" title="coastal waters" label="coastal waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641506" start="28025" end="28032" title="Hypoxia (environmental)" label="hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747391" start="28154" end="28167" title="Salford Docks" label="Salford Docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q935570" start="28180" end="28201" title="Manchester Ship Canal" label="Manchester Ship Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140772" start="28341" end="28351" title="phosphorus cycle" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190527" start="28417" end="28421" title="alum" label="alum"/>
<link wikidata="Q421857" start="28423" end="28440" title="aluminium sulfate" label="aluminium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073232" start="28764" end="28772" title="Phoslock" label="Phoslock"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54849" wikidata="Q53706" url="?curid=54849" title="Robbery">
<text>Robbery is the crime of taking or attempting to take anything of value by force, threat of force, or by use of fear. According to common law, robbery is defined as taking the property of another, with the intent to permanently deprive the person of that property, by means of force or fear; that is, it is a larceny or theft accomplished by an assault. Precise definitions of the offence may vary between jurisdictions. Robbery is differentiated from other forms of theft (such as burglary, shoplifting, pickpocketing, or car theft) by its inherently violent nature (a violent crime); whereas many lesser forms of theft are punished as misdemeanors, robbery is always a felony in jurisdictions that distinguish between the two. Under English law, most forms of theft are triable either way, whereas robbery is triable only on indictment. The word &quot;rob&quot; came via French from Late Latin words (e.g., &quot;deraubare&quot;) of Germanic origin, from Common Germanic &quot;raub&quot; &quot;theft&quot;.

Among the types of robbery are armed robbery, which involves the use of a weapon, and aggravated robbery, when someone brings with them a deadly weapon or something that appears to be a deadly weapon. Highway robbery or mugging takes place outside or in a public place such as a sidewalk, street, or parking lot. Carjacking is the act of stealing a car from a victim by force. Extortion is the threat to do something illegal, or the offer to not do something illegal, in the event that goods are not given, primarily using words instead of actions.

Criminal slang for robbery includes &quot;blagging&quot; (armed robbery, usually of a bank) or &quot;stick-up&quot; (derived from the verbal command to robbery targets to raise their hands in the air), and &quot;steaming&quot; (organized robbery on underground train systems).

== Canada ==

In Canada, the Criminal Code makes robbery an indictable offence, subject to a maximum penalty of life imprisonment. If the accused uses a restricted or prohibited firearm to commit robbery, there is a mandatory minimum sentence of five years for the first offence, and seven years for subsequent offences.

== Ireland ==
Robbery is a statutory offence in Ireland. It is created by section 14(1) of the Criminal Justice (Theft and Fraud Offences) Act 2001, which provides:

== United Kingdom ==

=== England and Wales ===
Robbery is a statutory offence created by section 8(1) of the Theft Act 1968 which reads:
====Aggravated theft====

Robbery is the only offence of aggravated theft.

====Aggravated robbery====

There are no offences of aggravated robbery.

==== &quot;Steals&quot; ====
This requires evidence to show a theft as set out in section 1(1) of the Theft Act 1968. In &quot;R v Robinson&quot; the defendant threatened the victim with a knife in order to recover money which he was actually owed. His conviction for robbery was quashed on the basis that Robinson had an honest, although unreasonable, belief (under Section 2(1)(a) of the Act) in his legal right to the money. See also &quot;R v Skivington&quot; [1968] 1 QB 166, [1967] 2 WLR 655, 131 JP 265, 111 SJ 72, [1967] 1 All ER 483, 51 Cr App R 167, CA.

In &quot;R v Hale&quot; (1978) the application of force and the stealing took place in many different locations, and it was not possible to establish the timing; it was held that the appropriation necessary to prove theft was a continuing act, and the jury could correctly convict of robbery. This approach was followed in &quot;R v Lockley&quot; (1995) when the force was applied to a shopkeeper after property had been taken. It was argued that the theft should be regarded as complete by this time, and &quot;R v Gomez&quot; (1993), should apply; the court disagreed, preferring to follow &quot;R v Hale&quot;.

==== Actual or threatened force against a person ====
The threat or use of force must take place immediately before or at the time of the theft. Force used after the theft is complete will not turn the theft into a robbery.

The words &quot;or immediately after&quot; that appeared in section 23(1)(b) of the Larceny Act 1916 were deliberately omitted from section 8(1).

The book &quot;Archbold&quot; said that the facts in &quot;R v Harman&quot;, which did not amount to robbery in 1620, would not amount to robbery now.

It was held in &quot;R v Dawson and James&quot; (1978) that &quot;force&quot; is an ordinary English word and its meaning should be left to the jury. This approach was confirmed in &quot;R v Clouden&quot; (1985) and &quot;Corcoran v Anderton&quot; (1980), both handbag-snatching cases. Stealing may involve a young child who is not aware that taking other persons&#x27; property is not in order.

==== Threat ====
The victim must be placed in apprehension or fear that force would be used immediately before or at the time of the taking of the property. A threat is not immediate if the wrongdoer threatens to use force of violence some future time.

Robbery occurs if an aggressor forcibly snatched a mobile phone or if they used a knife to make an implied threat of violence to the holder and then took the phone. The person being threatened does not need to be the owner of the property. It is not necessary that the victim was actually frightened, but the defendant must have put or sought to put the victim or some other person in fear of immediate force.

The force or threat may be directed against a third party, for example a customer in a jeweller&#x27;s shop. Theft accompanied by a threat to damage property will not constitute robbery, but it may disclose an offence of blackmail.

Dishonestly dealing with property stolen during a robbery will constitute an offence of handling.

==== Mode of trial ====
Robbery is an indictable-only offence.

==== Sentence ====

Under current sentencing guidelines, the punishment for robbery is affected by a variety of aggravating and mitigating factors. Particularly important is how much harm was caused to the victim and how much culpability the offender had (e.g. carrying a weapon or leading a group effort implies high culpability). Robbery is divided into three categories which are, in increasing order of seriousness: street or less sophisticated commercial; dwelling; and professionally planned commercial.

Robbery generally results in a custodial sentence. Only a low-harm, low-culpability robbery with other mitigating factors would result in an alternative punishment, in the form of a high level community order. The maximum legal punishment is imprisonment for life. It is also subject to the mandatory sentencing regime under the Criminal Justice Act 2003. Current sentencing guidelines advise that the sentence should be no longer than 20 years, for a high-harm, high-culpability robbery with other aggravating factors.

The &quot;starting point&quot; sentences are:
*Low-harm, low-culpability street robbery: 1 year
*Medium-harm, medium-culpability street robbery: 4 years
*Medium-harm, medium-culpability professionally planned robbery: 5 years
*High-harm, high-culpability street robbery: 8 years
*High-harm, high-culpability professionally planned robbery: 16 years
An offender may also serve a longer sentence if they are convicted of other offences alongside the robbery, such as assault and grievous bodily harm.

===== Common law =====
Robbery was an offence under the common law of England. Matthew Hale provided the following definition:

The common law offence of robbery was abolished for all purposes not relating to offences committed before 1 January 1969 by section 32(1)(a) of the Theft Act 1968.

===== Statute =====
See sections 40 to 43 of the Larceny Act 1861.

Section 23 of the Larceny Act 1916 read:

This section provided maximum penalties for a number of offences of robbery and aggravated robbery.

==== Assault with intent to rob ====
If a robbery is foiled before it can be completed, an alternative offence (with the same penalty, given by section 8(2) of the 1968 Act) is assault; any act which intentionally or recklessly causes another to fear the immediate and unlawful use of force, with an intent to rob, will suffice.

The following cases are relevant:
* &quot;R v Trusty and Howard&quot; (1783) 1 East PC 418
* &quot;R v Sharwin&quot; (1785) 1 East PC 421

=====Mode of trial and sentence=====

Assault with intent to rob is an indictable-only offence. It is punishable with imprisonment for life or for any shorter term.

Assault with intent to rob is also subject to the mandatory sentencing regime under the Criminal Justice Act 2003.

=== Northern Ireland ===
Robbery is a statutory offence in Northern Ireland. It is created by section 8 of the Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969.

== United States ==

In the United States, robbery is generally treated as an aggravated form of common law larceny. Specific elements and definitions differ from state to state. The common elements of robbery are:
a trespassory taking and carrying away of the personal property of another with the intent to steal from the person or presence of the victim by force or threat of force.

The first six elements are the same as common law larceny. It is the last two elements that aggravate the crime to common law robbery.

from the person or presence of the victim – robbery requires that the property be taken directly from the person of the victim or from their presence. This is different from larceny which simply requires that property be taken from the victim&#x27;s possession, actual or constructive. Property is &quot;on the victim&#x27;s person&quot; if the victim is actually holding the property, or the property is contained within clothing the victim is wearing or is attached to a victim&#x27;s body such as a watch or earrings. Property is in a person&#x27;s presence when it is within the area of their immediate control. The property has to be close enough to the victim&#x27;s person that the victim could have prevented its taking if he/she had not been placed in fear or intimidation.

by force or threat of force – the use of force or threat of force is the defining element of robbery. For there to be robbery there must be &quot;force or fear&quot; in perpetrating the theft. Questions concerning the degree of force necessary for robbery have been the subject of much litigation. Merely snatching the property from the victim&#x27;s person is not sufficient force unless the victim resists or one of the items is attached or carried in such a way that a significant amount of force must be used to free the item from the victim&#x27;s person.

For robbery the victim must be placed in &quot;fear&quot; of immediate harm by threat or intimidation. The threat need not be directed at the victim personally. Threats to third parties are sufficient. The threat must be one of present rather than future personal harm. Fear does not mean &quot;fright&quot;, it means apprehension – an awareness of the danger of immediate bodily harm.

=== California ===
The maximum sentence for robbery in California is 9 years, according to Penal Code section 213(a)(1)(A).

The threat or use of force does not have to take place immediately before or at the time of the theft. Force used after the theft will turn the theft into a robbery unless the theft is complete. The theft is considered completed when the perpetrator reaches a place of temporary safety with the property.

== Robbery statistics ==

=== Robberies by country ===

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime notes &quot;that when using the figures, any cross-national comparisons should be conducted with caution because of the differences that exist between the legal definitions of offences in countries, or the different methods of offence counting and recording&quot;. Also not every single crime is reported, meaning two things; (1) robbery rates are going to appear lower than they actually are and; (2) the percentage of crime that is not reported is going to be higher in some countries then others, for example – in one country 86% of the robberies were reported, whereas in another country only 67% of the robberies were reported. The last thing to note is that crime will vary by certain neighborhoods or areas in each country, so, just because a nationwide rate is a specified rate, does not mean that everywhere in that country retains the same amount of danger or safety. A 1983 study by the Department of Justice estimated that the amount of robberies in the US at schools alone may reach one million a year, exceeding the National Crime Survey reported estimate.

== In popular culture ==

Robberies have been depicted, sometimes graphically, in various forms of media, and several robbers have become pop icons, such as Bonnie and Clyde and John Dillinger. Examples of media works focused on robberies include:

=== In film ===
* &quot;The Killing&quot; (1956), by Stanley Kubrick, depicts a graphic robbery.
* &quot;Wake Up and Die&quot; (1966) is an Italian crime drama film directed by Carlo Lizzani, based on the real life of Luciano Lutring (&quot;il solista del mitra&quot;, translation: &quot;the submachine soloist&quot;), who kept his weapon in a violin case.
* &quot;Take the Money and Run&quot; (1969), by Woody Allen, depicts an unconventional view of a robbery by an incompetent robber.
* &quot;Le Gitan&quot; (1975), directed by José Giovanni, is loosely based on Luciano Lutring&#x27;s autobiography. Lutring is played by Alain Delon.
* &quot;Dog Day Afternoon&quot; (1975) depicts a bank robbery which escalates to a hostage situation. 
* &quot;Reservoir Dogs&quot; (1992), by Quentin Tarantino, shows the aftermath of a robbery, with an abundance of lurid details.

=== In literature ===
* Luciano Lutring (30 December 1937 – 13 May 2013), known as &quot;the submachine gun soloist&quot; because he kept the weapon in a violin case, used that moniker as the title of his memoir &quot;Il solista del mitra&quot;. He was an Italian criminal, author, and painter who, when committing robberies, worked alone (which is rather rare for a robber).
* Lionel White&#x27;s Bloodhound mysteries novel, No.116, &quot;Clean Break&quot; (1955) was the basis for Stanley Kubrick&#x27;s film &quot;The Killing&quot; (1956).

=== In video games ===
Video games &quot;&quot;, &quot;Payday 2&quot; and &quot;Payday 3&quot; are games by Overkill Software where one of the main objectives is to steal items of monetary value at places such as banks, art galleries, armored trucks, and more.

== See also ==
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==
* Matthew Hale. &quot;Historia Placitorum Coronae&quot;. 1736. 1800 Edition. Volume 1. Chapter XLVI. pp 532–538.
== Further reading ==
* Allen, Michael. (2005). &quot;Textbook on Criminal Law&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press. .
* Criminal Law Revision Committee. 8th Report. Theft and Related Offences. Cmnd. 2977
* Griew, Edward. &quot;Theft Acts 1968 &amp; 1978&quot;. London: Sweet &amp; Maxwell. London: LexisNexis. 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q53706" start="0" end="7" title="Robbery" label="Robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="15" end="20" title="crime" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="130" end="140" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485381" start="308" end="315" title="larceny" label="larceny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727213" start="319" end="324" title="theft" label="theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="344" end="351" title="assault" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727213" start="466" end="471" title="theft" label="theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q329425" start="481" end="489" title="burglary" label="burglary"/>
<link wikidata="Q383906" start="491" end="502" title="shoplifting" label="shoplifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q873750" start="504" end="517" title="pickpocketing" label="pickpocketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q548007" start="522" end="531" title="car theft" label="car theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520311" start="569" end="582" title="violent crime" label="violent crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q694324" start="636" end="648" title="misdemeanors" label="misdemeanors"/>
<link wikidata="Q178844" start="670" end="676" title="felony" label="felony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150885" start="771" end="789" title="triable either way" label="triable either way"/>
<link wikidata="Q763407" start="810" end="836" title="triable only on indictment" label="triable only on indictment"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="872" end="878" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503113" start="884" end="894" title="Late Latin" label="Late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="934" end="942" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="956" end="971" title="Common Germanic" label="Common Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q53706" start="1040" end="1053" title="Robbery" label="armed robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q728" start="1083" end="1089" title="weapon" label="weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q53706" start="1095" end="1113" title="Robbery" label="aggravated robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q294440" start="1265" end="1277" title="public place" label="public place"/>
<link wikidata="Q632327" start="1322" end="1332" title="Carjacking" label="Carjacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="1386" end="1395" title="Extortion" label="Extortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605475" start="1771" end="1779" title="steaming (crime)" label="steaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091694" start="1866" end="1879" title="Criminal Code (Canada)" label="Criminal Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q763407" start="1897" end="1915" title="indictable offence" label="indictable offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545106" start="1949" end="1966" title="Life imprisonment in Canada" label="life imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="2207" end="2214" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185549" start="2254" end="2306" title="Criminal Justice (Theft and Fraud Offences) Act 2001" label="Criminal Justice (Theft and Fraud Offences) Act 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777756" start="2435" end="2449" title="Theft Act 1968" label="Theft Act 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727213" start="2675" end="2680" title="theft" label="theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185527" start="3159" end="3167" title="Cr App R" label="Cr App R"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727213" start="3931" end="3936" title="theft" label="theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488749" start="4102" end="4118" title="Larceny Act 1916" label="Larceny Act 1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785701" start="4180" end="4188" title="Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice" label="Archbold"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="5019" end="5031" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q34284" start="5600" end="5609" title="blackmail" label="blackmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q708433" start="5700" end="5708" title="Handling Stolen Goods" label="handling"/>
<link wikidata="Q763407" start="5749" end="5772" title="indictable-only offence" label="indictable-only offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365664" start="6001" end="6012" title="culpability" label="culpability"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6479" end="6494" title="Community service#Court ordered service" label="community order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992231" start="6528" end="6549" title="Life imprisonment in England and Wales" label="imprisonment for life"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6615" end="6640" title="Criminal Justice Act 2003#Dangerous offenders" label="Criminal Justice Act 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="7272" end="7279" title="assault" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546545" start="7284" end="7304" title="grievous bodily harm" label="grievous bodily harm"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="7363" end="7373" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153559" start="7439" end="7457" title="common law offence" label="common law offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777756" start="7584" end="7598" title="Theft Act 1968" label="Theft Act 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488746" start="7650" end="7666" title="Larceny Act 1861" label="Larceny Act 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488749" start="7687" end="7703" title="Larceny Act 1916" label="Larceny Act 1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q677393" start="8012" end="8025" title="intention (criminal law)" label="intentionally"/>
<link wikidata="Q314112" start="8029" end="8039" title="Recklessness (law)" label="recklessly"/>
<link wikidata="Q763407" start="8352" end="8375" title="indictable-only offence" label="indictable-only offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992231" start="8399" end="8420" title="Life imprisonment in England and Wales" label="imprisonment for life"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8535" end="8560" title="Criminal Justice Act 2003#Dangerous offenders" label="Criminal Justice Act 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="8622" end="8638" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777754" start="8674" end="8707" title="Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969" label="Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q636107" start="11457" end="11497" title="United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime" label="United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q582878" start="12708" end="12716" title="pop icon" label="pop icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q219937" start="12727" end="12743" title="Bonnie and Clyde" label="Bonnie and Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q243918" start="12748" end="12762" title="John Dillinger" label="John Dillinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q592072" start="12843" end="12854" title="The Killing (film)" label="The Killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="12872" end="12887" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978441" start="12924" end="12939" title="Wake Up and Die" label="Wake Up and Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q26208" start="12996" end="13009" title="Carlo Lizzani" label="Carlo Lizzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838631" start="13037" end="13052" title="Luciano Lutring" label="Luciano Lutring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146315" start="13184" end="13206" title="Take the Money and Run (film)" label="Take the Money and Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="13224" end="13235" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q115754" start="13350" end="13363" title="José Giovanni" label="José Giovanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q106529" start="13444" end="13455" title="Alain Delon" label="Alain Delon"/>
<link wikidata="Q458656" start="13465" end="13482" title="Dog Day Afternoon" label="Dog Day Afternoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q72962" start="13568" end="13582" title="Reservoir Dogs" label="Reservoir Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="13600" end="13617" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838631" start="13714" end="13729" title="Luciano Lutring" label="Luciano Lutring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838631" start="13908" end="13928" title="Il solista del mitra" label="Il solista del mitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241962" start="14068" end="14080" title="Lionel White" label="Lionel White"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156711" start="14289" end="14297" title="Payday 2" label="Payday 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q85130376" start="14314" end="14322" title="Payday 3" label="Payday 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113718" start="14342" end="14359" title="Overkill Software" label="Overkill Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q16913626" start="14576" end="14603" title="Historia Placitorum Coronae" label="Historia Placitorum Coronae"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54860" wikidata="Q1759057" url="?curid=54860" title="Savoy Ballroom">
<text>The Savoy Ballroom was a large ballroom for music and public dancing located at 596 Lenox Avenue, between 140th and 141st Streets in the Harlem neighborhood of Manhattan, New York City.
Lenox Avenue was the main thoroughfare through upper Harlem. Poet Langston Hughes calls it the &quot;Heartbeat of Harlem&quot; in Juke Box Love Song, and he set his work &quot;Lenox Avenue: Midnight&quot; on the legendary street. The Savoy was one of many Harlem hot spots along Lenox, but it was the one to be called the &quot;World&#x27;s Finest Ballroom&quot;. It was in operation from March 12, 1926, to July 10, 1958, and as Barbara Englebrecht writes in her article &quot;Swinging at the Savoy&quot;, it was &quot;a building, a geographic place, a ballroom, and the &#x27;soul&#x27; of a neighborhood&quot;.
It was opened and owned by white entrepreneur Jay Faggen and Jewish businessman Moe Gale. It was managed by African-American businessman and civic leader Charles Buchanan. Buchanan, who was born in the British West Indies, sought to run a &quot;luxury ballroom to accommodate the many thousands who wished to dance in an atmosphere of tasteful refinement, rather than in the small stuffy halls and the foul smelling, smoke laden cellar nightclubs ...&quot;

==History==

The Savoy was modeled after Faggen&#x27;s downtown venue, Roseland Ballroom. The Roseland was a mostly European American swing dance club. With swing&#x27;s rise to popularity and Harlem becoming a connected black community, The Savoy gave the rising talented and passionate black dancers an equally beautiful venue. The ballroom, which was 10,000 square feet in size, was on the second floor and a block long. It could hold up to 4,000 people. The interior was painted pink and the walls were mirrored. Colored lights danced on the sprung layered wood floor. In 1926, the Savoy contained a spacious lobby framing a huge, cut glass chandelier and marble staircase. Leon James is quoted in &quot;Jazz Dance&quot; as saying, &quot;My first impression was that I had stepped into another world. I had been to other ballrooms, but this was different – much bigger, more glamour, real class ...&quot;

The Savoy Ballroom was named after the Savoy Hotel in London as those who named the ballroom felt this gave the ballroom a classy, upscale feeling, as the hotel is a very elite, upscale hotel.

The Savoy was popular from the start. A headline from the &quot;New York Age&quot; March 20, 1926, reads &quot;Savoy Turns 2,000 Away On Opening Night – Crowds Pack Ball Room All Week&quot;. The ballroom remained lit every night of the week.

The Savoy had the constant presence of the best Lindy Hoppers, known as &quot;Savoy Lindy Hoppers&quot;. Occasionally, groups of dancers such as Whitey&#x27;s Lindy Hoppers turned professional and performed in Broadway and Hollywood productions. Whitey turned out to be a successful agent, and in 1937 the Marx Brothers&#x27; movie &quot;A Day at the Races&quot; featured the group. Herbert White was a bouncer at the Savoy who was made floor manager in the early 1930s. He was sometimes known as Mac, but with his ambition to scout dancers at the ballroom to form his own group, he became widely known as Whitey for the white streak of hair down the center of his head. He looked for dancers who were &quot;young, stylized, and, most of all, they had to have a beat, they had to swing&quot;.

Unlike many ballrooms such as the Cotton Club, the Savoy always had a no-discrimination policy. The clientele was 85% black and 15% white, although sometimes there was an even split. Lindy hop dancer Frankie Manning said that patrons were judged on their dancing skills and not on the color of their skin: &quot;One night somebody came over and said, &#x27;Hey man, Clark Gable just walked in the house.&#x27; Somebody else said, &#x27;Oh, yeah, can he dance?&#x27; All they wanted to know when you came into the Savoy was, do you dance?&quot;.

The northeast corner of the dance floor, nicknamed &quot;Cats&#x27; Corner,&quot; was monopolized by the best and boldest dancers. Some sources claim only Whitey&#x27;s Lindy Hoppers were permitted to dance there, while others are less specific. Competition for a place in Cats&#x27; Corner was fierce, and every serious hopper awaited the nightly &quot;showtime&quot;. Other dancers would create a horseshoe around the band and &quot;only the greatest Lindy-hoppers would stay on the floor, to try to eliminate each other&quot;.

Many dances such as the Lindy Hop (which was named after Charles Lindbergh and originated in 1927) were developed and became famous there. It was known downtown as the &quot;Home of Happy Feet&quot; but uptown, in Harlem, as &quot;the Track&quot; because the floor was long and thin. The Lindy Hop is also known as The Jitterbug and was born out of &quot;mounting exhilaration and the &#x27;hot&#x27; interaction of music and dance&quot;. Other dances that were conceived at the Savoy are The Flying Charleston, Jive, Snakehips, Rhumboogie, and variations of the Shimmy and Mambo. Capitol Records released at least one album devoted to the club, &quot;The Home of Happy Feet&quot;, from 1959.

It is estimated that the ballroom generated $250,000 in annual profit in its peak years from the late 1920s to the 1940s. Every year the ballroom was visited by almost 700,000 people. The entrance fee was 30 to 85 cents per person, depending on what time a person came. Thirty cents was the base price, but after 6 pm the fee was 60 cents, and then 85 cents after 8 pm. The Savoy made enough money by its peak in 1936 that $50,000 was spent on remodeling.
The ballroom had a double bandstand that held one large and one medium-sized band running against its east wall. Music was continuous as the alternative band was always in position and ready to pick up the beat when the previous one had completed its set. The bouncers, who had previously worked as boxers, basketball players, and the like, wore tuxedos and made $100 a night. The floor was watched inconspicuously by a security force of four men at a time who were headed by Jack La Rue, and no man was allowed in who wasn&#x27;t dressed in a jacket with a tie. Besides the security staff, the Savoy was populated by &quot;Harlem&#x27;s most beautiful women&quot;: the Savoy Hostesses. They would be fired for consorting with patrons outside the ballroom, but inside the hostesses would teach people to dance and were dance partners for anyone who purchased a 25 cent dance ticket. Roseland Ballroom hostesses often visited the Savoy on their night off; this inspired Buchanan to create Monday Ladies-Free Nights. Other special events began during the week, including the giveaway of a new car every Saturday. The floor had to be replaced every three years due to frequent use.

During the 1930s, Chick Webb was the bandleader of the Savoy&#x27;s most popular house band. Ella Fitzgerald, fresh from a talent show victory at the Apollo Theater in 1934, became its teenage vocalist. Webb also recorded the 1934 big band song and jazz standard &quot;Stompin&#x27; at the Savoy&quot;, which is named for the Savoy. The Savoy was the site of many Battle of the Bands or Cutting Contests, which started when the Benny Goodman Orchestra challenged Webb in 1937. Webb and his band were declared the winners of that contest. In 1938, Webb was challenged by the Count Basie Band. While Webb was declared the winner again, there was a lack of consensus on who won. Earle Warren, alto saxophonist for Basie, reported that they had worked on the song &quot;Swingin&#x27; the Blues&quot; for competing and says, &quot;When we unloaded our cannons, that was the end&quot;.

Floating World Pictures made a documentary called &quot;The Savoy King&quot; about the ballroom. It was shown at the 50th New York Film Festival. Other prominent Savoy house bandleaders included Al Cooper, Erskine Hawkins, Lucky Millinder (with Wynonie Harris on vocals), Buddy Johnson, and Cootie Williams.

The Savoy participated in the 1939 New York World&#x27;s Fair, presenting &quot;The Evolution of Negro Dance&quot;.

The ballroom was shut down in April 1943 as a result of &quot;charges of vice filed by the police department and Army&quot;. Its license was renewed in mid-October of the same year.

==Demolition and legacy==

The ballroom went out of business in October 1958.
Despite efforts to save it by Borough President Hulan Jack, Savoy Ballroom manager and co-owner Charles Buchanan, clubs, and organizations, the Savoy Ballroom was demolished for the construction of the Delano Village housing complex between March and April 1959. The mayor was the target of protest by clubs and organizations. The fixtures of the ballroom were auctioned for a &quot;slum clearance housing project&quot;. Count Basie was quoted in the paper saying, &quot;With the passing of the Savoy Ballroom, a part of show business is gone. I feel about the same way I did when someone told me the news that Bill (Bojangles) Robinson was dead&quot;.

On May 26, 2002, Frankie Manning and Norma Miller, members of Whitey&#x27;s Lindy Hoppers, unveiled a commemorative plaque for the Savoy Ballroom on Lenox Avenue between 140th and 141st Streets.

On the 19th anniversary of the plaque&#x27;s installation, the Savoy Ballroom was honored with an interactive Google Doodle rhythm game, which featured popular swing dance tunes like Ella Fitzgerald and Louis Armstrong&#x27;s &quot;Let&#x27;s Call the Whole Thing Off&quot; duet.

==See also==
*List of jazz clubs

==References==
==External links==
* Savoy Ballroom plaque
* Welcome to the Savoy virtual reality project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1759057" start="4" end="18" title="Savoy Ballroom" label="Savoy Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q805353" start="31" end="39" title="ballroom" label="ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523155" start="84" end="96" title="Lenox Avenue" label="Lenox Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="137" end="143" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="160" end="169" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="171" end="184" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q188093" start="252" end="267" title="Langston Hughes" label="Langston Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="861" end="867" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q920396" start="1002" end="1021" title="British West Indies" label="British West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368225" start="1329" end="1346" title="Roseland Ballroom" label="Roseland Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q123704" start="1392" end="1403" title="swing dance" label="swing dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q97105645" start="1893" end="1902" title="cut glass" label="cut glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q746639" start="2207" end="2218" title="Savoy Hotel" label="Savoy Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134329" start="2653" end="2662" title="Lindy Hop" label="Lindy Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q10719907" start="2750" end="2777" title="Whitey&amp;#x27;s Lindy Hoppers" label="Whitey&amp;#x27;s Lindy Hoppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q64450" start="2911" end="2924" title="Marx Brothers" label="Marx Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214749" start="2943" end="2961" title="A Day at the Races (film)" label="A Day at the Races"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136776" start="3433" end="3444" title="Cotton Club" label="Cotton Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445086" start="3599" end="3614" title="Frankie Manning" label="Frankie Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q71243" start="3765" end="3776" title="Clark Gable" label="Clark Gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q17237" start="4988" end="4992" title="Jive (dance)" label="Jive"/>
<link wikidata="Q333002" start="5050" end="5055" title="Mambo (dance)" label="Mambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126170" start="5652" end="5661" title="bandstand" label="bandstand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157239" start="6102" end="6113" title="Jack La Rue" label="Jack La Rue"/>
<link wikidata="Q505749" start="6824" end="6834" title="Chick Webb" label="Chick Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q806349" start="6843" end="6853" title="bandleader" label="bandleader"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437096" start="6887" end="6897" title="house band" label="house band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768" start="6899" end="6914" title="Ella Fitzgerald" label="Ella Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q619124" start="6956" end="6970" title="Apollo Theater" label="Apollo Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="7037" end="7045" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q591990" start="7055" end="7068" title="jazz standard" label="jazz standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618804" start="7075" end="7101" title="Stompin&amp;#x27; at the Savoy" label="Stompin&amp;#x27; at the Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246424" start="7170" end="7189" title="Battle of the Bands" label="Battle of the Bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196998" start="7193" end="7208" title="Cutting Contest" label="Cutting Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q46755" start="7234" end="7247" title="Benny Goodman" label="Benny Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008" start="7380" end="7391" title="Count Basie" label="Count Basie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277478" start="7482" end="7494" title="Earle Warren" label="Earle Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q25648" start="7809" end="7831" title="New York Film Festival" label="New York Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703696" start="7882" end="7891" title="Al Cooper" label="Al Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q355481" start="7893" end="7908" title="Erskine Hawkins" label="Erskine Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q252474" start="7910" end="7925" title="Lucky Millinder" label="Lucky Millinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q326649" start="7932" end="7946" title="Wynonie Harris" label="Wynonie Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q925459" start="7959" end="7972" title="Buddy Johnson" label="Buddy Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q523899" start="7978" end="7993" title="Cootie Williams" label="Cootie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q207420" start="8026" end="8057" title="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935512" start="8422" end="8432" title="Hulan Jack" label="Hulan Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q104864311" start="8757" end="8771" title="Slum clearance in the United States" label="slum clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q862416" start="8985" end="9010" title="Bill Robinson" label="Bill (Bojangles) Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967375" start="9065" end="9077" title="Norma Miller" label="Norma Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523155" start="9177" end="9189" title="Lenox Avenue" label="Lenox Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q18156042" start="9334" end="9347" title="Google Doodle" label="Google Doodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632782" start="9348" end="9359" title="rhythm game" label="rhythm game"/>
<link wikidata="Q123704" start="9384" end="9395" title="Swing (dance)" label="swing dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="9427" end="9442" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367331" start="9456" end="9491" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Call the Whole Thing Off" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Call the Whole Thing Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864661" start="9519" end="9537" title="List of jazz clubs" label="List of jazz clubs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54861" wikidata="Q189074" url="?curid=54861" title="Harlem">
<text>Harlem is a neighborhood in Upper Manhattan, New York City. It is bounded roughly by the Hudson River on the west; the Harlem River and 155th Street on the north; Fifth Avenue on the east; and Central Park North on the south. The greater Harlem area encompasses several other neighborhoods and extends west and north to 155th Street, east to the East River, and south to Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard, Central Park, and East 96th Street.

Originally a Dutch village, formally organized in 1658, it is named after the city of Haarlem in the Netherlands. Harlem&#x27;s history has been defined by a series of economic boom-and-bust cycles, with significant population shifts accompanying each cycle. Harlem was predominantly occupied by Jewish and Italian Americans in the late 19th century, while African-American residents began to arrive in large numbers during the Great Migration in the early 20th century. In the 1920s and 1930s, Central and West Harlem were the center of the Harlem Renaissance, a major African-American cultural movement. With job losses during the Great Depression of the 1930s and the deindustrialization of New York City after World War II, rates of crime and poverty increased significantly. In the 21st century, crime rates decreased significantly, and Harlem started to gentrify.

The area is served by the New York City Subway and local bus routes. It contains several public elementary, middle, and high schools, and is close to several colleges, including Columbia University, Manhattan School of Music, and the City College of New York. Central Harlem is part of Manhattan Community District 10. It is patrolled by the 28th and 32nd Precincts of the New York City Police Department. The greater Harlem area also includes Manhattan Community Districts 9 and 11 and several police precincts, while fire services are provided by four New York City Fire Department companies.

==Geography==

Harlem is located in Upper Manhattan. The three neighborhoods comprising the greater Harlem area—West, Central, and East Harlem—stretch from the Harlem River and East River to the east, to the Hudson River to the west; and between 155th Street in the north, where it meets Washington Heights, and an uneven boundary along the south that runs along 96th Street east of Fifth Avenue, 110th Street between Fifth Avenue to Morningside Park, and 125th Street west of Morningside Park to the Hudson River. &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; references these boundaries, though the &quot;Encyclopedia of New York City&quot; takes a much more conservative view of Harlem&#x27;s boundaries, regarding only central Harlem as part of Harlem proper.

Central Harlem is the name of Harlem proper; it falls under Manhattan Community District 10. This section is bounded by Central Park North 110th street on the south; 155th street on the north; Fifth avenue on the east; and Morningside Park, St. Nicholas Avenue, and Edgecombe Avenue on the west. A chain of large linear parks includes Morningside Park, St. Nicholas Park, Jackie Robinson Park, Rucker Park, and Marcus Garvey Park (also known as Mount Morris Park) which separates this area from East Harlem to the east. Central Harlem includes the Mount Morris Park Historic District.

West Harlem (Manhattanville, Hamilton Heights, and Sugar Hill) comprises Manhattan Community district 9. The three neighborhoods&#x27; area is bounded by Cathedral Parkway/110th Street on the south; 155th Street on the north; Manhattan/Morningside Ave/St. Nicholas/Bradhurst/Edgecombe Avenues on the east; and Riverside Park/the Hudson River on the west. Manhattanville begins at roughly 123rd Street and extends northward to 135th Street. The northernmost section of West Harlem is Hamilton Heights. A chain of large linear parks includes West Harlem Piers, Riverbank State Park, St. Nicholas Park, and Jackie Robinson Park.

East Harlem, also called Spanish Harlem or &quot;El Barrio&quot;, is located within Manhattan Community District 11, which is bounded by East 96th Street on the south, East 138th Street on the north, Fifth Avenue on the west, and the Harlem River on the east. A chain of parks includes Thomas Jefferson Park and Marcus Garvey Park.

===SoHa controversy===
In the 2010s some real estate professionals started rebranding south Harlem as &quot;SoHa&quot; (a name standing for &quot;South Harlem&quot; in the style of SoHo or NoHo) in an attempt to accelerate gentrification of the neighborhoods. &quot;SoHa&quot;, applied to the area between West 110th and 125th Streets, has become a controversial name. Residents and other critics seeking to prevent this renaming of the area have labelled the SoHa brand as &quot;insulting and another sign of gentrification run amok&quot; and have said that &quot;the rebranding not only places their neighborhood&#x27;s rich history under erasure but also appears to be intent on attracting new tenants, including students from nearby Columbia University&quot;.

Multiple New York City politicians have initiated legislative efforts to curtail this practice of neighborhood rebranding, which when successfully introduced in other New York City neighborhoods, have led to increases in rents and real estate values, as well as &quot;shifting demographics&quot;. In 2011, U.S. Representative Hakeem Jeffries attempted but failed to implement legislation &quot;that would punish real estate agents for inventing false neighborhoods and redrawing neighborhood boundaries without city approval.&quot; By 2017, New York State Senator Brian Benjamin also worked to render the practice of rebranding historically recognized neighborhoods illegal.

===Political representation===
Politically, central Harlem is in New York&#x27;s 13th congressional district. It is in the New York State Senate&#x27;s 30th district, the New York State Assembly&#x27;s 68th and 70th districts, and the New York City Council&#x27;s 7th, 8th, and 9th districts.

== History ==


Before the arrival of European settlers, the area that would become Harlem (originally Haarlem) was inhabited by a Native American band, the &quot;Wecquaesgeek&quot;, dubbed &quot;Manhattans&quot; or &quot;Manhattoe&quot; by Dutch settlers, who along with other Native Americans, most likely Lenape, occupied the area on a semi-nomadic basis. As many as several hundred farmed the Harlem flatlands. Between 1637 and 1639, a few colonial settlements were established. The settlement of Harlem was formally incorporated in 1660 under the leadership of Peter Stuyvesant.

During the American Revolution, the British burned Harlem to the ground. It took a long time to rebuild, as Harlem grew more slowly than the rest of Manhattan during the late 18th century. After the American Civil War, Harlem experienced an economic boom starting in 1868. The neighborhood continued to serve as a refuge for New Yorkers, but increasingly those coming north were poor and Jewish or Italian. The New York and Harlem Railroad, as well as the Interborough Rapid Transit and elevated railway lines, helped Harlem&#x27;s economic growth, as they connected Harlem to lower and midtown Manhattan.


The Jewish and Italian demographic decreased, while the black and Puerto Rican population increased in this time. The early-20th century Great Migration of black people to northern industrial cities was fueled by their desire to leave behind the Jim Crow South, seek better jobs and education for their children, and escape a culture of lynching violence; during World War I, expanding industries recruited black laborers to fill new jobs, thinly staffed after the draft began to take young men. In 1910, Central Harlem population was about 10% black people. By 1930, it had reached 70%.

Starting around the time of the end of World War I, Harlem became associated with the New Negro movement, and then the artistic outpouring known as the Harlem Renaissance, which extended to poetry, novels, theater, and the visual arts. So many black people came that it &quot;threaten[ed] the very existence of some of the leading industries of Georgia, Florida, Tennessee and Alabama.&quot; Many settled in Harlem. By 1920, central Harlem was 32.43% black. The 1930 census revealed that 70.18% of central Harlem&#x27;s residents were black and lived as far south as Central Park, at 110th Street.

However, by the 1930s, the neighborhood was hit hard by job losses in the Great Depression. In the early 1930s, 25% of Harlemites were out of work, and employment prospects for Harlemites stayed poor for decades. Employment among black New Yorkers fell as some traditionally black businesses, including domestic service and some types of manual labor, were taken over by other ethnic groups. Major industries left New York City altogether, especially after 1950. Several riots happened in this period, including in 1935 and 1943.

There were major changes following World War II. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, Harlem was the scene of a series of rent strikes by neighborhood tenants, led by local activist Jesse Gray, together with the Congress of Racial Equality, Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited (HARYOU), and other groups. These groups wanted the city to force landlords to improve the quality of housing by bringing them up to code, to take action against rats and roaches, to provide heat during the winter, and to keep prices in line with existing rent control regulations.

The largest public works projects in Harlem in these years were public housing, with the largest concentration built in East Harlem. Typically, existing structures were torn down and replaced with city-designed and managed properties that would, in theory, present a safer and more pleasant environment than those available from private landlords. Ultimately, community objections halted the construction of new projects.

From the mid-20th century, the low quality of education in Harlem has been a source of distress. In the 1960s, about 75% of Harlem students tested under grade levels in reading skills, and 80% tested under grade level in math. In 1964, residents of Harlem staged two school boycotts to call attention to the problem. In central Harlem, 92% of students stayed home. In the post-World War II era, Harlem ceased to be home to a majority of the city&#x27;s black people, but it remained the cultural and political capital of black New York, and possibly black America.

By the 1970s, many of those Harlemites who were able to escape from poverty left the neighborhood in search of better schools and homes, and safer streets. Those who remained were the poorest and least skilled, with the fewest opportunities for success. Though the federal government&#x27;s Model Cities Program spent $100 million on job training, health care, education, public safety, sanitation, housing, and other projects over a ten-year period, Harlem showed no improvement. The city began auctioning its enormous portfolio of Harlem properties to the public in 1985. This was intended to improve the community by placing property in the hands of people who would live in them and maintain them. In many cases, the city would even pay to completely renovate a property before selling it (by lottery) below market value.

After the 1990s, Harlem began to grow again. Between 1990 and 2006 the neighborhood&#x27;s population grew by 16.9%, with the percentage of black people decreasing from 87.6% to 69.3%, then dropping to 54.4% by 2010, and the percentage of whites increasing from 1.5% to 6.6% by 2006, and to &quot;almost 10%&quot; by 2010. A renovation of 125th Street and new properties along the thoroughfare also helped to revitalize Harlem.
== Culture ==
In the 1920s and 1930s, Central and West Harlem was the focus of the &quot;Harlem Renaissance&quot;, an outpouring of artistic work without precedent in the American Black community. Though Harlem musicians and writers are particularly well remembered, the community has also hosted numerous actors and theater companies, including the New Heritage Repertory Theater, National Black Theater, Lafayette Players, Harlem Suitcase Theater, The Negro Playwrights, American Negro Theater, and the Rose McClendon Players.

The Apollo Theater opened on 125th Street on January 26, 1934, in a former burlesque house. The Savoy Ballroom, on Lenox Avenue, was a renowned venue for swing dancing, and was immortalized in a popular song of the era, &quot;Stompin&#x27; at the Savoy&quot;. In the 1920s and 1930s, between Lenox and Seventh Avenues in central Harlem, over 125 entertainment venues were in operation, including speakeasies, cellars, lounges, cafes, taverns, supper clubs, rib joints, theaters, dance halls, and bars and grills.

133rd Street, known as &quot;Swing Street&quot;, became known for its cabarets, speakeasies and jazz scene during the Prohibition era, and was dubbed &quot;Jungle Alley&quot; because of &quot;inter-racial mingling&quot; on the street. Some jazz venues, including the Cotton Club, where Duke Ellington played, and Connie&#x27;s Inn, were restricted to whites only. Others were integrated, including the Renaissance Ballroom and the Savoy Ballroom.

In 1936, Orson Welles produced his black &quot;Macbeth&quot; at the Lafayette Theater in Harlem. Grand theaters from the late 19th and early 20th centuries were torn down or converted to churches. Harlem lacked any permanent performance space until the creation of the Gatehouse Theater in an old Croton aqueduct building on 135th Street in 2006.
From 1965 until 2007, the community was home to the Harlem Boys Choir, a touring choir and education program for young boys, most of whom are black. The Girls Choir of Harlem was founded in 1989, and closed with the Boys Choir.

From 1967 to 1969, the Harlem Cultural Festival took place in Mount Morris Park. Another name for this festival is &quot;Black Woodstock&quot;. Artists like Stevie Wonder, The 5th Dimension, and Gladys Knight performed here.

Harlem is also home to the largest African American Day Parade, which celebrates the culture of African diaspora in America. The parade was started up in the spring of 1969 with Congressman Adam Clayton Powell Jr. as the Grand Marshal of the first celebration.

Arthur Mitchell, a former dancer with the New York City Ballet, established Dance Theatre of Harlem as a school and company of classical ballet and theater training in the late 1960s. The company has toured nationally and internationally. Generations of theater artists have gotten a start at the school.

By the 2010s, new dining hotspots were opening in Harlem around Frederick Douglass Boulevard. At the same time, some residents fought back against the powerful waves of gentrification the neighborhood is experiencing. In 2013, residents staged a sidewalk sit-in to protest a five-days-a-week farmers market that would shut down Macombs Place at 150th Street.

Uptown Night Market was founded in 2021 to celebrate cuisine, community, and culture. It is one of the largest night markets in Manhattan. The main attractions include musical performances, arts and crafts shows, and food.

===Music===

Many R&amp;B/Soul groups and artists formed in Harlem. The Main Ingredient, Frankie Lymon &amp; The Teenagers, Black Ivory, Cameo, Keith Sweat, Freddie Jackson, Alyson Williams, Johnny Kemp, Teddy Riley, Dave Wooley, and others got their start in Harlem.

Manhattan&#x27;s contributions to hip-hop stems largely from artists with Harlem roots such as Doug E. Fresh, Big L, Kurtis Blow, The Diplomats, Mase or Immortal Technique. Harlem is also the birthplace of popular hip-hop dances such as the Harlem shake, toe wop, and Chicken Noodle Soup.

Harlem&#x27;s classical music birthed organizations and chamber ensembles such as Roberta Guaspari&#x27;s Opus 118, Harlem Chamber Players, Omnipresent Music Festival BIPOC Musicians Festival, Harlem Quartet, and musicians such as violinist Edward W. Hardy.

In the 1920s, African-American pianists who lived in Harlem invented their own style of jazz piano, called stride, which was heavily influenced by ragtime. This style played a very important role in early jazz piano

===Language===
In 1938, jazz bandleader and singer Cab Calloway published the first dictionary by an African-American, &quot;Cab Calloway&#x27;s Cat-ologue: A &quot;Hepster&#x27;s&quot; Dictionary&quot;, which became the official jive language reference book of the New York Public Library. In 1939, Calloway published an accompanying book titled &quot;Professor Cab Calloway&#x27;s Swingformation Bureau&quot;, which instructed readers how to apply the words and phrases from the dictionary. He released several editions until 1944, the last being &quot;The New Cab Calloway&#x27;s Hepsters Dictionary: Language of Jive&quot;. Poet Lemn Sissay observed that &quot;Cab Calloway was taking ownership of language for a people who, just a few generations before, had their own languages taken away.&quot;

===Religious life===

Religious life has historically had a strong presence in Black Harlem. The area is home to over 400 churches, some of which are official city or national landmarks. Major Christian denominations include Baptists, Pentecostals, Methodists (generally African Methodist Episcopal Zionist, or &quot;AMEZ&quot; and African Methodist Episcopalian, or &quot;AME&quot;), Episcopalians, and Roman Catholic. The Abyssinian Baptist Church has long been influential because of its large congregation. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints built a chapel on 128th Street in 2005.

Many of the area&#x27;s churches are &quot;storefront churches&quot;, which operate in an empty store, or a basement, or a converted brownstone townhouse. These congregations may have fewer than 30–50 members each, but there are hundreds of them. Others are old, large, and designated landmarks. Especially in the years before World War II, Harlem produced popular Christian charismatic &quot;cult&quot; leaders, including George Wilson Becton and Father Divine.

Mosques in Harlem include the Masjid Malcolm Shabazz (formerly Mosque No. 7 Nation of Islam, and the location of the 1972 Harlem mosque incident), the Mosque of Islamic Brotherhood and Masjid Aqsa. Judaism, too, maintains a presence in Harlem through the Old Broadway Synagogue. A non-mainstream synagogue of Black Hebrews, known as Commandment Keepers, was based in a synagogue at 1 West 123rd Street until 2008.
===Landmarks===

====Officially designated landmarks====
Many places in Harlem are official city landmarks labeled by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission or are listed on the National Register of Historic Places:

* 12 West 129th Street, a New York City landmark
* 17 East 128th Street, a New York City landmark
* 369th Regiment Armory, a New York City landmark and NRHP-listed site
* Abyssinian Baptist Church, a New York City landmark
* Apollo Theater, a New York City landmark and NRHP-listed site
* Astor Row, a set of New York City landmark houses
* Blockhouse No. 1, Fort Clinton, and Nutter&#x27;s Battery, part of Central Park, a New York City scenic landmark and NRHP-listed site
* Central Harlem West–130–132nd Streets Historic District, a New York City landmark
* Dunbar Apartments, a New York City landmark
* Graham Court Apartments, a New York City landmark
* Hamilton Grange, a New York City landmark and NRHP-listed site
* Harlem River Houses, a New York City landmark
* Harlem YMCA, a New York City landmark
* Hotel Theresa, a New York City landmark
* Jackie Robinson YMCA Youth Center, a New York City landmark
* Langston Hughes House, a New York City landmark and NRHP-listed site
* Macombs Dam Bridge and 155th Street Viaduct, a New York City landmark
* Manhattan Avenue-West 120th-123rd Streets Historic District, a NRHP historic district
* Metropolitan Baptist Church, a New York City landmark and NRHP-listed site
* Minton&#x27;s Playhouse, a NRHP-listed site
* Morningside Park, a New York City scenic landmark
* Mother African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, a New York City landmark
* Mount Morris Park Historic District, a New York City landmark district
* Mount Olive Fire Baptized Holiness Church, a New York City landmark
* New York Public Library 115th Street Branch, a New York City landmark and NRHP-listed site
* Regent Theatre, a New York City landmark
* Schomburg Collection for Research in Black Culture, a New York City landmark and NRHP-listed site
* St. Aloysius Roman Catholic Church, a New York City landmark
* St. Andrew&#x27;s Church, a New York City landmark and NRHP-listed site
* St. Philip&#x27;s Protestant Episcopal Church, a New York City landmark
* St. Martin&#x27;s Episcopal Church (formerly Trinity Church), a New York City landmark
* St. Nicholas Historic District, a New York City landmark district
* St. Paul&#x27;s German Evangelical Lutheran Church, a New York City landmark
* Wadleigh High School for Girls, a New York City landmark
* Washington Apartments, a New York City landmark
====Other points of interest====
Other prominent points of interest include:
* Adam Clayton Powell Jr. State Office Building
* All Saints Church
* ATLAH World Missionary Church
* Bushman Steps, stairway that led baseball fans from the subway to The Polo Grounds ticket booth.
* Cotton Club
* Duke Ellington Circle
* Frederick Douglass Circle
* Harbor Conservatory for the Performing Arts
* Harlem Children&#x27;s Zone
* Harlem Hospital Center
* The Harlem School of the Arts
* Lenox Lounge
* Marcus Garvey Park
** Harlem Fire Watchtower, a New York City landmark and NRHP-listed site
* Morningside Park
* National Black Theatre
* New York College of Podiatric Medicine
* Red Rooster
* Rucker Park
* Savoy Ballroom
* St. Nicholas Houses
* Studio Museum in Harlem
* Sylvia&#x27;s Soul Food
* Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine
* New York Amsterdam News
== Demographics ==
The demographics of Harlem&#x27;s communities have changed throughout its history. In 1910, black residents formed 10% of Harlem&#x27;s population, but by 1930, they had become a 70% majority. The period between 1910 and 1930 was marked by the Great Migration of African Americans from the South to northern cities, including New York. Within the city, this era also witnessed an influx of black residents from downtown Manhattan neighborhoods, where black people were feeling less welcome, to the Harlem area. The black population in Harlem peaked in 1950, with a 98% share of the population of 233,000. As of 2000, central Harlem&#x27;s black residents comprised 77% of the total population of that area; however, the black population has recently declined as many African Americans move out and more immigrants move in. As of 2021, central Harlem&#x27;s Black residents numbered 56,668, comprising 44% of the total population. In that regard, there are an estimated 27% (34,773) Hispanics, 18% (23,182) White, 4% (5,151) Asian, 6% (7,727) of two or more races and 2% (2,575) Other.

Harlem suffers from unemployment rates generally more than twice the citywide average, as well as high poverty rates. and the numbers for men have been consistently worse than the numbers for women. Private and governmental initiatives to ameliorate unemployment and poverty have not been successful. During the Great Depression, unemployment in Harlem went past 20% and people were being evicted from their homes. At the same time, the federal government developed and instituted the redlining policy. This policy rated neighborhoods, such as Central Harlem, as unappealing based on the race, ethnicity, and national origins of the residents. Central Harlem was deemed &#x27;hazardous&#x27; and residents living in Central Harlem were refused home loans or other investments. Comparably, wealthy and white residents in New York City neighborhoods were approved more often for housing loans and investment applications. Overall, they were given preferential treatment by city and state institutions.

In the 1960s, uneducated black people could find jobs more easily than educated ones could, confounding efforts to improve the lives of people who lived in the neighborhood through education. Land owners took advantage of the neighborhood and offered apartments to the lower-class families for cheaper rent but in lower-class conditions. By 1999 there were 179,000 housing units available in Harlem. Housing activists in Harlem state that, even after residents were given vouchers for the Section 8 housing that was being placed, many were not able to live there and had to find homes elsewhere or become homeless. These policies are examples of societal racism, also known as structural racism. As public health leaders have named structural racism as a key social determinant of health disparities between racial and ethnic minorities, these 20th century policies have contributed to the current population health disparities between Central Harlem and other New York City neighborhoods.

===Central Harlem===
For census purposes, the New York City government classifies Central Harlem into two neighborhood tabulation areas: Central Harlem North and Central Harlem South, divided by 126th street. Based on data from the 2010 United States Census, the population of Central Harlem was 118,665, a change of 9,574 (8.1%) from the 109,091 counted in 2000. Covering an area of , the neighborhood had a population density of . The racial makeup of the neighborhood was 9.5% (11,322) White, 63% (74,735) African American, 0.3% (367) Native American, 2.4% (2,839) Asian, 0% (46) Pacific Islander, 0.3% (372) from other races, and 2.2% (2,651) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 22.2% (26,333) of the population. Harlem&#x27;s Black population was more concentrated in Central Harlem North, and its White population more concentrated in Central Harlem South, while the Hispanic / Latino population was evenly split.

The most significant shifts in the racial composition of Central Harlem between 2000 and 2010 were the White population&#x27;s increase by 402% (9,067), the Hispanic / Latino population&#x27;s increase by 43% (7,982), and the Black population&#x27;s decrease by 11% (9,544). While the growth of the Hispanic / Latino was predominantly in Central Harlem North, the decrease in the Black population was slightly greater in Central Harlem South, and the drastic increase in the White population was split evenly across the two census tabulation areas. Meanwhile, the Asian population grew by 211% (1,927) but remained a small minority, and the small population of all other races increased by 4% (142).

The entirety of Community District 10, which comprises Central Harlem, had 116,345 inhabitants as of NYC Health&#x27;s 2018 Community Health Profile, with an average life expectancy of 76.2 years. This is lower than the median life expectancy of 81.2 for all New York City neighborhoods. Most inhabitants are children and middle-aged adults: 21% are between the ages of 0–17, while 35% are between 25 and 44, and 24% between 45 and 64. The ratio of college-aged and elderly residents was lower, at 10% and 11% respectively.

As of 2017, the median household income in Community District 10 was $49,059. In 2018, an estimated 21% of Community District 10 residents lived in poverty, compared to 14% in all of Manhattan and 20% in all of New York City. Around 12% of residents were unemployed, compared to 7% in Manhattan and 9% in New York City. Rent burden, or the percentage of residents who have difficulty paying their rent, is 48% in Community District 10, compared to the boroughwide and citywide rates of 45% and 51% respectively. Based on this calculation, , Community District 10 is considered to be gentrifying: according to the Community Health Profile, the district was low-income in 1990 and has seen above-median rent growth up to 2010.

===Other sections===
In 2010, the population of West Harlem was 110,193. West Harlem, consisting of Manhattanville and Hamilton Heights, is predominately Hispanic / Latino, while African Americans make up about a quarter of the West Harlem population.

In 2010, the population of East Harlem was 120,000. East Harlem originally formed as a predominantly Italian American neighborhood. The area began its transition from Italian Harlem to Spanish Harlem when Puerto Rican migration began after World War II, though in recent decades, many Dominican, Mexican and Salvadoran immigrants have also settled in East Harlem. East Harlem is now predominantly Hispanic / Latino, with a significant African-American presence.

===2020 Census===
In the 2020 census, Harlem&#x27;s demographics were broken up into North Harlem, South Harlem, Hamilton Heights, and West Harlem. North Harlem had 40,000+ Black residents being the largest concentration of the black population of the Harlem area, 20,000 to 29,999 Hispanic residents, 5,000 to 9,999 White residents, and less than 5000 Asian residents. South Harlem had 20,000 to 29,999 Black residents, 5,000 to 9,999 Hispanic residents, 10,000 to 19,999 White residents, and fewer than 5,000 Asian residents. Hamilton Heights had 10,000 to 19,999 Black residents, 20,000 to 29,999 Hispanic residents being the largest population group in this section, 5,000 to 9,999 White residents, and fewer than 5,000 Asian residents. West Harlem had an equal number of Black and Hispanic residents with each of their population at 5,000 to 9,999 residents and each the White and Asian population were fewer than 5,000 residents. 

==Police and crime==
Central Harlem is patrolled by two precincts of the New York City Police Department (NYPD). Central Harlem North is covered by the 32nd Precinct, located at 250 West 135th Street, while Central Harlem South is patrolled by the 28th Precinct, located at 2271–2289 Eighth Avenue.

The 28th Precinct has a lower crime rate than it did in the 1990s, with crimes across all categories having decreased by 72.2% between 1990 and 2021. The precinct reported 2 murders, 9 rapes, 172 robberies, 245 felony assaults, 153 burglaries, 384 grand larcenies, and 52 grand larcenies auto in 2021. Of the five major violent felonies (murder, rape, felony assault, robbery, and burglary), the 28th Precinct had a rate of 1,125 crimes per 100,000 residents in 2019, compared to the boroughwide average of 632 crimes per 100,000 and the citywide average of 572 crimes per 100,000.

The crime rate in the 32nd Precinct has also decreased since the 1990s, with crimes across all categories having decreased by 71.4% between 1990 and 2021. The precinct reported 16 murders, 18 rapes, 183 robberies, 519 felony assaults, 168 burglaries, 320 grand larcenies, and 54 grand larcenies auto in 2021. Of the five major violent felonies (murder, rape, felony assault, robbery, and burglary), the 32nd Precinct had a rate of 1,042 crimes per 100,000 residents in 2019, compared to the boroughwide average of 632 crimes per 100,000 and the citywide average of 572 crimes per 100,000.

, Community District 10 has a non-fatal assault hospitalization rate of 116 per 100,000 people, compared to the boroughwide rate of 49 per 100,000 and the citywide rate of 59 per 100,000. Its incarceration rate is 1,347 per 100,000 people, the second-highest in the city, compared to the boroughwide rate of 407 per 100,000 and the citywide rate of 425 per 100,000.

=== Crime trends ===

In the early 20th century, Harlem was a stronghold of the Sicilian Mafia, other Italian organized crime groups, and later the Italian-American Mafia. As the ethnic composition of the neighborhood changed, black criminals began to organize themselves similarly. However, rather than compete with the established mobs, gangs concentrated on the &quot;policy racket&quot;, also called the numbers game, or &quot;bolita&quot; in East Harlem. This was a gambling scheme similar to a lottery that could be played, illegally, from countless locations around Harlem. According to Francis Ianni, &quot;By 1925 there were thirty black policy banks in Harlem, several of them large enough to collect bets in an area of twenty city blocks and across three or four avenues.&quot;

By the early 1950s, the total money at play amounted to billions of dollars, and the police force had been thoroughly corrupted by bribes from numbers bosses. These bosses became financial powerhouses, providing capital for loans for those who could not qualify for them from traditional financial institutions, and investing in legitimate businesses and real estate. One of the powerful early numbers bosses was a woman, Madame Stephanie St. Clair, who fought gun battles with mobster Dutch Schultz over control of the lucrative trade.

The popularity of playing the numbers waned with the introduction of the state lottery, which is legal but has lower payouts and has taxes collected on winnings. The practice continues on a smaller scale among those who prefer the numbers tradition or who prefer to trust their local numbers bank to the state.

Statistics from 1940 show about 100 murders per year in Harlem, &quot;but rape is very rare&quot;. By 1950, many whites had left Harlem and by 1960, much of the black middle class had departed. At the same time, control of organized crime shifted from Italian syndicates to local black, Puerto Rican, and Cuban groups that were somewhat less formally organized. At the time of the 1964 riots, the drug addiction rate in Harlem was ten times higher than the New York City average, and twelve times higher than the United States as a whole. Of the 30,000 drug addicts then estimated to live in New York City, 15,000 to 20,000 lived in Harlem. Property crime was pervasive, and the murder rate was six times higher than New York&#x27;s average. Half of the children in Harlem grew up with one parent, or none, and lack of supervision contributed to juvenile delinquency; between 1953 and 1962, the crime rate among young people increased throughout New York City, but was consistently 50% higher in Harlem than in New York City as a whole.

Injecting heroin grew in popularity in Harlem through the 1950s and 1960s, though the use of this drug then leveled off. In the 1980s, use of crack cocaine became widespread, which produced collateral crime as addicts stole to finance their purchasing of additional drugs, and as dealers fought for the right to sell in particular regions, or over deals gone bad.

With the end of the &quot;crack wars&quot; in the mid-1990s, and with the initiation of aggressive policing under mayors David Dinkins and his successor Rudy Giuliani, crime in Harlem plummeted. Compared to in 1981, when 6,500 robberies were reported in Harlem, reports of robberies dropped to 4,800 in 1990; to 1,700 in 2000; and to 1,100 in 2010. Within the 28th and 32nd precincts, there have been similar changes in all categories of crimes tracked by the NYPD.

Despite reductions versus historic highs, Harlem continues to have a high rate of violent crime and one of the highest rates of violent crime in New York City. This crime is largely correlated with high concentrations of poverty. Illicit activities such as theft, robbery, drug trafficking, prostitution are prevalent. Criminal organizations like street gangs are responsible for many of the murders and shootings in the neighborhood.

===Gangs===
There are many gangs in Harlem, often based in housing projects; when one gang member is killed by another gang, revenge violence erupts which can last for years. In addition, the East Harlem Purple Gang of the 1970s, which operated in East Harlem and surroundings, was an Italian American group of hitmen and heroin dealers.

Harlem and its gangsters have a strong link to hip hop, rap and R&amp;B culture in the United States, and many successful rappers in the music industry came from gangs in Harlem. Gangster rap, which has its origins in the late 1980s, often has lyrics that are &quot;misogynistic or that glamorize violence&quot;, glamorizing guns, drugs and easy women in Harlem and New York City.

==Fire safety==

Central Harlem is served by four New York City Fire Department (FDNY) fire stations:
* Engine Company 37/Ladder Company 40 – 415 West 125th Street
* Engine Company 58/Ladder Company 26 – 1367 5th Avenue
* Engine Company 59/Ladder Company 30 – 111 West 133rd Street
* Engine Company 69/Ladder Company 28/Battalion 16 – 248 West 143rd Street

Five additional firehouses are located in West and East Harlem. West Harlem contains Engine Company 47 and Engine Company 80/Ladder Company 23, while East Harlem contains Engine Company 35/Ladder Company 14/Battalion 12, Engine Company 53/Ladder Company 43, and Engine Company 91.

==Health==

, preterm births and births to teenage mothers are more common in Central Harlem than in other places citywide. In Central Harlem, there were 103 preterm births per 1,000 live births (compared to 87 per 1,000 citywide), and 23 births to teenage mothers per 1,000 live births (compared to 19.3 per 1,000 citywide), though the teenage birth rate is based on a small sample size. Central Harlem has a low population of residents who are uninsured. In 2018, this population of uninsured residents was estimated to be 8%, less than the citywide rate of 12%.

The concentration of fine particulate matter, the deadliest type of air pollutant, in Central Harlem is , slightly more than the city average. Ten percent of Central Harlem residents are smokers, which is less than the city average of 14% of residents being smokers. In Central Harlem, 34% of residents are obese, 12% are diabetic, and 35% have high blood pressure, the highest rates in the city—compared to the citywide averages of 24%, 11%, and 28% respectively. In addition, 21% of children are obese, compared to the citywide average of 20%.

84% of residents eat some fruits and vegetables every day, which is less than the city&#x27;s average of 87%. In 2018, 79% of residents described their health as &quot;good&quot;, &quot;very good&quot;, or &quot;excellent&quot;, more than the city&#x27;s average of 78%. For every supermarket in Central Harlem, there are 11 bodegas.

The nearest major hospital is NYC Health + Hospitals/Harlem in north-central Harlem.

===Social factors===
The population health of Central Harlem is closely linked to influential social factors on health, also known as social determinants of health, and the impact of structural racism on the neighborhood. The impact of discriminatory policies such as redlining have contributed to residents&#x27; bearing worse health outcomes in comparison to the average New York city resident. This applies to life expectancy, poverty rates, environmental neighborhood health, housing quality, and childhood and adult asthma rates. Additionally, the health of Central Harlem residents are linked to their experience of racism. Public health and scientific research studies have found evidence that experiencing racism creates and exacerbates chronic stress that can contribute to major causes of death, particularly for African-American and Hispanic populations in the United States, like cardiovascular diseases.

Certain health disparities between Central Harlem and the rest of New York City can be attributed to &#x27;avoidable causes&#x27; such as substandard housing quality, poverty, and law enforcement violence – all of which are issues identified by the American Public Health Association as key social determinants of health. These deaths that can be attributed to avoidable causes are known as &quot;avertable deaths&quot; of &quot;excess mortality&#x27;&quot;in public health.

=== Health problems ===

==== Health and housing conditions ====
Access to affordable housing and employment opportunities with fair wages and benefits are closely associated with good health. Public health leaders have shown that inadequate housing qualities is linked to poor health. As Central Harlem also bears the effects of racial segregation, public health researchers claim that racial segregation is also linked to substandard housing and exposure to pollutants and toxins. These associations have been documented to increase individual risk of chronic diseases and adverse birth outcomes. Historical income segregation via redlining also positions residents to be more exposed to risks that contribute to adverse mental health status, inadequate access to healthy foods, asthma triggers, and lead exposure. 

==== Asthma ====
Asthma is more common in children and adults in Central Harlem, compared to other New York City neighborhoods. The factors that can increase risk of childhood and adult asthma are associated with substandard housing conditions. Substandard housing conditions are water leaks, cracks and holes, inadequate heating, presence of mice or rats, peeling paint and can include the presence of mold, moisture, dust mites. In 2014, Central Harlem tracked worse in regards to home maintenance conditions, compared to the average rates Manhattan and New York City. Twenty percent of homes had cracks or holes; 21% had leaks and 19% had three or more maintenance deficiencies.

Adequate housing is defined as housing that is free from heating breakdowns, cracks, holes, peeling paint and other defects. Housing conditions in Central Harlem reveal that only 37% of its renter-occupied homes were adequately maintained by landlords in 2014. Meanwhile, 25% of Central Harlem households and 27% of adults reported seeing cockroaches (a potential trigger for asthma), a rate higher than the city average. Neighborhood conditions are also indicators of population: in 2014, Central Harlem had 32 per 100,000 people hospitalized due to pedestrian injuries, higher than Manhattan&#x27;s and the city&#x27;s average.

The environment also factors into the health of the people of Central Harlem with the neighborhood being found to have levels of fine particulate matter (PM2.5) at 7.9 micrograms per cubic meter compared to all of NYC at 7.5 micrograms per cubic meter. Poorer neighborhoods have some of the highest levels of air pollution in the city. Adults with asthma emergencies experiencing high rates of poverty visit the emergency department at rates nearly 5 times higher than those neighborhoods with lower levels of poverty. Nearly 3 in 4 deaths related to PM2.5 occurs in adults 65 years or older. The attribution of premature adult mortality rate to exposure of PM2.5 experiencing 77.4–117.7 deaths per 100,000 people.

Additionally, poverty levels can indicate one&#x27;s risk of vulnerability to asthma. In 2016, Central Harlem saw 565 children aged 5–17 years old per 10,000 residents visiting emergency departments for Asthma emergencies, over twice both Manhattan&#x27;s and the citywide rates. The rate of childhood asthma hospitalization in 2016 was more than twice that of Manhattan and New York City, with 62 hospitalizations per 10,000 residents. Rates of adult hospitalization due to asthma in Central Harlem trends higher in comparison to other neighborhoods. In 2016, 270 adults per 10,000 residents visited the emergency department due to asthma, close to three times the average rates of both Manhattan and New York City.

==== Other health problems ====
Health outcomes for men have generally been worse than those of women. Infant mortality was 124 per thousand in 1928, meaning that 12.4% of infants would die. By 1940, infant mortality in Harlem was 5%, and the death rate from disease generally was twice that of the rest of New York. Tuberculosis was the main killer, and four times as prevalent among Harlem citizens than among the rest of New York&#x27;s population.

A 1990 study of life expectancy of teenagers in Harlem reported that 15-year-old girls in Harlem had a 65% chance of surviving to the age of 65, about the same as women in Pakistan. Fifteen-year-old men in Harlem, on the other hand, had a 37% chance of surviving to 65, about the same as men in Angola; for men, the survival rate beyond the age of 40 was lower in Harlem than Bangladesh. Infectious diseases and diseases of the circulatory system were to blame, with a variety of contributing factors, including consumption of the deep-fried foods traditional to the South, which may contribute to heart disease.

==Post offices and ZIP Codes==
Harlem is located within five primary ZIP Codes. From south to north they are 10026 (from 110th to 120th Streets), 10027 (from 120th to 133rd Streets), 10037 (east of Lenox Avenue and north of 130th Street), 10030 (west of Lenox Avenue from 133rd to 145th Streets) and 10039 (from 145th to 155th Streets). Harlem also includes parts of ZIP Codes 10031, 10032, and 10035. The United States Postal Service operates five post offices in Harlem:
* Morningside Station – 232 West 116th Street
* Manhattanville Station and Morningside Annex – 365 West 125th Street
* College Station – 217 West 140th Street
* Colonial Park Station – 99 Macombs Place
* Lincoln Station – 2266 5th Avenue

== Education ==

Central Harlem generally has a similar rate of college-educated residents to the rest of the city . While 42% of residents age 25 and older have a college education or higher, 19% have less than a high school education and 39% are high school graduates or have some college education. By contrast, 64% of Manhattan residents and 43% of city residents have a college education or higher. The percentage of Central Harlem students excelling in math rose from 21% in 2000 to 48% in 2011, and reading achievement increased from 29% to 37% during the same time period.

Central Harlem&#x27;s rate of elementary school student absenteeism is higher than the rest of New York City. In Central Harlem, 25% of elementary school students missed twenty or more days per school year, more than the citywide average of 20%. Additionally, 64% of high school students in Central Harlem graduate on time, less than the citywide average of 75%.

===Schools===

The New York City Department of Education operates the following public elementary schools in Central Harlem:
* PS 76 A Phillip Randolph (grades PK-8)
* PS 92 Mary Mcleod Bethune (grades PK-5)
* PS 123 Mahalia Jackson (grades PK-8)
* PS 149 Sojourner Truth (grades PK-8)
* PS 154 Harriet Tubman (grades PK-5)
* PS 175 Henry H Garnet (grades PK-5)
* PS 185 the Early Childhood Discovery and Design Magnet School (grades PK-2)
* PS 194 Countee Cullen (grades PK-5)
* PS 197 John B Russwurm (grades PK-5)
* PS 200 The James Mccune Smith School (grades PK-5)
* PS 242 The Young Diplomats Magnet School (grades PK-5)
* Stem Institute of Manhattan (grades K-5)
* Thurgood Marshall Academy Lower School (grades K-5)
The following middle and high schools are located in Central Harlem:
* Frederick Douglass Academy (grades 6–12)
* Frederick Douglass Academy II Secondary School (grades 6–12)
* Mott Hall High School (grades 9–12)
* Thurgood Marshall Academy For Learning And Social Change (grades 6–12)
* Wadleigh Secondary School for the Performing and Visual Arts (grades 6–12)

Harlem has a high rate of charter school enrollment: a fifth of students were enrolled in charter schools in 2010. By 2017, that proportion had increased to 36%, about the same that attended their zoned public schools. Another 20% of Harlem students were enrolled in public schools elsewhere.

===Higher education===
The CUNY Graduate School of Public Health and Health Policy, New York College of Podiatric Medicine, City College of New York, and Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine, in addition to a branch of College of New Rochelle, are all located in Harlem.

===Libraries===

The New York Public Library (NYPL) operates four circulating branches and one research branch in Harlem, as well as several others in adjacent neighborhoods.
* The Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, a research branch, is located at 515 Malcolm X Boulevard. It is housed in a Carnegie library structure that opened in 1905, though the branch itself was established in 1925 based on a collection from its namesake, Arturo Alfonso Schomburg. The Schomburg Center is a National Historic Landmark, as well as a city designated landmark and a National Register of Historic Places (NRHP)-listed site.
* The Countee Cullen branch is located at 104 West 136th Street. It was originally housed in the building now occupied by the Schomburg Center. The current structure, in 1941, is an annex of the Schomburg building.
* The Harry Belafonte 115th Street branch is located at 203 West 115th Street. The three-story Carnegie library, built in 1908, is both a city designated landmark and an NRHP-listed site. It was renamed for the entertainer and Harlem resident Harry Belafonte in 2017.
* The Harlem branch is located at 9 West 124th Street. It is one of the oldest libraries in the NYPL system, having operated in Harlem since 1826. The current three-story Carnegie library building was built in 1909 and renovated in 2004.
* The Macomb&#x27;s Bridge branch is located at 2633 Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard. The branch opened in 1955 at 2650 Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard, inside the Harlem River Houses, and was the smallest NYPL branch at . In January 2020, the branch moved across the street to a larger space.

Other branches include the 125th Street and Aguilar branches in East Harlem and the George Bruce and Hamilton Grange branches in western Harlem.

== Transportation ==

===Bridges===

The Harlem River separates the Bronx and Manhattan, necessitating several spans between the two New York City boroughs. Five free bridges connect Harlem and the Bronx: the Willis Avenue Bridge (for northbound traffic only), Third Avenue Bridge (for southbound traffic only), Madison Avenue Bridge, 145th Street Bridge, and Macombs Dam Bridge. In East Harlem, the Wards Island Bridge, also known as the 103rd Street Footbridge, connects Manhattan with Wards Island. The Triborough Bridge is a complex of three separate bridges that offers connections between Queens, East Harlem, and the Bronx.

===Public transportation===
Public transportation service is provided by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority. This includes the New York City Subway and MTA Regional Bus Operations. Some Bronx local routes also serve Manhattan, providing customers with access between both boroughs. Metro-North Railroad has a commuter rail station at Harlem–125th Street, serving trains to the Lower Hudson Valley and Connecticut.

====Subway====

Harlem is served by the following subway lines:
* IRT Lenox Avenue Line () between Central Park North–110th Street and Harlem–148th Street
* IND Eighth Avenue Line () between Cathedral Parkway–110th Street and 155th Street
* IND Concourse Line () at 155th Street

In addition, several other lines stop nearby:
* IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line () between Cathedral Parkway–110th Street and 145th Street, serving western Harlem
* IRT Lexington Avenue Line () between 96th Street and 125th Street, serving East Harlem

Phase 2 of the Second Avenue Subway is also planned to serve East Harlem, with stops at 106th Street, 116th Street, and Harlem–125th Street.

====Bus====
Harlem is served by numerous local bus routes operated by MTA Regional Bus Operations:
* along 155th Street
* along 145th Street
* along 135th Street
* along Fifth/Madison Avenues
* along Seventh Avenue, Central Park North, and Fifth/Madison Avenues
* along Manhattan Avenue, Central Park North, and Fifth/Madison Avenues
* along Broadway, Central Park North, and Fifth/Madison Avenues
* along 125th Street
* along Lenox Avenue and 116th Street
* along Frederick Douglass Boulevard
* along 116th Street

Routes that run near Harlem, but do not stop in the neighborhood, include:
* along Riverside Drive
* along Amsterdam Avenue north of West 110 Street
* along First/Second Avenues
* via Triborough Bridge
* along Third/Lexington Avenues
* along Broadway

==See also==
* List of films shot in Harlem
* List of people from Harlem
== References ==
== Sources ==
* excerpt

==Further reading==
* Bourgois, Philippe. &quot;In search of respect: Selling crack in El Barrio&quot;. (Cambridge University Press, 2003).
* Goldstein, Brian D. &quot;The roots of urban renaissance: Gentrification and the struggle over Harlem&quot; (Harvard University Press, 2017) .
* Ianni, Francis A. J. &quot;Black Mafia: Ethnic Succession in Organized Crime&quot;, 1974.
* King, Shannon. &quot;Whose Harlem Is This? Community Politics and Grassroots Activism During the New Negro Era&quot;. New York: New York University Press, 2015.
* Lane, Jeffrey. &quot;The digital street: An ethnographic study of networked street life in Harlem.&quot; &quot;American Behavioral Scientist&quot; 60.1 (2016): 43–58. online
* McGruder, Kevin. &quot;Race and Real Estate: Conflict and Cooperation in Harlem, 1890–1920&quot; (Columbia University Press, 2015).
* Orsi, Robert A. &quot;The Madonna of 115th Street: faith and community in Italian Harlem, 1880–1950&quot; (Yale University Press, 2010) online.
* Osofsky, Gilbert. &quot;Harlem: The Making of a Ghetto: Negro New York, 1890–1930&quot;, 1971.
* &quot;WPA Guide to New York City&quot;, 1939
* Wintz, Cary D., and Paul Finkelman. &quot;Encyclopedia of the Harlem Renaissance&quot; (Routledge, 2012).
* &quot;TIME&quot;, vol. 84, No. 5, July 31, 1964. &quot;Harlem: No Place Like Home&quot;.
* &quot;Newsweek&quot;, August 3, 1964. &quot;Harlem: Hatred in the Streets&quot;.
* &quot;Crack&#x27;s Decline: Some Surprises from U.S. Cities&quot;, National Institute of Justice Research in Brief, July 1997.
* Paterson, David &quot;Black, Blind, &amp; In Charge: A Story of Visionary Leadership and Overcoming Adversity.&quot; Skyhorse Publishing. New York, New York, 2020

==External links==

* Portraits of Harlem
* Digital Harlem: Everyday Life 1915–1930
* Harlem —NYCwiki</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="0" end="6" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q11252" start="28" end="43" title="Upper Manhattan" label="Upper Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="89" end="101" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q597451" start="119" end="131" title="Harlem River" label="Harlem River"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706137" start="136" end="148" title="155th Street (Manhattan)" label="155th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q109858" start="163" end="175" title="Fifth Avenue" label="Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q655136" start="193" end="211" title="110th Street (Manhattan)" label="Central Park North"/>
<link wikidata="Q212862" start="346" end="356" title="East River" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="Q173672" start="371" end="403" title="Martin Luther King, Jr., Boulevard (Manhattan)" label="Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="405" end="417" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q277081" start="423" end="439" title="96th Street (Manhattan)" label="East 96th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="455" end="460" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9920" start="528" end="535" title="Haarlem" label="Haarlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q192311" start="619" end="632" title="boom-and-bust" label="boom-and-bust"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="738" end="744" title="Jewish American" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="749" end="756" title="Italian American" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="799" end="815" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="870" end="885" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q829895" start="984" end="1002" title="Harlem Renaissance" label="Harlem Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="1075" end="1091" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909102" start="1113" end="1132" title="deindustrialization" label="deindustrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1156" end="1168" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16828406" start="1179" end="1196" title="Crime in Harlem" label="crime and poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="1302" end="1310" title="gentrification" label="gentrify"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="1339" end="1359" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="1491" end="1510" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702106" start="1512" end="1537" title="Manhattan School of Music" label="Manhattan School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093910" start="1547" end="1571" title="City College of New York" label="City College of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179546" start="1599" end="1630" title="Manhattan Community Board 10" label="Manhattan Community District 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="1686" end="1717" title="New York City Police Department" label="New York City Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176768" start="1757" end="1788" title="Manhattan Community Board 9" label="Manhattan Community Districts 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179558" start="1793" end="1795" title="Manhattan Community Board 11" label="11"/>
<link wikidata="Q283207" start="1867" end="1896" title="New York City Fire Department" label="New York City Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q11252" start="1945" end="1960" title="Upper Manhattan" label="Upper Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q597451" start="2069" end="2081" title="Harlem River" label="Harlem River"/>
<link wikidata="Q212862" start="2086" end="2096" title="East River" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="2117" end="2129" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370292" start="2197" end="2215" title="Washington Heights, Manhattan" label="Washington Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q277081" start="2272" end="2283" title="96th Street (Manhattan)" label="96th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q109858" start="2292" end="2304" title="Fifth Avenue" label="Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q655136" start="2306" end="2318" title="110th Street (Manhattan)" label="110th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913001" start="2343" end="2359" title="Morningside Park (Manhattan)" label="Morningside Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q173672" start="2365" end="2377" title="125th Street (Manhattan)" label="125th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="2430" end="2453" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732037" start="2506" end="2535" title="Encyclopedia of New York City" label="Encyclopedia of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913001" start="2999" end="3015" title="Morningside Park (Manhattan)" label="Morningside Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590845" start="3017" end="3034" title="St. Nicholas Park" label="St. Nicholas Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q30624313" start="3036" end="3056" title="Jackie Robinson Park" label="Jackie Robinson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004591" start="3058" end="3069" title="Rucker Park" label="Rucker Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585658" start="3075" end="3093" title="Marcus Garvey Park" label="Marcus Garvey Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069687" start="3159" end="3170" title="East Harlem" label="East Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922292" start="3212" end="3247" title="Mount Morris Park Historic District" label="Mount Morris Park Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857997" start="3263" end="3277" title="Manhattanville, Manhattan" label="Manhattanville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455265" start="3279" end="3295" title="Hamilton Heights, Manhattan" label="Hamilton Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857393" start="3301" end="3311" title="Sugar Hill, Manhattan" label="Sugar Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857997" start="3790" end="3807" title="West Harlem Piers" label="West Harlem Piers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724117" start="3809" end="3829" title="Riverbank State Park" label="Riverbank State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590845" start="3831" end="3848" title="St. Nicholas Park" label="St. Nicholas Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q30624313" start="3854" end="3874" title="Jackie Robinson Park" label="Jackie Robinson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069687" start="3877" end="3888" title="East Harlem" label="East Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069687" start="3902" end="3916" title="Spanish Harlem" label="Spanish Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q97009613" start="4163" end="4184" title="Thomas Jefferson Park" label="Thomas Jefferson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585658" start="4189" end="4207" title="Marcus Garvey Park" label="Marcus Garvey Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="4251" end="4262" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988051" start="4285" end="4295" title="Neighborhood rebranding in New York City" label="rebranding"/>
<link wikidata="Q461572" start="4391" end="4395" title="SoHo, Manhattan" label="SoHo"/>
<link wikidata="Q513254" start="4399" end="4403" title="NoHo" label="NoHo"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="4433" end="4447" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640425" start="5301" end="5316" title="Hakeem Jeffries" label="Hakeem Jeffries"/>
<link wikidata="Q38103354" start="5539" end="5553" title="Brian Benjamin" label="Brian Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q175410" start="5716" end="5759" title="New York&amp;#x27;s 13th congressional district" label="New York&amp;#x27;s 13th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722258" start="5774" end="5795" title="New York State Senate" label="New York State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="5822" end="5845" title="New York State Assembly" label="New York State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q645195" start="5886" end="5907" title="New York City Council" label="New York City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="6076" end="6091" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q12885585" start="6092" end="6096" title="Tribe (Native American)" label="band"/>
<link wikidata="Q12645114" start="6108" end="6120" title="Wecquaesgeek" label="Wecquaesgeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767060" start="6167" end="6176" title="Manhattoe" label="Manhattoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="6253" end="6259" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q161536" start="6511" end="6527" title="Peter Stuyvesant" label="Peter Stuyvesant"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="6541" end="6560" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="6729" end="6747" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q370625" start="6941" end="6969" title="New York and Harlem Railroad" label="New York and Harlem Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523955" start="6986" end="7012" title="Interborough Rapid Transit" label="Interborough Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601555" start="7017" end="7033" title="elevated railway" label="elevated railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="7275" end="7290" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="7384" end="7392" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q486775" start="7475" end="7483" title="lynching" label="lynching"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7501" end="7512" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010591" start="7813" end="7822" title="New Negro" label="New Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q829895" start="7879" end="7897" title="Harlem Renaissance" label="Harlem Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="8294" end="8306" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="8400" end="8416" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658575" start="8841" end="8845" title="1935 Harlem riot" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658573" start="8850" end="8854" title="Harlem riot of 1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8892" end="8904" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313519" start="8977" end="8988" title="rent strike" label="rent strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177615" start="9037" end="9047" title="Jesse Gray" label="Jesse Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125901" start="9067" end="9094" title="Congress of Racial Equality" label="Congress of Racial Equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127476" start="9096" end="9132" title="Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited" label="Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="9295" end="9298" title="rat" label="rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661828" start="9304" end="9311" title="cockroach" label="roaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341036" start="9885" end="9904" title="education in Harlem" label="education in Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888223" start="10696" end="10716" title="Model Cities Program" label="Model Cities Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q829895" start="11749" end="11767" title="Harlem Renaissance" label="Harlem Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744577" start="12133" end="12155" title="American Negro Theater" label="American Negro Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q619124" start="12194" end="12208" title="Apollo Theater" label="Apollo Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q217117" start="12265" end="12280" title="burlesque house" label="burlesque house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759057" start="12286" end="12300" title="Savoy Ballroom" label="Savoy Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523155" start="12305" end="12317" title="Lenox Avenue" label="Lenox Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q123704" start="12344" end="12349" title="Swing (dance)" label="swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618804" start="12416" end="12442" title="Stompin&amp;#x27; at the Savoy" label="Stompin&amp;#x27; at the Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q109926" start="12492" end="12507" title="Seventh Avenue (Manhattan)" label="Seventh Avenues"/>
<link wikidata="Q616100" start="12586" end="12597" title="Speakeasy" label="speakeasies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149970" start="12704" end="12716" title="133rd Street (Manhattan)" label="133rd Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136776" start="12971" end="12982" title="Cotton Club" label="Cotton Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="12990" end="13004" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161816" start="13017" end="13034" title="Connie&amp;#x27;s Inn" label="Connie&amp;#x27;s Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q54954260" start="13106" end="13126" title="Renaissance Ballroom" label="Renaissance Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="13161" end="13173" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941656" start="13187" end="13212" title="Voodoo Macbeth" label="black &amp;quot;Macbeth&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471542" start="13220" end="13237" title="Lafayette Theatre (Harlem)" label="Lafayette Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141610" start="13449" end="13464" title="Croton aqueduct" label="Croton aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278230" start="13477" end="13489" title="135th Street (Manhattan)" label="135th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208984" start="13551" end="13568" title="Boys Choir of Harlem" label="Harlem Boys Choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658526" start="13751" end="13775" title="Harlem Cultural Festival" label="Harlem Cultural Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585658" start="13790" end="13807" title="Marcus Garvey Park" label="Mount Morris Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="13885" end="13898" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753111" start="13900" end="13917" title="The 5th Dimension" label="The 5th Dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q235952" start="13923" end="13936" title="Gladys Knight" label="Gladys Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152072" start="13989" end="14016" title="African American Day Parade" label="African American Day Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="14058" end="14066" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050018" start="14144" end="14167" title="Adam Clayton Powell Jr." label="Adam Clayton Powell Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3753500" start="14216" end="14231" title="Arthur Mitchell (dancer)" label="Arthur Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336942" start="14258" end="14278" title="New York City Ballet" label="New York City Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215207" start="14292" end="14315" title="Dance Theatre of Harlem" label="Dance Theatre of Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147337" start="14777" end="14783" title="sit-in" label="sit-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522620" start="14814" end="14828" title="farmers market" label="farmers market"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="15010" end="15019" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q383398" start="15174" end="15193" title="The Main Ingredient (band)" label="The Main Ingredient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445090" start="15195" end="15228" title="Frankie Lymon &amp;amp; The Teenagers" label="Frankie Lymon &amp;amp; The Teenagers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921059" start="15230" end="15241" title="Black Ivory" label="Black Ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q922528" start="15243" end="15248" title="Cameo (band)" label="Cameo"/>
<link wikidata="Q946728" start="15250" end="15261" title="Keith Sweat" label="Keith Sweat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496741" start="15263" end="15278" title="Freddie Jackson" label="Freddie Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8196862" start="15280" end="15295" title="Alyson Williams" label="Alyson Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182925" start="15297" end="15308" title="Johnny Kemp" label="Johnny Kemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q927450" start="15310" end="15321" title="Teddy Riley" label="Teddy Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q109452523" start="15323" end="15334" title="Dave Wooley" label="Dave Wooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="15409" end="15416" title="hip-hop" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q269645" start="15470" end="15483" title="Doug E. Fresh" label="Doug E. Fresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q316588" start="15485" end="15490" title="Big L" label="Big L"/>
<link wikidata="Q961447" start="15492" end="15503" title="Kurtis Blow" label="Kurtis Blow"/>
<link wikidata="Q201909" start="15505" end="15518" title="The Diplomats" label="The Diplomats"/>
<link wikidata="Q126927" start="15520" end="15524" title="Mase" label="Mase"/>
<link wikidata="Q347368" start="15528" end="15546" title="Immortal Technique" label="Immortal Technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169794" start="15616" end="15628" title="Harlem shake (dance)" label="Harlem shake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096261" start="15643" end="15662" title="Chicken Noodle Soup (Webstar song)" label="Chicken Noodle Soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="15679" end="15694" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159354" start="15747" end="15763" title="Roberta Guaspari" label="Roberta Guaspari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15805" end="15856" title="Omnipresent Music Festival BIPOC Musicians Festival" label="Omnipresent Music Festival BIPOC Musicians Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658566" start="15858" end="15872" title="Harlem Quartet" label="Harlem Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q51337607" start="15906" end="15921" title="Edward W. Hardy" label="Edward W. Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181897" start="16031" end="16037" title="Stride (music)" label="stride"/>
<link wikidata="Q185652" start="16071" end="16078" title="ragtime" label="ragtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q273079" start="16192" end="16204" title="Cab Calloway" label="Cab Calloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571823" start="16371" end="16384" title="Glossary of jive talk" label="jive language"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="16407" end="16430" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521230" start="16774" end="16785" title="Lemn Sissay" label="Lemn Sissay"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="17169" end="17177" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="17193" end="17203" title="Methodism" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q384125" start="17215" end="17250" title="African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church" label="African Methodist Episcopal Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q384121" start="17276" end="17306" title="African Methodist Episcopal Church" label="African Methodist Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="17329" end="17342" title="Episcopal Church in the United States of America" label="Episcopalians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="17348" end="17362" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49254" start="17368" end="17393" title="Abyssinian Baptist Church" label="Abyssinian Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="17455" end="17502" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619978" start="17587" end="17604" title="storefront church" label="storefront church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546417" start="17967" end="17987" title="George Wilson Becton" label="George Wilson Becton"/>
<link wikidata="Q739119" start="17992" end="18005" title="Father Divine" label="Father Divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916427" start="18038" end="18060" title="Masjid Malcolm Shabazz" label="Masjid Malcolm Shabazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q220222" start="18084" end="18099" title="Nation of Islam" label="Nation of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575029" start="18125" end="18152" title="1972 Harlem mosque incident" label="1972 Harlem mosque incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064722" start="18263" end="18285" title="Old Broadway Synagogue" label="Old Broadway Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415143" start="18317" end="18330" title="Black Hebrews" label="Black Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152228" start="18341" end="18360" title="Commandment Keepers" label="Commandment Keepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q967276" start="18544" end="18591" title="New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission" label="New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="18613" end="18649" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18654" end="18674" title="12 West 129th Street" label="12 West 129th Street"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18703" end="18723" title="17 East 128th Street" label="17 East 128th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635701" start="18752" end="18773" title="369th Regiment Armory" label="369th Regiment Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q49254" start="18823" end="18848" title="Abyssinian Baptist Church" label="Abyssinian Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q619124" start="18877" end="18891" title="Apollo Theater" label="Apollo Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q750142" start="18941" end="18950" title="Astor Row" label="Astor Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927275" start="18993" end="19009" title="Blockhouse No. 1" label="Blockhouse No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470941" start="19011" end="19023" title="Fort Clinton (Central Park)" label="Fort Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070572" start="19029" end="19050" title="Nutter&amp;#x27;s Battery" label="Nutter&amp;#x27;s Battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="19060" end="19072" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q126454260" start="19076" end="19105" title="New York City scenic landmark" label="New York City scenic landmark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19129" end="19184" title="Central Harlem West–130–132nd Streets Historic District" label="Central Harlem West–130–132nd Streets Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041212" start="19213" end="19230" title="Dunbar Apartments" label="Dunbar Apartments"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592745" start="19259" end="19282" title="Graham Court Apartments" label="Graham Court Apartments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542563" start="19311" end="19326" title="Hamilton Grange" label="Hamilton Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127475" start="19376" end="19395" title="Harlem River Houses" label="Harlem River Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128957" start="19424" end="19435" title="Harlem YMCA" label="Harlem YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478380" start="19464" end="19477" title="Hotel Theresa" label="Hotel Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19506" end="19539" title="Jackie Robinson YMCA Youth Center" label="Jackie Robinson YMCA Youth Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486515" start="19568" end="19589" title="Langston Hughes House" label="Langston Hughes House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724821" start="19639" end="19657" title="Macombs Dam Bridge" label="Macombs Dam Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749230" start="19711" end="19770" title="Manhattan Avenue-West 120th-123rd Streets Historic District" label="Manhattan Avenue-West 120th-123rd Streets Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824998" start="19799" end="19826" title="Metropolitan Baptist Church (New York City)" label="Metropolitan Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814151" start="19876" end="19899" title="Minton&amp;#x27;s Playhouse" label="Minton&amp;#x27;s Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913001" start="19922" end="19938" title="Morningside Park (Manhattan)" label="Morningside Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q126454260" start="19942" end="19971" title="New York City scenic landmark" label="New York City scenic landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917296" start="19974" end="20020" title="Mother African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church" label="Mother African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922292" start="20049" end="20084" title="Mount Morris Park Historic District" label="Mount Morris Park Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20122" end="20163" title="Mount Olive Fire Baptized Holiness Church" label="Mount Olive Fire Baptized Holiness Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013880" start="20192" end="20235" title="New York Public Library 115th Street Branch" label="New York Public Library 115th Street Branch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20285" end="20299" title="Regent Theatre (New York City)" label="Regent Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060566" start="20328" end="20378" title="Schomburg Collection for Research in Black Culture" label="Schomburg Collection for Research in Black Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586788" start="20428" end="20462" title="St. Aloysius Catholic Church (New York City)" label="St. Aloysius Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586863" start="20491" end="20515" title="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church (New York City)" label="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20565" end="20610" title="St. Philip&amp;#x27;s Protestant Episcopal Church" label="St. Philip&amp;#x27;s Protestant Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20639" end="20673" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church (New York City)" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356475" start="20728" end="20758" title="St. Nicholas Historic District" label="St. Nicholas Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20796" end="20846" title="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s German Evangelical Lutheran Church" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s German Evangelical Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959300" start="20875" end="20905" title="Wadleigh High School for Girls" label="Wadleigh High School for Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612082" start="20934" end="20955" title="Washington Apartments (New York City)" label="Washington Apartments"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678869" start="21061" end="21106" title="Adam Clayton Powell Jr. State Office Building" label="Adam Clayton Powell Jr. State Office Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729546" start="21109" end="21126" title="All Saints Church (Manhattan)" label="All Saints Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4815950" start="21129" end="21158" title="ATLAH World Missionary Church" label="ATLAH World Missionary Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166847" start="21161" end="21174" title="Bushman Steps" label="Bushman Steps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276360" start="21227" end="21243" title="The Polo Grounds" label="The Polo Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136776" start="21260" end="21271" title="Cotton Club" label="Cotton Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312765" start="21274" end="21295" title="Duke Ellington Circle" label="Duke Ellington Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497668" start="21298" end="21323" title="Frederick Douglass Circle" label="Frederick Douglass Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654575" start="21326" end="21369" title="Harbor Conservatory for the Performing Arts" label="Harbor Conservatory for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658530" start="21372" end="21399" title="Harlem Children&amp;#x27;s Zone" label="Harlem Children&amp;#x27;s Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q14956756" start="21402" end="21424" title="Harlem Hospital Center" label="Harlem Hospital Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738910" start="21427" end="21456" title="The Harlem School of the Arts" label="The Harlem School of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q241630" start="21459" end="21471" title="Lenox Lounge" label="Lenox Lounge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585658" start="21474" end="21492" title="Marcus Garvey Park" label="Marcus Garvey Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658536" start="21496" end="21518" title="Harlem Fire Watchtower" label="Harlem Fire Watchtower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913001" start="21568" end="21584" title="Morningside Park (Manhattan)" label="Morningside Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865612" start="21587" end="21609" title="National Black Theatre" label="National Black Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707079" start="21612" end="21650" title="New York College of Podiatric Medicine" label="New York College of Podiatric Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q522944" start="21653" end="21664" title="Marcus Samuelsson" label="Red Rooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004591" start="21667" end="21678" title="Rucker Park" label="Rucker Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759057" start="21681" end="21695" title="Savoy Ballroom" label="Savoy Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590835" start="21698" end="21717" title="St. Nicholas Houses" label="St. Nicholas Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q903403" start="21720" end="21743" title="Studio Museum in Harlem" label="Studio Museum in Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660869" start="21746" end="21769" title="Sylvia&amp;#x27;s Restaurant of Harlem" label="Sylvia&amp;#x27;s Soul Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829354" start="21772" end="21809" title="Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine" label="Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140177" start="21812" end="21835" title="New York Amsterdam News" label="New York Amsterdam News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="22099" end="22114" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="22118" end="22135" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="23253" end="23269" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453838" start="23426" end="23435" title="redlining" label="redlining"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569700" start="24431" end="24448" title="Section 8 housing" label="Section 8 housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143139" start="24588" end="24603" title="societal racism" label="societal racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512929" start="24723" end="24741" title="health disparities" label="health disparities"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="25165" end="25190" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="25291" end="25295" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="25422" end="25427" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="25442" end="25458" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="25471" end="25486" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="25501" end="25506" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="25516" end="25532" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="25550" end="25561" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="25604" end="25612" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="25616" end="25622" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995038" start="26680" end="26690" title="New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene" label="NYC Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591167" start="27127" end="27143" title="household income" label="household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="27687" end="27698" title="gentrification" label="gentrifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857997" start="27930" end="27944" title="Manhattanville" label="Manhattanville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455265" start="27949" end="27965" title="Hamilton Heights" label="Hamilton Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069687" start="28110" end="28121" title="East Harlem" label="East Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="28288" end="28300" title="Puerto Rican people" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247924" start="28368" end="28377" title="People of the Dominican Republic" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209676" start="28379" end="28386" title="Mexican people" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q12775779" start="28391" end="28401" title="Salvadorans" label="Salvadoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455265" start="28659" end="28675" title="Hamilton Heights, Manhattan" label="Hamilton Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="29557" end="29588" title="New York City Police Department" label="New York City Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q109951" start="29768" end="29781" title="Eighth Avenue (Manhattan)" label="Eighth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="31404" end="31418" title="Sicilian Mafia" label="Sicilian Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102072" start="31426" end="31449" title="Italian organized crime" label="Italian organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="31472" end="31494" title="Italian-American Mafia" label="Italian-American Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689648" start="31576" end="31605" title="African-American organized crime" label="organize themselves similarly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069608" start="31732" end="31744" title="numbers game" label="numbers game"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="32245" end="32250" title="bribe" label="bribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502231" start="32543" end="32562" title="Stephanie St. Clair" label="Stephanie St. Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q957299" start="32600" end="32613" title="Dutch Schultz" label="Dutch Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684947" start="32725" end="32738" title="Lotteries in the United States" label="state lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989605" start="33077" end="33092" title="White flight" label="whites had left"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745499" start="33131" end="33143" title="Middle class in the United States" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658577" start="33345" end="33355" title="Harlem Riot of 1964" label="1964 riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q857984" start="33605" end="33619" title="Property crime" label="Property crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204559" start="33750" end="33760" title="Single parent household" label="one parent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001125" start="33810" end="33830" title="juvenile delinquency" label="juvenile delinquency"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="34012" end="34018" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q330694" start="34144" end="34157" title="crack cocaine" label="crack cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758527" start="34393" end="34403" title="crack epidemic" label="crack wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q467133" start="34488" end="34501" title="David Dinkins" label="David Dinkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q212648" start="34520" end="34533" title="Rudy Giuliani" label="Rudy Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727213" start="35091" end="35096" title="theft" label="theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q53706" start="35098" end="35105" title="robbery" label="robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="35107" end="35123" title="drug trafficking" label="drug trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="35125" end="35137" title="prostitution" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q275186" start="35188" end="35192" title="gang" label="gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="35226" end="35232" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383906" start="35462" end="35485" title="East Harlem Purple Gang" label="East Harlem Purple Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="35555" end="35571" title="Italian American" label="Italian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="35656" end="35663" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="35665" end="35668" title="Hip hop music" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="35673" end="35680" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q753679" start="35788" end="35800" title="Gangsta rap" label="Gangster rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q283207" start="36041" end="36070" title="New York City Fire Department" label="New York City Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q625506" start="36645" end="36658" title="preterm birth" label="preterm birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691094" start="37077" end="37086" title="Health insurance coverage in the United States" label="uninsured"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="37218" end="37241" title="particulates" label="fine particulate matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="37265" end="37278" title="air pollution" label="air pollutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q662860" start="37384" end="37391" title="Smoking" label="smokers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="37504" end="37509" title="Obesity" label="obese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="37519" end="37527" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="diabetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="37542" end="37561" title="hypertension" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361709" start="38069" end="38076" title="convenience store" label="bodegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14956756" start="38109" end="38138" title="Harlem Hospital Center" label="NYC Health + Hospitals/Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291156" start="38190" end="38207" title="population health" label="population health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045352" start="38299" end="38328" title="social determinants of health" label="social determinants of health"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143139" start="38348" end="38365" title="structural racism" label="structural racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453838" start="38433" end="38442" title="redlining" label="redlining"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372903" start="39250" end="39257" title="Poverty in the United States" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744758" start="39332" end="39366" title="American Public Health Association" label="American Public Health Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914399" start="39512" end="39528" title="Mortality displacement" label="excess mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453838" start="40192" end="40201" title="redlining" label="redlining"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="40274" end="40295" title="Mental health issue" label="adverse mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358552" start="40304" end="40338" title="Food desert" label="inadequate access to healthy foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="40340" end="40355" title="Asthma" label="asthma triggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q110315" start="40361" end="40374" title="lead exposure" label="lead exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="40395" end="40401" title="Asthma" label="Asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q112980630" start="41425" end="41432" title="Asthma trigger" label="trigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="43229" end="43245" title="Infant mortality" label="Infant mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="43443" end="43455" title="Tuberculosis" label="Tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="43595" end="43610" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="43874" end="43880" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="43955" end="43965" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="43991" end="44025" title="cardiovascular disease" label="diseases of the circulatory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q555997" start="44110" end="44126" title="soul food" label="deep-fried foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118600" start="44142" end="44151" title="Stroke Belt" label="the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="44177" end="44190" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q136208" start="44262" end="44270" title="ZIP Code" label="ZIP Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="44599" end="44627" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q915466" start="45681" end="45692" title="school year" label="school year"/>
<link wikidata="Q408230" start="45870" end="45907" title="New York City Department of Education" label="New York City Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q15032107" start="46646" end="46672" title="Frederick Douglass Academy" label="Frederick Douglass Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12241709" start="46965" end="46979" title="charter school" label="charter school"/>
<link wikidata="Q20011419" start="47260" end="47315" title="CUNY School of Public Health" label="CUNY Graduate School of Public Health and Health Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707079" start="47317" end="47355" title="New York College of Podiatric Medicine" label="New York College of Podiatric Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093910" start="47357" end="47381" title="City College of New York" label="City College of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829354" start="47387" end="47424" title="Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine" label="Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146784" start="47453" end="47476" title="College of New Rochelle" label="College of New Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="47527" end="47550" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060566" start="47687" end="47733" title="Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture" label="Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q43303" start="47772" end="47781" title="Malcolm X" label="Malcolm X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043939" start="47811" end="47827" title="Carnegie library" label="Carnegie library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865928" start="47949" end="47973" title="Arturo Alfonso Schomburg" label="Arturo Alfonso Schomburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="48001" end="48027" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q967276" start="48042" end="48066" title="New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission" label="city designated landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="48073" end="48109" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137066" start="48136" end="48150" title="Countee Cullen" label="Countee Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013880" start="48351" end="48386" title="New York Public Library 115th Street Branch" label="Harry Belafonte 115th Street branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q214959" start="48588" end="48603" title="Harry Belafonte" label="Harry Belafonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050018" start="48904" end="48927" title="Adam Clayton Powell Jr." label="Adam Clayton Powell Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3127475" start="49019" end="49038" title="Harlem River Houses" label="Harlem River Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013883" start="49251" end="49266" title="New York Public Library Hamilton Grange Branch" label="Hamilton Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q597451" start="49337" end="49349" title="Harlem River" label="Harlem River"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="49360" end="49369" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581529" start="49505" end="49525" title="Willis Avenue Bridge" label="Willis Avenue Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784766" start="49557" end="49576" title="Third Avenue Bridge (New York City)" label="Third Avenue Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751430" start="49608" end="49629" title="Madison Avenue Bridge" label="Madison Avenue Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549789" start="49631" end="49650" title="145th Street Bridge" label="145th Street Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724821" start="49656" end="49674" title="Macombs Dam Bridge" label="Macombs Dam Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q975801" start="49696" end="49715" title="Wards Island Bridge" label="Wards Island Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q21042825" start="49784" end="49796" title="Wards Island" label="Wards Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q125450" start="49802" end="49819" title="Triborough Bridge" label="Triborough Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="49891" end="49897" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146109" start="50005" end="50042" title="Metropolitan Transportation Authority" label="Metropolitan Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="50062" end="50082" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386993" start="50087" end="50114" title="MTA Regional Bus Operations" label="MTA Regional Bus Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q125908" start="50217" end="50237" title="Metro-North Railroad" label="Metro-North Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="50244" end="50257" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658643" start="50269" end="50288" title="Harlem–125th Street (Metro-North station)" label="Harlem–125th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140235" start="50312" end="50331" title="Lower Hudson Valley" label="Lower Hudson Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="50336" end="50347" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372392" start="50416" end="50437" title="IRT Lenox Avenue Line" label="IRT Lenox Avenue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917561" start="50449" end="50480" title="Central Park North–110th Street (IRT Lenox Avenue Line)" label="Central Park North–110th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q667049" start="50485" end="50504" title="Harlem–148th Street (IRT Lenox Avenue Line)" label="Harlem–148th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373436" start="50507" end="50529" title="IND Eighth Avenue Line" label="IND Eighth Avenue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066424" start="50541" end="50571" title="Cathedral Parkway–110th Street (IND Eighth Avenue Line)" label="Cathedral Parkway–110th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612658" start="50576" end="50588" title="155th Street (IND Eighth Avenue Line)" label="155th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970698" start="50591" end="50609" title="IND Concourse Line" label="IND Concourse Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286335" start="50616" end="50628" title="155th Street (IND Concourse Line)" label="155th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344719" start="50678" end="50710" title="IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line" label="IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278502" start="50722" end="50752" title="Cathedral Parkway–110th Street (IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line)" label="Cathedral Parkway–110th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q663865" start="50757" end="50769" title="145th Street (IRT Broadway–Seventh Avenue Line)" label="145th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620591" start="50796" end="50821" title="IRT Lexington Avenue Line" label="IRT Lexington Avenue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982555" start="50833" end="50844" title="96th Street (IRT Lexington Avenue Line)" label="96th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566588" start="50849" end="50861" title="125th Street (IRT Lexington Avenue Line)" label="125th Street"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50884" end="50891" title="History of the Second Avenue Subway#Phase 2" label="Phase 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104718" start="50899" end="50919" title="Second Avenue Subway" label="Second Avenue Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546689" start="50972" end="50984" title="106th Street (Second Avenue Subway)" label="106th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547581" start="50986" end="50998" title="116th Street (Second Avenue Subway)" label="116th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566588" start="51004" end="51023" title="Harlem–125th Street (IND Second Avenue Line)" label="Harlem–125th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386993" start="51096" end="51123" title="MTA Regional Bus Operations" label="MTA Regional Bus Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q378650" start="51809" end="51837" title="List of films shot in Harlem" label="List of films shot in Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243301" start="51840" end="51866" title="List of people from Harlem" label="List of people from Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q11674" start="53462" end="53477" title="David Paterson" label="Paterson, David"/>
<link wikidata="" start="53484" end="53571" title="Black, Blind, &amp;amp; In Charge: A Story of Visionary Leadership and Overcoming Adversity" label="Black, Blind, &amp;amp; In Charge: A Story of Visionary Leadership and Overcoming Adversity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54862" wikidata="Q192687" url="?curid=54862" title="Downing Street">
<text>Downing Street is a street in Westminster in London that houses the official residences and offices of the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and the Chancellor of the Exchequer. In a cul-de-sac situated off Whitehall, it is long, and a few minutes&#x27; walk from the Houses of Parliament. Downing Street was built in the 1680s by Sir George Downing.

For more than three hundred years, it has held the official residences of both the First Lord of the Treasury, the office now synonymous with that of the Prime Minister, and the Second Lord of the Treasury, the office held by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. The Prime Minister&#x27;s official residence is 10 Downing Street, and the Chancellor&#x27;s official residence is Number 11. The government&#x27;s Chief Whip has an official residence at Number 12. Over time, government offices and officials came to occupy most of the street&#x27;s townhouses. The houses on the south side of the street were demolished in the 19th century to make way for government offices now occupied by the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office. Opposite, for part of the street, the Cabinet Office, initially Treasury, was built to face Whitehall.

The term &quot;Downing Street&quot; is also used as a metonym for the Prime Minister or the British Government more generally.

== History ==

The street was built in the 1680s by Sir George Downing, 1st Baronet, on the site of a mansion, Hampden House. Little is known about what was on the site before the mansion, but there is evidence of a brewhouse called &#x27;The Axe&#x27;, owned by the Abbey of Abingdon, and the premises of the goldsmith Everard Everdyes.

Downing was a soldier and diplomat who served under Oliver Cromwell and King Charles II, and who invested in properties and acquired considerable wealth. In 1654, he purchased the lease on land east of St James&#x27;s Park, adjacent to the House at the Back, and within walking distance of Parliament. Downing planned to build a row of townhouses &quot;for persons of good quality to inhabit&quot;. However, the Hampden family had a lease which prevented their construction for 30 years. When the Hampden lease expired, Downing received permission to build further west to take advantage of recent developments. The new warrant issued in 1682 reads: &quot;Sir George Downing ... [is authorised] to build new and more houses further westward on the grounds granted him by the patent of 1663/4 Feb. 23. The present grant is by reason that the said Cockpit or the greater part thereof is since demolished; but it is to be subject to the proviso that it be not built any nearer than 14 feet of the wall of the said Park at the West end thereof.&quot;

Between 1682 and 1684, Downing built the cul-de-sac of two-storey townhouses with coach-houses, stables and views of St James&#x27;s Park. How many he built is not clear; most historians say 15, others say 20. The addresses changed several times; Number 10 was numbered 5 for a while, and was renumbered in 1787. Downing employed Sir Christopher Wren to design the houses. Although large, they were put up quickly and cheaply on soft soil with shallow foundations. The fronts had facades with lines painted on the surface imitating brick mortar. Winston Churchill wrote that Number 10 was &quot;shaky and lightly built by the profiteering contractor whose name they bear&quot;.
The upper end of the Downing Street cul-de-sac closed access to St James&#x27;s Park, making the street quiet and private. An advertisement in 1720 described it as &quot;a pretty open Place, especially at the upper end, where are four or five very large and well-built Houses, fit for Persons of Honour and Quality; each House having a pleasant Prospect into St James&#x27;s Park, with a Tarras Walk&quot;. The houses had several distinguished residents. The Countess of Yarmouth lived at Number 10 between 1688 and 1689, Lord Lansdowne from 1692 to 1696 and the Earl of Grantham from 1699 to 1703. The diarist James Boswell took rooms in Downing Street during his stay in London during 1762–63 at a rent of £22 per annum. He records having dealings with prostitutes in the adjacent park.

Downing probably never lived in his townhouses. In 1675, he retired to Cambridge, where he died a few months after the houses were completed. His portrait hangs in the entrance foyer of the modern Number 10.

Downing College, Cambridge was founded in 1800, under the terms of the will of Sir George Downing, 3rd Baronet (died 1749). A door from Number 10 is in use in the college.

The houses between Number 9 and Whitehall were acquired by the government and demolished in 1824 to allow the construction of the Privy Council Office, Board of Trade and Treasury offices. In 1861, the houses on the south side of Downing Street were replaced by purpose-built government offices for the Foreign Office, India Office, Colonial Office, and the Home Office.

== Houses ==


*1-8 Downing Street were the houses between Number 9 and Whitehall that were taken over by the government and demolished in 1824 to allow the construction of the Privy Council Office, Board of Trade and Treasury offices. 
*9 Downing Street is the location of the Downing Street Press Briefing Room. It formerly held the offices for previous ministerial departments which have since been dissolved or moved. Since 2014 it has housed the offices of the Chief Whip, though their official address remained No. 12. 
* 10 Downing Street is the official residence of the First Lord of the Treasury, the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. The two roles have been filled by the same person since the 1720s with almost no exceptions. It has fulfilled this role since 1735. Originally three houses, Number 10 was offered to Sir Robert Walpole by King George II in 1732 and now contains approximately 100 rooms. A private residence occupies the third floor and there is a kitchen in the basement. The other floors contain offices and conference, reception, sitting and dining rooms where the Prime Minister works, and where government ministers, national leaders and foreign dignitaries are met and entertained. At the rear is an interior courtyard and a terrace overlooking a garden of 0.5 acres (2,000 m2). Other residents of 10 Downing Street are the Spouse of the Prime Minister and family, Downing Street Director of Communications and Chief Mouser to the Cabinet Office.
* 11 Downing Street has been the official residence of the Second Lord of the Treasury, the Chancellor of the Exchequer since 1828. The residence was built alongside the official residence of the Prime Minister at Number 10 in 1682.
*12 Downing Street, formerly the Chief Whip&#x27;s Office, houses the Prime Minister&#x27;s Press Office, Strategic Communications Unit and Information and Research Unit. In the 1820s it was occupied by the Judge Advocate-General, although it remained in private ownership. It entered government hands when purchased by the East India Company in 1863, and was occupied by the marine and railway departments of the Board of Trade. It was badly damaged by fire in 1879, and underwent further changes.
*13 Downing Street was originally part of 12 Downing Street before the housing area was partially re-built and re-numbered in 1876.
* 14 Downing Street formerly closed off the western end of the street. It was leased as a town house from 1723 to 1797. It was acquired by the Crown in 1798, and was used by the War Office and Colonial Office in the 19th century. Some parts were demolished in the 1860s, and by 1876 it had been removed completely.
* 15–20 Downing Street, long since demolished, were at one time houses leading up to Horse Guards Road. 15-16 formerly housed the Foreign Office, which also occupied two houses on the south side of the street. 18 was occupied by the West India Department of the Colonial Office and 20 was occupied by the Tithe Commission.

The houses at the end of the street were arranged around Downing Square.

There used to be a public house, the Rose and Crown, in Downing Street. In 1830 the tenant was a Mr Dixon.

Throughout the history of these houses, ministers have lived by agreement in whatever rooms they thought necessary. On some occasions Number 11 has been occupied not by the Chancellor of the Exchequer but by the individual considered to be the nominal deputy Prime Minister (whether or not they actually took the title); this was particularly common in coalition governments. Sometimes a minister only uses the Downing Street flat for formal occasions and lives elsewhere.

In 1881, William Ewart Gladstone claimed residence in numbers 10, 11 and 12 for himself and his family. He was both Chancellor of the Exchequer and Prime Minister at the time.

After the 1997 general election, in which Labour took power, a swap was carried out by the new incumbents of the two titles; Tony Blair being a married man with three children living at home, while his counterpart Gordon Brown was unmarried at the time of taking up his post. Although Number 10 was the Prime Minister&#x27;s official residence and contained the prime ministerial offices, Blair and his family actually moved into the more spacious Number 11, while Brown lived in the more meagre apartments of Number 10. This was the second time this had occurred; Stafford Northcote lived in Number 10 at one point, while Benjamin Disraeli occupied Number 11. That was for precisely the same reason—at the time, Number 10 was the more spacious apartment and Sir Stafford had a larger family. Blair and Brown&#x27;s arrangement continued between Brown (at Number 11) and Alistair Darling (at Number 10), and continued in the Cameron ministry (with David Cameron at Number 11 and George Osborne at Number 10) and under the premiership of Theresa May, with Theresa May at Number 11 and Philip Hammond at Number 10. Boris Johnson similarly resided at Number 11.

== Security gates ==

Barriers were erected at the St James&#x27;s Park end of the street for the unveiling of the Cenotaph on 11 November 1920. They were a public safety measure intended to prevent the crowds in Whitehall becoming too dense.

When the movement for Irish independence became increasingly violent, it was decided to retain the barriers, which were raised and strengthened. On 26 November 1920 construction commenced on a wooden barricade, high at the end of the street. They were described as being of a &quot;substantial character&quot; mounted on proper foundations and incorporated vehicle gates. The barriers were taken down in 1922 when the Irish Free State was created.

Vehicle access was curtailed in 1973 when metal barriers were placed across the entrance to the street. In 1974, the Metropolitan Police proposed erecting a semi-permanent barrier between the pavement and carriageway on the Foreign Office side to keep pedestrians off the main part of the street. The proposal came with assurances that tourists would still be permitted to take photographs at the door of Number 10. The Prime Minister, Harold Wilson, rejected the proposal, feeling that it would appear to be an unacceptable restriction of the freedom of the public. Wilson&#x27;s private secretary wrote &quot;I much regret this further erosion of the Englishman&#x27;s right to wander at will in Downing Street.&quot;

In 1982 access was further restricted by railings and a demountable gate. They were replaced by black steel gates in 1989. The increase in security was due to an increase in violence, particularly by the IRA during The Troubles. The Thatcher ministry was particularly moved to increase security after the 1979 Assassination of Lord Mountbatten.

Access through these gates led to a political scandal known as Plebgate (or Gategate), which started in September 2012. The trigger was an altercation between Conservative Chief Whip Andrew Mitchell, and the police officers on duty at these gates. Mitchell had to resign as the Government Chief Whip because of the incident.

On the afternoon of 25 May 2023 the gates were damaged when a car crashed into them. The Prime Minister was inside at the time. A man was arrested by police and the incident was not terrorism related.

=== Public right of way ===
Technically speaking, the public right of way along Downing Street has not been extinguished nor subject to a gating order and the road retains the status of a public highway maintained by Westminster City Council. Public access was curtailed by relying on common law powers to prevent breach of the peace (although its legality has been questioned by a correspondent for &quot;New Statesman&quot; magazine). In 2005, Westminster City Council used anti-terrorism powers contained in the Civil Contingencies Act 2004 to formalise the restrictions by means of a traffic management order. This by implication results in Downing Street being inaccessible to the general public as admittance is only granted by the Police to scheduled visitors, Parliamentary pass holders and members of the accredited press.

Although the Downing Street government buildings and grounds are a designated site under the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 for criminal trespass, the street was not included in the boundaries of the designated area.

=== Security ===
Since 1989, entering Downing Street has required passing through a security checkpoint. The street is patrolled by armed police from the Diplomatic Protection Group, and there is usually at least one police officer outside the front door of Number 10. Security was tightened after 10 Downing Street was mortar bombed by the IRA in 1991 and again after the 11 September attacks.

==Notes==
== See also ==
* Downing Street Christmas Tree
* List of eponymous roads in London

== References ==
== External links ==
* Downing Street at the &quot;Survey of London&quot; online (see items 14–18 in the table of contents).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192687" start="0" end="14" title="Downing Street" label="Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="30" end="41" title="City of Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="45" end="51" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q481289" start="68" end="86" title="official residence" label="official residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="107" end="143" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="152" end="179" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731" start="186" end="196" title="cul-de-sac" label="cul-de-sac"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="210" end="219" title="Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="271" end="291" title="Houses of Parliament" label="Houses of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335492" start="334" end="352" title="Sir George Downing, 1st Baronet" label="Sir George Downing"/>
<link wikidata="Q609884" start="438" end="464" title="First Lord of the Treasury" label="First Lord of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="533" end="560" title="Second Lord of the Treasury" label="Second Lord of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="662" end="679" title="10 Downing Street" label="10 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403633" start="729" end="738" title="11 Downing Street" label="Number 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307072" start="762" end="772" title="Chief Whip" label="Chief Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722248" start="802" end="811" title="12 Downing Street" label="Number 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="1044" end="1088" title="Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office" label="Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5995" start="1128" end="1142" title="Cabinet Office" label="Cabinet Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="1248" end="1255" title="Metonymy" label="metonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="1286" end="1304" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="British Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335492" start="1374" end="1405" title="Sir George Downing, 1st Baronet" label="Sir George Downing, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820496" start="1589" end="1606" title="Abbey of Abingdon" label="Abbey of Abingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q122722756" start="1642" end="1658" title="Everard Everdyes" label="Everard Everdyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="1713" end="1728" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="1733" end="1748" title="Charles II of England" label="King Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q216914" start="1863" end="1883" title="St James&amp;#x27;s Park" label="St James&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q319771" start="2507" end="2514" title="Cockfight" label="Cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731" start="2750" end="2760" title="cul-de-sac" label="cul-de-sac"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="3039" end="3059" title="Christopher Wren" label="Sir Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="3255" end="3272" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326395" start="3846" end="3866" title="Earl of Yarmouth" label="Countess of Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034543" start="3909" end="3923" title="George Granville, 1st Baron Lansdowne" label="Lord Lansdowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3725947" start="3950" end="3966" title="Henry de Nassau d&amp;#x27;Auverquerque, 1st Earl of Grantham" label="Earl of Grantham"/>
<link wikidata="Q335060" start="3998" end="4011" title="James Boswell" label="James Boswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q181461" start="4386" end="4412" title="Downing College, Cambridge" label="Downing College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526875" start="4465" end="4496" title="Sir George Downing, 3rd Baronet" label="Sir George Downing, 3rd Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928395" start="4689" end="4709" title="Privy Council Office (United Kingdom)" label="Privy Council Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q887543" start="4711" end="4725" title="Board of Trade" label="Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q578269" start="4730" end="4738" title="HM Treasury" label="Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="4862" end="4876" title="Foreign Office" label="Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q769779" start="4878" end="4890" title="India Office" label="India Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110907" start="4892" end="4907" title="Colonial Office" label="Colonial Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="4917" end="4928" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="5003" end="5012" title="Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646402" start="5169" end="5185" title="9 Downing Street" label="9 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q106590143" start="5209" end="5243" title="Downing Street Press Briefing Room" label="Downing Street Press Briefing Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="5459" end="5476" title="10 Downing Street" label="10 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q609884" start="5510" end="5536" title="First Lord of the Treasury" label="First Lord of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="5542" end="5578" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="5762" end="5780" title="Robert Walpole" label="Sir Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="5784" end="5798" title="George II of Great Britain" label="King George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q921439" start="6291" end="6319" title="Spouse of the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Spouse of the Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q16882619" start="6332" end="6373" title="Downing Street Director of Communications" label="Downing Street Director of Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q198641" start="6378" end="6412" title="Chief Mouser to the Cabinet Office" label="Chief Mouser to the Cabinet Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403633" start="6416" end="6433" title="11 Downing Street" label="11 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="6473" end="6500" title="Second Lord of the Treasury" label="Second Lord of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="6506" end="6533" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="6628" end="6637" title="10 Downing Street" label="Number 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722248" start="6648" end="6665" title="12 Downing Street" label="12 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302471" start="6854" end="6876" title="Judge Advocate General (United Kingdom)" label="Judge Advocate-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="6971" end="6989" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q887543" start="7061" end="7075" title="Board of Trade" label="Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="7417" end="7426" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="7456" end="7466" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110907" start="7471" end="7486" title="Colonial Office" label="Colonial Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770585" start="7678" end="7695" title="Horse Guards Road" label="Horse Guards Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="7723" end="7737" title="Foreign Office" label="Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="8582" end="8605" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Ewart Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="8760" end="8781" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="8792" end="8798" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="8875" end="8885" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="8964" end="8976" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q332650" start="9315" end="9333" title="Stafford Northcote" label="Stafford Northcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="9373" end="9390" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q296639" start="9621" end="9637" title="Alistair Darling" label="Alistair Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719801" start="9675" end="9691" title="Cameron–Clegg coalition" label="Cameron ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="9698" end="9711" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q332493" start="9729" end="9743" title="George Osborne" label="George Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q27629645" start="9772" end="9798" title="premiership of Theresa May" label="premiership of Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="9805" end="9816" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q332987" start="9834" end="9848" title="Philip Hammond" label="Philip Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896743" start="10025" end="10033" title="The Cenotaph, Whitehall" label="Cenotaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="10163" end="10194" title="Irish War of Independence" label="movement for Irish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="10572" end="10588" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="10720" end="10739" title="Metropolitan Police" label="Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q177749" start="10795" end="10803" title="sidewalk" label="pavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645474" start="10808" end="10819" title="carriageway" label="carriageway"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="11039" end="11052" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246152" start="11184" end="11201" title="private secretary" label="private secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="11528" end="11531" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="11539" end="11551" title="The Troubles" label="The Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q113213574" start="11634" end="11667" title="Assassination of Louis Mountbatten" label="Assassination of Lord Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204344" start="11733" end="11741" title="Plebgate" label="Plebgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026965" start="11746" end="11754" title="List of &amp;quot;-gate&amp;quot; scandals" label="Gategate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="11829" end="11841" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307072" start="11842" end="11852" title="Chief Whip" label="Chief Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q333261" start="11853" end="11868" title="Andrew Mitchell" label="Andrew Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q294528" start="12259" end="12271" title="Rights of way in England and Wales" label="right of way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989145" start="12415" end="12439" title="Westminster City Council" label="Westminster City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="12483" end="12493" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722536" start="12512" end="12531" title="breach of the peace" label="breach of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566255" start="12604" end="12617" title="New Statesman" label="New Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124452" start="12713" end="12741" title="Civil Contingencies Act 2004" label="Civil Contingencies Act 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454900" start="13124" end="13167" title="Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005" label="Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q4088301" start="13346" end="13365" title="security checkpoint" label="security checkpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q129685871" start="13394" end="13406" title="armed police" label="armed police"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708889" start="13416" end="13443" title="Diplomatic Protection Group" label="Diplomatic Protection Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542423" start="13582" end="13614" title="Downing Street mortar attack" label="mortar bombed by the IRA in 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="13635" end="13655" title="11 September attacks" label="11 September attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q85757549" start="13685" end="13714" title="Downing Street Christmas Tree" label="Downing Street Christmas Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q6618973" start="13717" end="13750" title="List of eponymous roads in London" label="List of eponymous roads in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505497" start="13820" end="13836" title="Survey of London" label="Survey of London"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54863" wikidata="Q292816" url="?curid=54863" title="Coke">
<text>Coke usually refers to:

* Coca-Cola, a brand of soft drink
**The Coca-Cola Company
* Slang term for cocaine, an illicit drug
* Coke (fuel), a coal-based fuel

Coke may also refer to:
==People==
* Coke (surname), a list of people
* Edward Coke, Viscount Coke (1719–1753), British Member of Parliament
* Coke Daniels, American film director, screenwriter and producer nicknamed &quot;Coke&quot;
* Coke Escovedo (1941–1986), American percussionist nicknamed &quot;Coke&quot;
* Coke Reed (born 1940), American mathematician
* Coke R. Stevenson (1888–1975), governor of Texas from 1941 to 1947
* Coke (footballer), Spanish footballer Jorge Andújar Moreno (born 1987)
* Coke La Rock (born 1955), American rapper
* Coco, sometimes spelled Coke, a Karankawa tribe concentrated in Texas, United States

==Other uses==
* Cola, any soft drink similar to Coca-Cola
* Generic name for a soft drink
* &quot;Coke&quot; (album), a 1975 album by Coke Escovedo
* Coke, Texas, United States, an unincorporated community in Wood County
* Coke County, Texas, United States
* COKE (programming language), a programming language
* Antonov An-24, a Soviet transport aircraft, NATO reporting name &quot;Coke&quot;
* Petroleum coke, a solid, carbon-rich residue derived from the distillation of crude oil
* Coke baronets, an extinct title in the Baronetage of England

==See also==
* 
* Coke Studio (disambiguation)
* Koch (disambiguation)
* Koke (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q292816" start="0" end="4" title="Coke" label="Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="27" end="36" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295867" start="62" end="83" title="The Coca-Cola Company" label="The Coca-Cola Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="101" end="108" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192795" start="128" end="139" title="Coke (fuel)" label="Coke (fuel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q292816" start="160" end="164" title="Coke" label="Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16865671" start="197" end="211" title="Coke (surname)" label="Coke (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342348" start="232" end="258" title="Edward Coke, Viscount Coke" label="Edward Coke, Viscount Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q113687945" start="303" end="315" title="Coke Daniels" label="Coke Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981939" start="396" end="409" title="Coke Escovedo" label="Coke Escovedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21822551" start="475" end="484" title="Coke Reed" label="Coke Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q542045" start="523" end="540" title="Coke R. Stevenson" label="Coke R. Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601676" start="592" end="609" title="Coke (footballer)" label="Coke (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088952" start="665" end="677" title="Coke La Rock" label="Coke La Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728967" start="741" end="750" title="Karankawa people" label="Karankawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q134041" start="812" end="816" title="Cola" label="Cola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="856" end="885" title="Names for soft drinks in the_United States#Coke" label="Generic name for a soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141694" start="888" end="912" title="Coke (album)" label="&amp;quot;Coke&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q119854030" start="946" end="957" title="Coke, Texas" label="Coke, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q108846" start="1019" end="1037" title="Coke County, Texas" label="Coke County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966202" start="1055" end="1082" title="COKE (programming language)" label="COKE (programming language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q337467" start="1109" end="1122" title="Antonov An-24" label="Antonov An-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q909123" start="1192" end="1206" title="Petroleum coke" label="Petroleum coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141710" start="1282" end="1295" title="Coke baronets" label="Coke baronets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141702" start="1362" end="1390" title="Coke Studio (disambiguation)" label="Coke Studio (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q225810" start="1393" end="1414" title="Koch (disambiguation)" label="Koch (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q535630" start="1417" end="1438" title="Koke (disambiguation)" label="Koke (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54864" wikidata="Q1543085" url="?curid=54864" title="List of mayors of New York City">
<text>The mayor of New York City is the chief executive of the Government of New York City, as stipulated by New York City&#x27;s charter. The current officeholder, the 110th in the sequence of regular mayors, is Eric Adams, a member of the Democratic Party.

During the Dutch colonial period from 1624 to 1664, New Amsterdam was governed by the Director of New Netherland. Following the 1664 creation of the British Province of New York, newly renamed New York City was run by the British military governor, Richard Nicolls. The office of Mayor of New York City was established in 1665. Holders were appointed by colonial governors, beginning with Thomas Willett. The position remained appointed until 1777. That year, during the American Revolution, a Council of Appointment was formed by the State of New York. In 1821 the New York City Council – then known as the Common Council – began appointing mayors. Since 1834, mayors have been elected by direct popular vote.

The city included little beyond the island of Manhattan before 1874, when it annexed the western part of the Bronx, to be followed in 1895 by the rest of the Bronx. The 1898 consolidation created the city as it is today with five boroughs: Queens, Brooklyn, Manhattan, Staten Island and the Bronx. The first mayor of the expanded city was Robert Anderson Van Wyck.

The longest-serving mayors have been Fiorello H. La Guardia (1934–1945), Robert F. Wagner Jr. (1954–1965), Ed Koch (1978–1989) and Michael Bloomberg (2002–2013), each of whom was in office for twelve years (three successive four-year terms). The shortest terms in office since 1834 have been those of acting mayors: William T. Collins served a single day on December 31, 1925, Samuel B. H. Vance served one month (from November 30 to December 31, 1874), and Thomas Coman served five weeks (from Monday, November 30, 1868, to Monday, January 4, 1869).

==Colonial mayors (1665–1783)==
Before 1680, mayors served one-year terms. From 1680, they served two-year terms. Exceptions are noted thus (*). A dagger (†) indicates mayoralties cut short by death in office. (When the same man served more than one continuous term, his name is lightly shaded purely for clarity, but the tints have no other significance.)

Note
# Peter Delanoy was the first and only directly-elected mayor of New York until 1834. Appointed mayors resumed in the wake of Leisler&#x27;s Rebellion.

† &quot;died in office&quot;

==Pre-consolidation mayors (1784–1897)==
The mayor continued to be selected by the Government of New York&#x27;s Council of Appointment until 1821, when Stephen Allen became the first mayor appointed by a local Common Council. Under the Charter of 1834, mayors were elected annually by direct popular vote. Starting in 1849, mayors were elected to serve two-year terms.

Notes
# John T. Hoffman resigned after his election as Governor of New York state but before the end of his mayoral term. Thomas Coman, President of the Board of Aldermen, completed Hoffman&#x27;s term as acting mayor until his elected successor, A. Oakey Hall, took office.
# When Hall temporarily retired during the Tweed investigation, the Acting Mayor of New York City was John Cochrane, the President of the New York City Council.
# William F. Havemeyer died during his last term of office. Samuel B. H. Vance, President of the Board of Aldermen, completed Havemeyer&#x27;s term as acting mayor until his elected successor, William H. Wickham, took office.
# William L. Strong served an additional year in office because New York City mayoral elections were changed to be held in odd-numbered years due to the impending consolidation of New York City.

† &quot;died in office&quot;

==Post-consolidation mayors (since 1897)==

The 1898–1901 term was for four years. The City Charter was changed to make the mayor&#x27;s term a two-year one beginning in 1902, but after two such terms was changed back to resume four-year terms in 1906. George B. McClellan Jr. thus served one two-year term from 1904 to 1905, during which he was elected to a four-year term from 1906 to 1909. Since then, mayors have had to be elected with the support of all five boroughs: Queens, Brooklyn, Manhattan, Staten Island, and the Bronx.

The party of the mayor reflects party registration, as opposed to the party lines run under during the general election.
&#x27;

Notes
# Randolph Gugghenheimer I (born 1846) served as acting mayor in 1900 while Robert A. Van Wyck was away.
# Seth Low previously served as Mayor of the City of Brooklyn from 1882 to 1885.
# William Jay Gaynor died September 10, 1913. Ardolph L. Kline, the unelected President of the Board of Aldermen, succeeded as acting mayor upon Gaynor&#x27;s death, but then sought re-election as an alderman (successfully) rather than election as mayor. Kline has thus been the only mayor since 1834 never to win a citywide election (having been appointed Vice President of the Board of Aldermen by his colleagues and then succeeding to the presidency mid-term, rather than winning it by popular election at large).
# John Hylan and Police Commissioner Richard Enright resigned December 30, 1925 to ensure that they received their city pensions, which they may not have been entitled to keep had they stayed in office for one more day. William T. Collins became acting Mayor for one day, prior to the inauguration of Jimmy Walker
# Jimmy Walker resigned September 1, 1932 and went to Europe, amid allegations of corruption in his administration. Joseph V. McKee, as President of the Board of Aldermen, became acting mayor in Walker&#x27;s place, but was then defeated in a special election by John P. O&#x27;Brien.
# William O&#x27;Dwyer resigned August 31, 1950, during a police corruption scandal, after which he was appointed Ambassador to Mexico by President Harry S. Truman.
# Vincent R. Impellitteri, President of the New York City Council, became acting mayor when O&#x27;Dwyer resigned on August 31, 1950, and was then elected to the office in a special election held on November 7, 1950. He was inaugurated on November 14.
# John Lindsay switched party affiliation from Republican to Democrat in 1971 and ran unsuccessfully for the Democratic nomination for president in 1972.
# Michael Bloomberg was a lifelong Democrat before registering as a Republican in 2001 and running for mayor. He then registered as an Independent in 2007, and re-registered as a Democrat in 2018 in preparation for his unsuccessful bid for the Democratic nomination for president in 2020.
# Eric Adams is the first sitting mayor of New York City to ever face indictment; he faces two charges of solicitation of a contribution from a foreign national, as well as charges of wire fraud, conspiracy, and bribery.

† &quot;died in office&quot;

==Appendices==

===Mayoral terms and term limits in New York City since 1834===

Direct elections to the mayoralty of the unconsolidated City of New York began in 1834 for a term of one year, extended to two years after 1849. The 1897 Charter of the consolidated City stipulated that the mayor was to be elected for a single four-year term. In 1901, the term halved to two years, with no restrictions on reelection. In 1905, the term was extended to four years once again. (Mayors Fiorello La Guardia, Robert F. Wagner Jr. and Ed Koch were later able to serve for twelve years each.) In 1993, the voters approved a two-term (eight-year) limit, and reconfirmed this limit when the issue was submitted to referendum in 1996. In 2008, the New York City Council voted to change the two-term limit to three terms (without submitting the issue to the voters). Legal challenges to the Council&#x27;s action were rejected by Federal courts in January and April 2009. However, in 2010, yet another referendum, reverting the limit to two terms, passed overwhelmingly.

&quot;Principal source:&quot; &quot;The Encyclopedia of New York City&quot; especially the entries for &quot;charter&quot; and &quot;mayoralty&quot;.

# Mayor Strong, elected in 1894, served an extra year because no municipal election was held in 1896, in anticipation of the consolidated City&#x27;s switch to odd-year elections.
# George B. McClellan Jr. was elected to one two-year term (1904–1906) and one four-year term (1906-1910).
# David Dinkins was not affected by the term limit enacted in 1993 because he had served only one term by 1993 and failed to win re-election.
# The September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center in Manhattan coincided with the primary elections for a successor to Mayor Giuliani, who was completing his second and final term of office. Many were so impressed by both the urgency of the situation and Giuliani&#x27;s response that they wanted to keep him in office beyond December 31, 2001, either by removing the term limit or by extending his service for a few months. However, neither happened, the primary elections (with the same candidates) were re-run on September 25, the general election was held as scheduled on November 6, and Michael Bloomberg took office on the regularly appointed date of January 1, 2002.
# On October 2, 2008, Michael Bloomberg announced that he would ask the city council to extend the limit for mayor, council and other officers from two terms to three, and that, should such an extended limit prevail, he himself would seek re-election as mayor. On October 23, the New York City Council voted 29–22 to extend the two-term limit to three terms. (A proposed amendment to submit the vote to a public referendum had failed earlier the same day by a vote of 22–28 with one abstention.)
#In November 2010, yet another popular referendum, limiting mayoral terms to two, passed overwhelmingly.

====Interrupted terms====

Mayors John T. Hoffman (1866–1868, elected Governor 1868), William Havemeyer (1845–1846, 1848–1849, and 1873–1874), William Jay Gaynor (1910–1913), John Francis Hylan (1918–1925), Jimmy Walker (1926–1932), and William O&#x27;Dwyer (1946–1950) failed to complete the final terms to which they were elected. The uncompleted mayoral terms of Hoffman, Walker, and O&#x27;Dwyer were added to the other offices elected in (respectively) 1868, 1932, and 1950 [those three elections are listed as &quot;special&quot; in the table below because they occurred before the next regularly scheduled &quot;mayoral&quot; election; the &quot;regular&quot; mayoral elections of 1874 and 1913, on the other hand, were held on the same day that they would have happened had the mayoralty not become vacant.]

† Became acting mayor as the president of the board of aldermen or (in 1950) city council.

(D) = (Democratic)

(R) = (Republican)

# Mayor Havemeyer was a Democrat who ran as a Republican against the Democratic Tweed Ring in 1872.
# Acting Mayors Coman, Vance, Kline and Collins did not seek election as mayor.
# Acting Mayors McKee and Impellitteri were Democrats who lost the Democratic primary to succeed themselves, but still ran in the general election as independents.
# Elected Mayor Oakey Hall won re-election, while Mayor Wickham did not seek it. Mayors Mitchel and O&#x27;Brien lost attempts at re-election, while Mayor Impellitteri did not run for a full term in the 1953 regular general election after losing the Democratic primary.

===Mayors of the City of Brooklyn, 1834–1897===
Brooklyn elected a mayor from 1834 until consolidation in 1898 into the City of Greater New York, whose own second mayor (1902–1903), Seth Low, had been Mayor of Brooklyn from 1882 to 1885. Since 1898, Brooklyn has, in place of a separate mayor, elected a Borough President.
&#x27;

===Mayors of Long Island City, 1870–1897===

Long Island City, now within the Borough of Queens, was incorporated as a city in its own right on May 4, 1870 and (like the City of Brooklyn) consolidated into the present Greater New York City on January 1, 1898.


==See also==
* Election results for Mayor of New York
* History of New York City
* History of Brooklyn
* List of governors of New York

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q785304" start="4" end="26" title="mayor of New York City" label="mayor of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="34" end="49" title="chief executive" label="chief executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112559" start="57" end="84" title="Government of New York City" label="Government of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385992" start="207" end="217" title="Eric Adams" label="Eric Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="235" end="251" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q223308" start="306" end="319" title="New Amsterdam" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425784" start="340" end="366" title="Director of New Netherland" label="Director of New Netherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="411" end="431" title="Province of New York" label="Province of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150288" start="503" end="518" title="Richard Nicolls" label="Richard Nicolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525671" start="643" end="657" title="Thomas Willett" label="Thomas Willett"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="725" end="744" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176351" start="748" end="770" title="Council of Appointment" label="Council of Appointment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589272" start="789" end="794" title="Government of New York (state)" label="State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="798" end="806" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q645195" start="820" end="841" title="New York City Council" label="New York City Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="916" end="922" title="Mayor#United States" label="mayors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984595" start="1051" end="1080" title="West Bronx" label="the western part of the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123708" start="1135" end="1153" title="City of Greater New York" label="1898 consolidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q408804" start="1191" end="1204" title="Boroughs of New York City" label="five boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="1206" end="1212" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="1214" end="1222" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="1224" end="1233" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="1235" end="1248" title="Staten Island" label="Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="1253" end="1262" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156376" start="1305" end="1329" title="Robert Anderson Van Wyck" label="Robert Anderson Van Wyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q312502" start="1369" end="1391" title="Fiorello H. La Guardia" label="Fiorello H. La Guardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q439156" start="1405" end="1425" title="Robert F. Wagner Jr." label="Robert F. Wagner Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q467122" start="1439" end="1446" title="Ed Koch" label="Ed Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q607" start="1463" end="1480" title="Michael Bloomberg" label="Michael Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q87758436" start="1648" end="1666" title="William T. Collins" label="William T. Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410831" start="1709" end="1727" title="Samuel B. H. Vance" label="Samuel B. H. Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788552" start="1790" end="1802" title="Thomas Coman" label="Thomas Coman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376533" start="2249" end="2262" title="Peter Delanoy" label="Peter Delanoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520240" start="2373" end="2397" title="Leisler&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="Leisler&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589272" start="2513" end="2542" title="Government of New York (state)" label="Government of New York&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176351" start="2543" end="2565" title="Council of Appointment" label="Council of Appointment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608575" start="2583" end="2596" title="Stephen Allen (American politician)" label="Stephen Allen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2641" end="2655" title="New York City Council#History" label="Common Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q880736" start="2809" end="2824" title="John T. Hoffman" label="John T. Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347975" start="2856" end="2876" title="Governor of New York" label="Governor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788552" start="2923" end="2935" title="Thomas Coman" label="Thomas Coman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648216" start="3048" end="3061" title="A. Oakey Hall" label="A. Oakey Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5844272" start="3178" end="3191" title="John Cochrane (politician)" label="John Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q645195" start="3214" end="3235" title="New York City Council" label="New York City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q15487031" start="3239" end="3259" title="William Frederick Havemeyer" label="William F. Havemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410831" start="3297" end="3315" title="Samuel B. H. Vance" label="Samuel B. H. Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010672" start="3430" end="3448" title="William H. Wickham" label="William H. Wickham"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014245" start="3465" end="3482" title="William L. Strong" label="William L. Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536568" start="3942" end="3965" title="George B. McClellan Jr." label="George B. McClellan Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2274772" start="4465" end="4473" title="Seth Low" label="Seth Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="4508" end="4524" title="History of Brooklyn" label="City of Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544704" start="4546" end="4564" title="William Jay Gaynor" label="William Jay Gaynor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121154" start="4590" end="4606" title="Ardolph L. Kline" label="Ardolph L. Kline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4622" end="4656" title="New York City Council#Presiding officers since 1898" label="President of the Board of Aldermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233903" start="5063" end="5073" title="John Hylan" label="John Hylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325520" start="5098" end="5113" title="Richard Enright" label="Richard Enright"/>
<link wikidata="Q87758436" start="5281" end="5299" title="William T. Collins" label="William T. Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q204135" start="5362" end="5374" title="Jimmy Walker" label="Jimmy Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q204135" start="5377" end="5389" title="Jimmy Walker" label="Jimmy Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287566" start="5491" end="5506" title="Joseph V. McKee" label="Joseph V. McKee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701296" start="5638" end="5658" title="John P. O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="John P. O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q441554" start="5662" end="5682" title="William O&amp;#x27;Dwyer" label="William O&amp;#x27;Dwyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="5788" end="5794" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="5808" end="5823" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q939458" start="5827" end="5850" title="Vincent R. Impellitteri" label="Vincent R. Impellitteri"/>
<link wikidata="Q645195" start="5869" end="5890" title="New York City Council" label="New York City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q666931" start="6079" end="6091" title="John Lindsay" label="John Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q644161" start="6225" end="6229" title="1972 United States presidential election" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q607" start="6233" end="6250" title="Michael Bloomberg" label="Michael Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="6514" end="6518" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385992" start="6522" end="6532" title="Eric Adams" label="Eric Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735709" start="6704" end="6714" title="wire fraud" label="wire fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q312502" start="7253" end="7272" title="Fiorello La Guardia" label="Fiorello La Guardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q439156" start="7274" end="7294" title="Robert F. Wagner Jr." label="Robert F. Wagner Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q467122" start="7299" end="7306" title="Ed Koch" label="Ed Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q645195" start="7508" end="7529" title="New York City Council" label="New York City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732037" start="7867" end="7900" title="The Encyclopedia of New York City" label="The Encyclopedia of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="8417" end="8437" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="8445" end="8463" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q607" start="9006" end="9023" title="Michael Bloomberg" label="Michael Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q645195" start="9368" end="9389" title="New York City Council" label="New York City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q880736" start="9724" end="9739" title="John T. Hoffman" label="John T. Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15487031" start="9776" end="9793" title="William Havemeyer" label="William Havemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544704" start="9833" end="9851" title="William Jay Gaynor" label="William Jay Gaynor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233903" start="9865" end="9883" title="John Francis Hylan" label="John Francis Hylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q204135" start="9897" end="9909" title="Jimmy Walker" label="Jimmy Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q441554" start="9927" end="9947" title="William O&amp;#x27;Dwyer" label="William O&amp;#x27;Dwyer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10154" end="10158" title="#1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10164" end="10168" title="#1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353450" start="10719" end="10729" title="Tweed Ring" label="Tweed Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="11302" end="11310" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="11321" end="11326" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123708" start="11374" end="11398" title="City of Greater New York" label="City of Greater New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="11417" end="11422" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274772" start="11436" end="11444" title="Seth Low" label="Seth Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="11455" end="11460" title="Mayor" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="11464" end="11472" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="11504" end="11512" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="11541" end="11546" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946327" start="11558" end="11575" title="Borough President" label="Borough President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190597" start="11630" end="11646" title="Long Island City" label="Long Island City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="11674" end="11680" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123708" start="11803" end="11824" title="City of Greater New York" label="Greater New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013332" start="11862" end="11900" title="New York City mayoral elections" label="Election results for Mayor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067131" start="11903" end="11927" title="History of New York City" label="History of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="11930" end="11949" title="History of Brooklyn" label="History of Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q845547" start="11952" end="11981" title="List of governors of New York" label="List of governors of New York"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54866" wikidata="Q602933" url="?curid=54866" title="Peter Murphy">
<text>Peter Murphy may refer to:

==Arts and entertainment==
* Peter Murphy (broadcaster) (1923–2011), Irish radio and television broadcaster
* Peter Murphy (musician) (born 1957), British musician with the band Bauhaus
* Peter Murphy (artist) (born 1959), English Stuckist artist

==Politics and law==
* Peter P. Murphy (1801–1880), American politician, New York state senator
* Peter Murphy (businessman) (1853–1925), Australian politician
* Peter J. Murphy (1860–1916), American politician, Wisconsin state assemblyman
* Pete Murphy (1872–1946), American politician, North Carolina state representative and college football player
* Peter Murphy (Maryland politician) (born 1949), American politician, member of the Maryland House of Delegates
* Peter Murphy (JAG) (fl. 2000s), American lawyer and officer in the United States Marine Corps

==Sports==
* Peter Murphy (footballer, born 1922) (1922–1975), English footballer with Coventry City, Tottenham Hotspur and Birmingham City
* Peter Murphy (rugby league) (born 1941), Scottish rugby league footballer
* Peter Murphy (hurler) (born 1961), Irish hurler
* Peter Murphy (rower) (born 1967), Australian Olympic rower
* Peter Murphy (footballer, born 1980), Irish international footballer; current Queen of the South manager
* Peter Murphy (footballer, born 1990), English footballer with Wycombe Wanderers

==Others==
* Peter William Murphy (died 1976), New Zealand police officer
* Peter Murphy (executive) (born 1962), American businessman

==See also==
* Peta Murphy, Australian politician</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q602933" start="0" end="12" title="Peter Murphy" label="Peter Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176001" start="57" end="83" title="Peter Murphy (broadcaster)" label="Peter Murphy (broadcaster)"/>
<link wikidata="Q505692" start="138" end="161" title="Peter Murphy (musician)" label="Peter Murphy (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175999" start="216" end="237" title="Peter Murphy (artist)" label="Peter Murphy (artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176257" start="299" end="314" title="Peter P. Murphy" label="Peter P. Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665227" start="374" end="400" title="Peter Murphy (businessman)" label="Peter Murphy (businessman)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22019079" start="438" end="453" title="Peter J. Murphy" label="Peter J. Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19974983" start="518" end="529" title="Pete Murphy" label="Pete Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176005" start="630" end="664" title="Peter Murphy (Maryland politician)" label="Peter Murphy (Maryland politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175998" start="743" end="761" title="Peter Murphy (JAG)" label="Peter Murphy (JAG)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057277" start="851" end="887" title="Peter Murphy (footballer, born 1922)" label="Peter Murphy (footballer, born 1922)"/>
<link wikidata="Q94694546" start="980" end="1007" title="Peter Murphy (rugby league)" label="Peter Murphy (rugby league)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176004" start="1056" end="1077" title="Peter Murphy (hurler)" label="Peter Murphy (hurler)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47466697" start="1106" end="1126" title="Peter Murphy (rower)" label="Peter Murphy (rower)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376776" start="1167" end="1203" title="Peter Murphy (footballer, born 1980)" label="Peter Murphy (footballer, born 1980)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176003" start="1274" end="1310" title="Peter Murphy (footballer, born 1990)" label="Peter Murphy (footballer, born 1990)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592127" start="1368" end="1388" title="Peter William Murphy" label="Peter William Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176002" start="1431" end="1455" title="Peter Murphy (executive)" label="Peter Murphy (executive)"/>
<link wikidata="Q64205879" start="1506" end="1517" title="Peta Murphy" label="Peta Murphy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54876" wikidata="Q2059792" url="?curid=54876" title="Plumbaginales">
<text>Plumbaginales is an order of flowering plants. The order is recognized by several systems, such as the Wettstein system, last revised in 1935, the Engler system, in its update of 1964 and the Cronquist system, 1981. Its circumscription is typically:

* order Plumbaginales
*: family Plumbaginaceae

Cronquist placed this order in his subclass Caryophyllidae of three orders.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2059792" start="0" end="13" title="Plumbaginales" label="Plumbaginales"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="29" end="44" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629799" start="82" end="89" title="list of systems of plant taxonomy" label="systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q739045" start="103" end="119" title="Wettstein system" label="Wettstein system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480083" start="147" end="160" title="Engler system" label="Engler system"/>
<link wikidata="Q213094" start="192" end="208" title="Cronquist system" label="Cronquist system"/>
<link wikidata="Q156141" start="283" end="297" title="Plumbaginaceae" label="Plumbaginaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21808" start="343" end="357" title="Caryophyllidae" label="Caryophyllidae"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54878" wikidata="Q117741" url="?curid=54878" title="Andy Razaf">
<text>Andy Razaf (born Andriamanantena Paul Razafinkarefo; December 16, 1895 – February 3, 1973) was an American poet, composer, and lyricist of such well-known songs as &quot;Ain&#x27;t Misbehavin&#x27;&quot; and &quot;Honeysuckle Rose&quot;.

==Biography==
Razaf was born in 1895 in Washington, D.C., United States. His birth name was Andriamanantena Paul Razafinkarefo. He was the son of Henri Razafinkarefo, nephew of Queen Ranavalona III of the Imerina kingdom in Madagascar, and Jennie Razafinkarefo (née Waller), daughter of John L. Waller, the first African American consul to Imerina. The French invasion of Madagascar (1894-95) left Henri dead, and forced pregnant 15-year-old Jennie to escape to the U.S.. Razaf was raised in Harlem, Manhattan.

At age 16, Razaf quit school and took a job as an elevator operator in a Tin Pan Alley office building. A year later he penned his first song text, embarking on his career as a lyricist. During this time he spent many nights in the Greyhound Lines bus station in Times Square, and picked up his mail at the Gaiety Theatre office building, which was considered the black Tin Pan Alley.

Some of Razaf&#x27;s early poems were published in 1917–18 in the Hubert Harrison-edited &quot;Voice&quot;, the first newspaper of the &quot;New Negro Movement&quot;. Razaf collaborated with composers Eubie Blake, Don Redman, James P. Johnson, Harry Brooks, and Fats Waller. Among the best-known Razaf-Waller collaborations are &quot;Ain&#x27;t Misbehavin&#x27;&quot;, &quot;Honeysuckle Rose&quot;, &quot;The Joint Is Jumpin&#x27;&quot;, &quot;Willow Tree&quot;, &quot;Keepin&#x27; Out of Mischief Now&quot; and &quot;(What Did I Do to Be So) Black and Blue&quot;. His music was played by other Tin Pan Alley musicians, as well as Benny Goodman, Eubie Blake, Cab Calloway and many others. He was a contributor and editor of the Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League&#x27;s &quot;Negro World&quot; newspaper.

Razaf wrote a number of raunchy &quot;character&quot; blues-type songs for many 1920s female blues singers. He also made a number of records as a vocalist (both as solo and as vocalist for jazz groups, including a handful by James P. Johnson and Fletcher Henderson).

He was married to Jean Blackwell Hutson from 1939 to 1947.

In 1972, Razaf was recognized by his Tin Pan Alley peers when he was inducted in the Songwriters Hall of Fame.

===Death===
Razaf died in North Hollywood, California in February 1973 from renal failure, aged 77.

==Songs==
The Songwriters Hall of Fame entry for Andy Razaf lists 215 compositions, giving co-writers and publishers. He had many unpublished songs; Singer&#x27;s biography lists more than 800, published and unpublished (but without giving lyrics). Some notable lyrics include:
* &quot;Baltimo&quot;, which he wrote at age 17, was sung by members of &quot;The Passing Show of 1913&quot; at the Winter Garden Theatre, New York.
* &quot;Mound Bayou&quot; was named for Mound Bayou, an independent Black community in Mississippi. The original song was sung by Maxine Sullivan, and was on an album dedicated to his work, &quot;A Tribute to Andy Razaf&quot;.
* &quot;Ain&#x27;t Misbehavin&#x27;&quot;
* &quot;Black and Blue&quot;
* &quot;Christopher Columbus&quot; with Leon Berry (1936)
* &quot;Garvey! Hats Off to Garvey&quot;
* &quot;Gee, Baby, Ain&#x27;t I Good to You&quot; with Don Redman (1929)
* &quot;Honeysuckle Rose&quot;
* &quot;In the Mood&quot;
* &quot;A Porter&#x27;s Love Song to a Chambermaid&quot;
* &quot;The Joint Is Jumpin&#x27;&quot;
* &quot;Keepin&#x27; Out of Mischief Now&quot;
* &quot;Louisiana&quot;
* &quot;Stompin&#x27; at the Savoy&quot;
* &quot;That&#x27;s What I Like About the South&quot;
* &quot;UNIA&quot;

==Recordings==
Although Razaf&#x27;s songs are found on hundreds of recordings, there are only two albums devoted exclusively to his compositions:
* Maxine Sullivan, &quot;A Tribute to Andy Razaf&quot;, 1956, produced by Leonard Feather, re-issued in 2006 as &quot;My Memories of You&quot; with two additional non-Razaf tracks.
* Bobby Short, &quot;Guess Who&#x27;s in Town: Bobby Short Performs the Songs of Andy Razaf&quot;, 1987, re-released in 2001 in tandem with &quot;Bobby Short Loves Cole Porter&quot;.

==Poems==
* &quot;Wired, Hired, Fired&quot;, an expression of grief and sorrow that color bars one fitted to position (that is, one otherwise qualified for, or well suited to the job, is barred on the basis of race).
* &quot;Jack Johnson&quot;, touching on defeat with honor.

==References==
==Bibliography==
* &quot;Black and Blue: The Life and Lyrics of Andy Razaf&quot; by Barry Singer, Foreword by Bobby Short, 
* &quot;Easy to Remember: The Great American Songwriters and Their Songs&#x27;; by William Zinsser, David R. Godine Publisher, 2006, 
* &quot;The Poets of Tin Pan Alley: A History of America&#x27;s Great Lyricists&quot; by Philip Furia, 
* &quot;Who&#x27;s Who of the Colored Race, Memento Edition Half-Century Anniversary of Negro Freedom in U.S.&quot;, reprinted by Gale Research Company, Book Tower Detroit, 1976.

==External links==
*FBI file on Andy Razaf at the Internet Archive
*Andy Razaf recordings at the Discography of American Historical Recordings.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q117741" start="0" end="10" title="Andy Razaf" label="Andy Razaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q117741" start="17" end="51" title="Andy Razaf" label="Andriamanantena Paul Razafinkarefo"/>
<link wikidata="Q406268" start="170" end="197" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t Misbehavin&amp;#x27; (song)" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t Misbehavin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q280907" start="214" end="230" title="Honeysuckle Rose (song)" label="Honeysuckle Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="279" end="295" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q233326" start="422" end="436" title="Ranavalona III" label="Ranavalona III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071439" start="444" end="451" title="Merina Kingdom" label="Imerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243728" start="526" end="540" title="John L. Waller" label="John L. Waller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071439" start="579" end="586" title="Merina Kingdom" label="Imerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127978" start="592" end="621" title="Second Madagascar expedition" label="French invasion of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="731" end="737" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="739" end="748" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121111" start="824" end="837" title="Tin Pan Alley" label="Tin Pan Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="983" end="998" title="Greyhound Lines" label="Greyhound Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="1014" end="1026" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517010" start="1058" end="1088" title="Embassy Five Theatre" label="Gaiety Theatre office building"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682630" start="1203" end="1218" title="Hubert Harrison" label="Hubert Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q829895" start="1278" end="1296" title="Harlem Renaissance" label="New Negro Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q919632" start="1338" end="1349" title="Eubie Blake" label="Eubie Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188936" start="1351" end="1361" title="Don Redman" label="Don Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q550541" start="1363" end="1379" title="James P. Johnson" label="James P. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667534" start="1381" end="1393" title="Harry Brooks (composer)" label="Harry Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q310476" start="1399" end="1410" title="Fats Waller" label="Fats Waller"/>
<link wikidata="Q406268" start="1471" end="1498" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t Misbehavin&amp;#x27; (song)" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t Misbehavin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q280907" start="1512" end="1528" title="Honeysuckle Rose (song)" label="Honeysuckle Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q29586642" start="1606" end="1638" title="Keepin&amp;#x27; Out of Mischief Now" label="Keepin&amp;#x27; Out of Mischief Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q880634" start="1655" end="1694" title="(What Did I Do to Be So) Black and Blue" label="(What Did I Do to Be So) Black and Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121111" start="1732" end="1745" title="Tin Pan Alley" label="Tin Pan Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q46755" start="1768" end="1781" title="Benny Goodman" label="Benny Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q919632" start="1783" end="1794" title="Eubie Blake" label="Eubie Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q273079" start="1796" end="1808" title="Cab Calloway" label="Cab Calloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781637" start="1865" end="1935" title="Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League" label="Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874273" start="1949" end="1960" title="Negro World" label="Negro World"/>
<link wikidata="Q505559" start="2225" end="2243" title="Fletcher Henderson" label="Fletcher Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014076" start="2265" end="2286" title="Jean Blackwell Hutson" label="Jean Blackwell Hutson"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="2392" end="2416" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319697" start="2445" end="2472" title="North Hollywood, California" label="North Hollywood, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="2495" end="2508" title="renal failure" label="renal failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569403" start="2914" end="2935" title="Winter Garden Theatre" label="Winter Garden Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q867508" start="2987" end="2998" title="Mound Bayou" label="Mound Bayou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="3034" end="3045" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q281341" start="3077" end="3092" title="Maxine Sullivan" label="Maxine Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q406268" start="3182" end="3209" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t Misbehavin&amp;#x27; (song)" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t Misbehavin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q880634" start="3224" end="3238" title="Black and Blue (Fats Waller song)" label="Black and Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958126" start="3253" end="3273" title="Christopher Columbus (jazz song)" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089014" start="3285" end="3295" title="Chu Berry" label="Leon Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529735" start="3352" end="3387" title="Gee, Baby, Ain&amp;#x27;t I Good to You" label="Gee, Baby, Ain&amp;#x27;t I Good to You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188936" start="3399" end="3409" title="Don Redman" label="Don Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q280907" start="3425" end="3441" title="Honeysuckle Rose (song)" label="Honeysuckle Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413725" start="3456" end="3467" title="In the Mood" label="In the Mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371318" start="3482" end="3524" title="A Porter&amp;#x27;s Love Song to a Chambermaid" label="A Porter&amp;#x27;s Love Song to a Chambermaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q29586642" start="3579" end="3611" title="Keepin&amp;#x27; Out of Mischief Now" label="Keepin&amp;#x27; Out of Mischief Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618804" start="3650" end="3676" title="Stompin&amp;#x27; at the Savoy" label="Stompin&amp;#x27; at the Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635014" start="3691" end="3730" title="That&amp;#x27;s What I Like About the South" label="That&amp;#x27;s What I Like About the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q281341" start="3906" end="3921" title="Maxine Sullivan" label="Maxine Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382271" start="3978" end="3993" title="Leonard Feather" label="Leonard Feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q888675" start="4087" end="4098" title="Bobby Short" label="Bobby Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="5153" end="5169" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800691" start="5200" end="5245" title="Discography of American Historical Recordings" label="Discography of American Historical Recordings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54879" wikidata="Q2037294" url="?curid=54879" title="Five Barbarians">
<text>The Five Barbarians, or Wu Hu (), is a Chinese historical exonym for five ancient non-Han &quot;Hu&quot; peoples who immigrated to northern China in the Eastern Han dynasty, and then overthrew the Western Jin dynasty and established their own kingdoms in the 4th–5th centuries. The peoples categorized as the Five Barbarians were:
* Xiongnu
* Jie
* Xianbei
* Qiang
* Di
Of these five tribal ethnic groups, the Xiongnu and Xianbei were nomadic peoples from the northern steppes. The ethnic identity of the Xiongnu is uncertain, but the Xianbei appear to have been Mongolic. The Jie, another pastoral people, may have been a branch of the Xiongnu, who may have been Yeniseian or Iranian. The Di and Qiang were from the highlands of western China. The Qiang were predominantly herdsmen and spoke Sino-Tibetan (Tibeto-Burman) languages, while the Di were farmers who may have spoken a Sino-Tibetan or Turkic language.

Although the term &quot;Five Barbarians&quot; is often used alongside the Sixteen Kingdoms, there were in fact more than five relevant ethnic groups during the period, such as the Dingling and Wuhuan. Patrilineally, the ruling family of Cheng-Han descended from the Bandun Man, also known as Cong (賨), but are referred to as Ba-Di as they mingled with the Di tribes. The Juqu clan of Northern Liang, though often classed as Xiongnu, were of Lushuihu ethnicity, while Gao Yun, who can either be interpreted as the last ruler of Later Yan or first ruler of Northern Yan, was an ethnic Goguryeo. 

==Definition==

The earliest recorded use of the phrase &quot;Five Barbarians&quot; or &quot;Wu Hu&quot; (五胡) comes from the &quot;Spring and Autumn Annals of the Sixteen Kingdoms&quot; (501–522) from a quote by the Former Qin ruler, Fu Jian, although it was not specified who the five exactly were. Modern historians like Chen Yinke and Zhou Yiliang believe that the &quot;Five Barbarians&quot; in this case was simply in reference to the &quot;Five Virtues of Beginning and End&quot;, a theoretical concept often invoked by Chinese dynasties to legitimize their reigns.

The Five Barbarians as a concept only emerged during the 12th century in the Southern Song dynasty, when the official, Hong Mai wrote an essay titled &quot;Wuhu Luanhua&quot; (五胡亂華; &quot;Upheaval of the Five Barbarians&quot;) in his book, &quot;Rongzhai Suibi&quot; (容齋隨筆). Even so, he did not properly define the term, as the seven rulers he mentioned only accounted for four non-Han groups, namely the Xiongnu, Jie, Xianbei and Di. A later Southern Song official, Wang Yinglin defined the Five Barbarians as &quot;Liu Yuan&#x27;s Xiongnu, Shi Le&#x27;s Jie, Murong-Xianbei, Fu Hong&#x27;s Di and Yao Chang&#x27;s Qiang.&quot; Hu Sanxing&#x27;s annotation of the Zizhi Tongjian affirms Wang Yinglin&#x27;s view by listing the five as the Xiongnu, Jie, Xianbei, Di and Qiang, after which it became widely accepted.

They were a mix of tribes from various stocks, such as proto-Mongolic, Turkic, Tibetan and Yeniseian. Others divide them into two Turkic tribes, one Tungusic tribe, and two Tibetan tribes, and yet others into Tibetan and Altaic (proto-Mongolian and early Turkic). While later historians determined that there were more than five, the Five Barbarians has become a collective term for all northern and western non-Han groups that lived during the Jin dynasty (266–420) and Sixteen Kingdoms period.

==Five Barbarians==
Since the later Han dynasty, northern China was home to various ethnic groups from the north and west. These peoples were subjects of the Han, taking up agriculture and serving in the military force. While many of them retained their respective tribal identity, they also underwent various degrees of Sinicization. By the Western Jin period, their population had grown substantially, becoming a cause for concern among a few officials within the imperial court as they began to revolt. There were calls to have the tribes relocated outside the borders, most notably by the minister Jiang Tong in his essay, &quot;Xi Rong Lun&quot; (徙戎論; Discussion on Relocating the Rong Tribe), but these proposals were disregarded. As central authority collapsed due to the War of the Eight Princes, many of these &quot;barbarians&quot; rebelled alongside their Han Chinese compatriots in the Upheaval of the Five Barbarians, although there were also those who initially fought on the side of Jin. Throughout the 4th century and early-5th century, several states were founded by the &quot;Five Barbarians&quot; in northern China and Sichuan, collectively known as the Sixteen Kingdoms.

=== Xiongnu ===

Ruling over the steppes of East Asia, the Xiongnu empire was once a powerful adversary to the Han dynasty, but by the 1st century AD, their power had greatly declined due to defeats to the Han, internal power struggles and natural disasters. In 50 AD, a few years after the empire was split into two, the Southern Xiongnu branch became a vassal to the Han. The court of the chanyu was moved to Xihe Commandery in Bing province while their people were resettled across the frontier commanderies within the Great Wall. The Southern Xiongnu served the Han by helping them to guard the northern borders, even assisting in destroying the rival Northern Xiongnu. However, tension was evident between the two sides. Being economically dependant on the Han and with the Han court interfering in their politics, the Southern Xiongnu would frequently rebel on the frontiers.

In 216, the warlord Cao Cao abolished the chanyu office and divided the Southern Xiongnu into Five Divisions around Taiyuan Commandery. From this point onwards, the Xiongnu declined as a coherent identity, as the Five Divisions became dominated by the Chuge branch, while those excluded mixed with tribes from other ethnicities and were vaguely referred to as &quot;&quot;hu&quot;&quot; and other terms for the non-Chinese. The &quot;barbarian&quot; tribes of Bing province underwent varying degrees of sinicization; many among the Five Divisions adopted &quot;Liu&quot; as their surname, claiming that their Xiongnu ancestors had married Han princesses through &quot;heqin&quot;, and their nobility were even allowed to hold government offices under the Western Jin dynasty. Nonetheless, they continued to resent the ruling Chinese dynasties due to their lower status and privileges.

Though the Xiongnu were no longer a unified entity by the 4th-century, their descendants continued to invoke their ancestors as a form of legitimacy. In 304, at the height of the War of the Eight Princes, Liu Yuan of the Five Divisions rebelled and founded the Han-Zhao dynasty. He claimed direct descent from the Southern Xiongnu chanyus and, by extension, the Han princesses, as he portrayed his state as a restoration of the Han dynasty. The Tiefu tribe also descended from a member of the Southern Xiongnu imperial family, but had intermingled with the Xianbei and were pushed out from Bing to the Hetao region. When their member, Helian Bobo founded the Helian Xia dynasty in 407, he began emphasising his Xiongnu lineage to claim descent from the Xia dynasty, which the Xiongnu traditionally regarded as their ancestors.

=== Jie ===
The Jie were one of the many miscellaneous &quot;hu&quot; tribes in Bing province. The most famous Jie, Shi Le, was a descendant of the Qiangqu tribe (羌渠) of the Southern Xiongnu. Their exact origins is still debated by modern scholars, as theories range from them originating from the Tocharian or Eastern Iranian people of Sogdia to the Yeniseian people, but with no general consensus. When a great famine broke out in Bing province in 303, many of the Jie and other &quot;hu&quot; people were displaced before being captured and sold into slavery by the provincial inspector. The Jie and &quot;hu&quot; were thus scattered throughout Hebei and Shandong.

Despite their seemingly small population, the Jie were thrusted into prominence by Shi Le, who founded the Later Zhao dynasty in 319. The Later Zhao dominated northern China for a majority of its existence before its demise in 351. Following Ran Min&#x27;s culling order and the wars that followed the Later Zhao collapse, the Jie ceased to appear in records, though some key figures in later history may have descended from them.

=== Xianbei ===
When the Xiongnu empire defeated them in the 3rd century BC, the Donghu people splintered into the Xianbei and Wuhuan. The Xianbei began occupying the Mongolian plateau in around 93 AD after the Northern Xiongnu were forced to the northwest by the Han dynasty. In the mid-2nd century, the chieftain, Tanshihuai unified the Xianbei and launched incessant raids on the Han&#x27;s northern borders. Following his death, however, his descendants failed to maintain the support of the chieftains and his confederation fell apart. In the northeast, several Xianbei tribes near the border became Chinese vassals and were allowed to live within the Great Wall such as the Murong and Tuoba tribes after the defeat of the Wuhuan at the Battle of White Wolf Mountain in 207. Others migrated west to live around the Hexi Corridor, with a branch of the Murong even subjugating the Qiang people of Qinghai and founding the Tuyuhun.

At the height of the Jin princely civil wars, the Inspector of You province, Wang Jun allied himself with the local Xianbei and Wuhuan tribes, most notably the Duan-Xianbei who was granted a dukedom in Liaoxi Commandery for their services. The Xianbei were a deciding factor in the civil wars, and when the Han-Zhao broke away from Jin, the Tuoba joined forces with Jin and were also given a dukedom in Dai Commandery. Meanwhile, the Murong in Liaodong, isolated from the conflicts of the Central Plains, expanded their influence in the region by providing refuge to fleeing Chinese officials and peasants. As the Jin were pushed out of northern China, however, the Xianbei distanced themselves from Jin and established full autonomy over their fiefdoms.

The Xianbei founded several states during the Sixteen Kingdoms period. The Murong were a prominent player during this period, as they founded the Former Yan, Later Yan, Western Yan and Southern Yan that ruled over the Central Plains. After the Battle of Fei River, the Qifu and Tufa tribes in the Hexi founded the Western Qin and Southern Liang, respectively, competing for control over the region among themselves and other rival claimants. Most importantly, the Tuoba of Dai later founded the Northern Wei dynasty, which reunified the north in 439 and ushered China into the Northern and Southern dynasties period.

=== Di ===
The Di were a semi-nomadic people that resided in the western provinces of Gansu, Shaanxi and Sichuan. In 111 BC, the Han dynasty expanded westwards and established Wudu Commandery where the Di mainly resided, causing them to spread out in northern and western China. The Di tribes became Han tributaries, and relations between the two were mostly stable until the fall of Han, when the Di began to frequently rebel. In 219, the warlord Cao Cao had 50,000 Di people relocated from Wudu commandery to Tianshui and Fufeng commanderies to deter them from allying with his rival to the south, Liu Bei.

The Di in the northwest continued to rebel during the Western Jin dynasty. Between 296 and 299, Qi Wannian, a Di chieftain, led the various non-Han groups in rebellion, devastating the Guanzhong region and displacing many of the population. The Di that fled south into the Hanzhong and Sichuan basins founded the Chouchi and Cheng-Han regimes, although the Li clan that ruled the latter were more specifically referred to as Ba-Di. The Fu clan that remained behind later founded the Former Qin dynasty, most notable for briefly unifying northern China under Fu Jiān. During the Qin collapse that followed the Battle of Fei River, the Di general, Lü Guang founded the Later Liang in Gansu.

=== Qiang ===
The term &quot;Qiang&quot; broadly referred to groups of western semi-nomadic people from Qinghai and Gansu. Since the Western Han period, many of the Qiang submitted to the Chinese court and were allowed to settle in the Guanzhong region and the watersheds of the Wei and Jing rivers, where they practiced agriculture and lived with Han Chinese settlers. The Qiang were not a unified entity, and their various tribes often fought among themselves. However, the Qiang also faced oppression by the local Han governors and officials, leading to frequent large-scale rebellions in the northwest that adversely affected the Han military and economy. The Qiang also fought as soldiers for the Han and later for the Cao Wei and Shu Han during the Three Kingdoms period.

The Qiang continued to participate in rebellions in the northwest against the Western Jin dynasty, but it would not be until after the Battle of Fei River that they established their first and only state of the Sixteen Kingdoms under the Later Qin dynasty. The second ruler of Later Qin, Yao Xing, was a key proponent in the spread of Buddhism by making it his state religion and sponsoring the influential Buddhist translator, Kumārajīva. The Qiang also founded the minor polities of Dangchang and Dengzhi.

== Other non-Han groups ==

=== Lushuihu ===

The Lushuihu (盧水胡; Lu River Barbarians) were an ethnic group that were distributed between Zhangye in modern-day Gansu and central Shaaxi. Their origin is still debated by scholars today, and a leading theory is that they were descendants of the Lesser Yuezhi that intermingled with the Qiang people. The Juqu clan of the Northern Liang dynasty were of Lushuihu ethnicity, but as their ancestors once served under the Xiongnu empire, they have been classified in more recent historiographies as &quot;Xiongnu&quot; to fit the Five Barbarians terminology.

=== Ba Cong ===

The region of Ba in eastern Sichuan was home to the Bandun Man, who were also known as the Cong people (賨人) as their taxes were collected by the Han dynasty in the form of a money called &quot;cong&quot; (賨). Many of the Cong moved north to Hanzhong to become followers of the Way of the Five Pecks of Rice, but after Cao Cao conquered the region in 215, they were resettled further north to Lüeyang Commandery, where they mingled with the local Di people. These people became known as the Ba-Di, with Ba referring to their ancestral homeland. The Li clan of Ba-Di ethnicity later moved back to Sichuan during Qi Wannian&#x27;s rebellion, where they founded the Cheng-Han dynasty in 304. Later, the Ba chieftain, Gou Quzhi led the Ba and other tribes in Guanzhong against the Han-Zhao dynasty in 320.

=== Dingling ===

The Dingling were a nomadic people that originally lived south of Lake Baikal and were vassals of the Xiongnu empire. A branch of the Dingling migrated west and resided in Kangju, becoming known as the Western Dingling, before moving into China. During the Sixteen Kingdoms period, the Zhai clan of the Western Dingling were one of the earliest groups to rebel against the Former Qin after their defeat at the Battle of Fei River, and in 388, they founded the short-lived Zhai Wei dynasty, which is not considered as one of the Sixteen Kingdoms. The Dingling that remained behind on the northern steppes were later known at the Chile, Gaoche or Tiele people.

=== Goguryeo ===

Goguryeo was one of the Three Kingdoms of Korea and a rival to the Murong-Xianbei during the Sixteen Kingdoms period. During its invasion of Goguryeo in 342, the Former Yan captured several members of the Goguryeo imperial family and resettled them in Qingshan (青山, in modern Jinzhou, Liaoning). One of them, Gao Yun, served the Later Yan dynasty and eventually overthrew the Murong. Historians either consider him to be the last ruler of Later Yan or the first ruler of Northern Yan, though his successors were from the Feng clan of Han Chinese ethnicity. According to the &quot;Xi Rong Lun&quot;, there were also several Goguryeo families living in Xingyang since the Cao Wei period following the Wei campaigns against Goguryeo.

=== Wuhuan ===

Much like the Xianbei, the Wuhuan was another group that splintered from the Donghu people. Since the 2nd century BC, the Han dynasty allowed them to settle in the northeastern commanderies of Shanggu, Yuyang, Youbeiping, Liaodong and Liaoxi in exchange for their military services. During the fall of Han, the Wuhuan looked to establish their own dominion, but their power was broken after Cao Cao defeated them at the Battle of White Wolf Mountain in 207. Many of the Wuhuan were relocated further south in China, and they gradually lost their cultural identity as they assimilated with the Han Chinese and Xianbei that filled the power vacuum. The Wuhuan continued to appear during the Jin dynasty and Sixteen Kingdoms period, but their name had become a generic term for &quot;hu&quot; tribes with Donghu backgrounds. They fought as auxiliaries for the Jin during the War of the Eight Princes and Upheaval of the Five Barbarians, and there were several fortified settlements (塢堡; &quot;wubao&quot;) in northern China that were led by the Wuhuan during the Later Yan dynasty period. 

==See also==
*History of China
**Han dynasty
**Three Kingdoms
**Jin dynasty (266–420)
**Sixteen Kingdoms
**Southern and Northern Dynasties
**Northern Wei Dynasty
*Shiliuguo Chunqiu
*List of past Chinese ethnic groups

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2037294" start="4" end="19" title="Five Barbarians" label="Five Barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037294" start="24" end="29" title="Five Barbarians" label="Wu Hu"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="58" end="64" title="Exonym and endonym" label="exonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="86" end="89" title="Han Chinese" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q910051" start="96" end="98" title="Hu (people)" label="Hu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="153" end="172" title="Eastern Han dynasty" label="Eastern Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="197" end="216" title="Jin dynasty (265–420)" label="Western Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q683551" start="233" end="251" title="Sixteen Kingdoms" label="their own kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="333" end="340" title="Xiongnu" label="Xiongnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149106" start="343" end="346" title="Jie people" label="Jie"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="349" end="356" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267629" start="359" end="364" title="Qiang (historical people)" label="Qiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194940" start="367" end="369" title="Di (Five Barbarians)" label="Di"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="435" end="449" title="nomadic people" label="nomadic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="469" end="475" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10588098" start="563" end="571" title="Mongolic peoples" label="Mongolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056738" start="590" end="598" title="Pastoralism" label="pastoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148020" start="664" end="673" title="Yeniseian people" label="Yeniseian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="677" end="684" title="Iranian peoples" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="793" end="831" title="Tibeto-Burman languages" label="Sino-Tibetan (Tibeto-Burman) languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="897" end="912" title="Turkic language" label="Turkic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q683551" start="989" end="1005" title="Sixteen Kingdoms" label="Sixteen Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290031" start="1095" end="1103" title="Dingling" label="Dingling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269374" start="1108" end="1114" title="Wuhuan" label="Wuhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q840178" start="1116" end="1129" title="Chinese kin" label="Patrilineally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069905" start="1152" end="1161" title="Cheng-Han" label="Cheng-Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854732" start="1181" end="1191" title="Bandun Man" label="Bandun Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194940" start="1240" end="1245" title="Ba-Di" label="Ba-Di"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539360" start="1299" end="1313" title="Northern Liang" label="Northern Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040487" start="1356" end="1364" title="Lushuihu" label="Lushuihu"/>
<link wikidata="Q718184" start="1382" end="1389" title="Gao Yun (emperor)" label="Gao Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534482" start="1442" end="1451" title="Later Yan" label="Later Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006864" start="1470" end="1482" title="Northern Yan" label="Northern Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28370" start="1498" end="1506" title="Goguryeo" label="Goguryeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150382" start="1641" end="1689" title="Spring and Autumn Annals of the Sixteen Kingdoms" label="Spring and Autumn Annals of the Sixteen Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471995" start="1726" end="1736" title="Former Qin" label="Former Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q967998" start="1744" end="1751" title="Fu Jian (337–385)" label="Fu Jian"/>
<link wikidata="Q714824" start="1833" end="1843" title="Chen Yinke" label="Chen Yinke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1848" end="1860" title="Zhou Yiliang" label="Zhou Yiliang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1956" end="1989" title="Wuxing (Chinese philosophy)#Dynastic transitions" label="Five Virtues of Beginning and End"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="2160" end="2173" title="Song dynasty" label="Southern Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147294" start="2202" end="2210" title="Hong Mai" label="Hong Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817040" start="2271" end="2302" title="Upheaval of the Five Barbarians" label="Upheaval of the Five Barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2329" end="2343" title="Rongzhai Suibi" label="Rongzhai Suibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="2488" end="2495" title="Xiongnu" label="Xiongnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149106" start="2497" end="2500" title="Jie people" label="Jie"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="2502" end="2509" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194940" start="2514" end="2516" title="Di (Five Barbarians)" label="Di"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2550" end="2562" title="Wang Yinglin" label="Wang Yinglin"/>
<link wikidata="Q714159" start="2600" end="2615" title="Liu Yuan (Han-Zhao)" label="Liu Yuan&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305906" start="2644" end="2650" title="Murong" label="Murong"/>
<link wikidata="Q912248" start="2660" end="2674" title="Fu Hong" label="Fu Hong&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147266" start="2682" end="2698" title="Yao Chang" label="Yao Chang&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267629" start="2699" end="2704" title="Qiang (historical people)" label="Qiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q721420" start="2712" end="2729" title="Hu Sanxing" label="Hu Sanxing&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q207062" start="2748" end="2762" title="Zizhi Tongjian" label="Zizhi Tongjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892172" start="2955" end="2969" title="proto-Mongols" label="proto-Mongolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="2971" end="2977" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148020" start="2991" end="3000" title="Yeniseian people" label="Yeniseian"/>
<link wikidata="Q868179" start="3049" end="3057" title="Tungusic peoples" label="Tungusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37845" start="3121" end="3127" title="Altaic" label="Altaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="3345" end="3366" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Jin dynasty (266–420)"/>
<link wikidata="Q683551" start="3371" end="3387" title="Sixteen Kingdoms" label="Sixteen Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="3433" end="3444" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258641" start="3718" end="3730" title="Sinicization" label="Sinicization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="3739" end="3750" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Western Jin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3999" end="4009" title="Jiang Tong" label="Jiang Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q770951" start="4176" end="4200" title="War of the Eight Princes" label="War of the Eight Princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817040" start="4295" end="4326" title="Upheaval of the Five Barbarians" label="Upheaval of the Five Barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="4535" end="4542" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q683551" start="4570" end="4586" title="Sixteen Kingdoms" label="Sixteen Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="4911" end="4927" title="Southern Xiongnu" label="Southern Xiongnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15926379" start="5000" end="5015" title="Xihe Commandery" label="Xihe Commandery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038508" start="5019" end="5032" title="Bingzhou" label="Bing province"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="5111" end="5121" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="5245" end="5261" title="Northern Xiongnu" label="Northern Xiongnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10941075" start="5588" end="5606" title="Taiyuan Commandery" label="Taiyuan Commandery"/>
<link wikidata="Q28409718" start="5724" end="5729" title="Chuge" label="Chuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q910051" start="5838" end="5852" title="Hu (people)" label="&amp;quot;hu&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258641" start="5975" end="5987" title="sinicization" label="sinicization"/>
<link wikidata="Q697395" start="6140" end="6145" title="heqin" label="heqin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="6227" end="6246" title="Western Jin Dynasty" label="Western Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q770951" start="6537" end="6561" title="War of the Eight Princes" label="War of the Eight Princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q714159" start="6563" end="6571" title="Liu Yuan (Han-Zhao)" label="Liu Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574107" start="6619" end="6635" title="Han-Zhao" label="Han-Zhao dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="6915" end="6922" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071754" start="6960" end="6965" title="Hetao" label="Hetao"/>
<link wikidata="Q254752" start="6993" end="7004" title="Helian Bobo" label="Helian Bobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q546282" start="7017" end="7035" title="Helian Xia" label="Helian Xia dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q169705" start="7111" end="7122" title="Xia dynasty" label="Xia dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149106" start="7202" end="7205" title="Jie people" label="Jie"/>
<link wikidata="Q910051" start="7247" end="7249" title="Hu (people)" label="hu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038508" start="7266" end="7279" title="Bingzhou" label="Bing province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196190" start="7302" end="7308" title="Shi Le" label="Shi Le"/>
<link wikidata="Q192858" start="7484" end="7493" title="Tocharians" label="Tocharian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="7497" end="7512" title="Eastern Iranian people" label="Eastern Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q486244" start="7523" end="7529" title="Sogdia" label="Sogdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148020" start="7537" end="7553" title="Yeniseian people" label="Yeniseian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q21208" start="7835" end="7840" title="Hebei" label="Hebei"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="7845" end="7853" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314907" start="7963" end="7981" title="Later Zhao dynasty" label="Later Zhao dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q836256" start="8098" end="8112" title="Ran Min" label="Ran Min&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q908664" start="8369" end="8375" title="Donghu people" label="Donghu"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="8403" end="8410" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269374" start="8415" end="8421" title="Wuhuan" label="Wuhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q560198" start="8455" end="8472" title="Mongolian Plateau" label="Mongolian plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q985907" start="8604" end="8614" title="Tanshihuai" label="Tanshihuai"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="8945" end="8955" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305906" start="8968" end="8974" title="Murong" label="Murong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099766" start="8979" end="8984" title="Tuoba" label="Tuoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269374" start="9016" end="9022" title="Wuhuan" label="Wuhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q848062" start="9030" end="9059" title="Battle of White Wolf Mountain" label="Battle of White Wolf Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052359" start="9108" end="9121" title="Hexi Corridor" label="Hexi Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267629" start="9172" end="9177" title="Qiang (historical people)" label="Qiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q45833" start="9188" end="9195" title="Qinghai" label="Qinghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196201" start="9213" end="9220" title="Tuyuhun" label="Tuyuhun"/>
<link wikidata="Q770951" start="9244" end="9267" title="War of the Eight Princes" label="Jin princely civil wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q97350298" start="9286" end="9298" title="Youzhou (ancient China)" label="You province"/>
<link wikidata="Q11573159" start="9300" end="9308" title="Wang Jun (Pengzu)" label="Wang Jun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195649" start="9383" end="9387" title="Duan tribe" label="Duan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574107" start="9530" end="9538" title="Han-Zhao" label="Han-Zhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884456" start="9626" end="9640" title="Dai Commandery" label="Dai Commandery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305906" start="9657" end="9663" title="Murong" label="Murong"/>
<link wikidata="Q326917" start="9667" end="9675" title="Liaodong Peninsula" label="Liaodong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472004" start="10125" end="10135" title="Former Yan" label="Former Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534482" start="10137" end="10146" title="Later Yan" label="Later Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149230" start="10148" end="10159" title="Western Yan" label="Western Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329439" start="10164" end="10176" title="Southern Yan" label="Southern Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190277" start="10197" end="10211" title="Zhongyuan" label="Central Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333898" start="10223" end="10242" title="Battle of Fei River" label="Battle of Fei River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668970" start="10293" end="10304" title="Western Qin" label="Western Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330290" start="10309" end="10323" title="Southern Liang (Sixteen Kingdoms)" label="Southern Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149098" start="10452" end="10455" title="Dai (Sixteen Kingdoms)" label="Dai"/>
<link wikidata="Q875305" start="10474" end="10494" title="Northern Wei" label="Northern Wei dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q49696" start="10556" end="10594" title="Northern and Southern dynasties" label="Northern and Southern dynasties period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194940" start="10612" end="10614" title="Di (Five Barbarians)" label="Di"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="10683" end="10688" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="10690" end="10697" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="10702" end="10709" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="10726" end="10737" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q477646" start="10773" end="10788" title="Wudu, Longnan" label="Wudu Commandery"/>
<link wikidata="Q204077" start="11045" end="11052" title="Cao Cao" label="Cao Cao"/>
<link wikidata="Q533157" start="11108" end="11116" title="Tianshui" label="Tianshui"/>
<link wikidata="Q10916260" start="11121" end="11127" title="Fufeng (region)" label="Fufeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q245315" start="11197" end="11204" title="Liu Bei" label="Liu Bei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="11261" end="11280" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Western Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11180185" start="11303" end="11313" title="Qi Wannian" label="Qi Wannian"/>
<link wikidata="Q189923" start="11392" end="11401" title="Guanzhong" label="Guanzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766884" start="11480" end="11488" title="Hanzhong Basin" label="Hanzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q271294" start="11493" end="11500" title="Sichuan Basin" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196298" start="11520" end="11527" title="Chouchi" label="Chouchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069905" start="11532" end="11541" title="Cheng-Han" label="Cheng-Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194940" start="11632" end="11637" title="Ba-Di" label="Ba-Di"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471995" start="11690" end="11708" title="Former Qin" label="Former Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q967998" start="11765" end="11772" title="Fu Jian (337–385)" label="Fu Jiān"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333898" start="11816" end="11835" title="Battle of Fei River" label="Battle of Fei River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069762" start="11853" end="11861" title="Lü Guang" label="Lü Guang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314869" start="11874" end="11885" title="Later Liang (Sixteen Kingdoms)" label="Later Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="11889" end="11894" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q45833" start="12001" end="12008" title="Qinghai" label="Qinghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="12013" end="12018" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q189923" start="12133" end="12142" title="Guanzhong" label="Guanzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q847641" start="12176" end="12179" title="Wei River" label="Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q773033" start="12184" end="12188" title="Jing River" label="Jing"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="12245" end="12256" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q320930" start="12621" end="12628" title="Cao Wei" label="Cao Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q320925" start="12633" end="12640" title="Shu Han" label="Shu Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q185043" start="12652" end="12666" title="Three Kingdoms" label="Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="12754" end="12773" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Western Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q683551" start="12887" end="12903" title="Sixteen Kingdoms" label="Sixteen Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730130" start="12914" end="12931" title="Later Qin" label="Later Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149160" start="12964" end="12972" title="Yao Xing" label="Yao Xing"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="13011" end="13019" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q335293" start="13104" end="13114" title="Kumārajīva" label="Kumārajīva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127700" start="13161" end="13170" title="Dangchang Kingdom" label="Dangchang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127710" start="13175" end="13182" title="Dengzhi" label="Dengzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q197402" start="13322" end="13329" title="Zhangye" label="Zhangye"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="13344" end="13349" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="13362" end="13368" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaaxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q467985" start="13477" end="13490" title="Yuezhi" label="Lesser Yuezhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267629" start="13518" end="13523" title="Qiang (historical people)" label="Qiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q950756" start="13818" end="13820" title="Ba (state)" label="Ba"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="13832" end="13839" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854732" start="13856" end="13866" title="Bandun Man" label="Bandun Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766884" start="14045" end="14053" title="Hanzhong Basin" label="Hanzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328573" start="14081" end="14110" title="Way of the Five Pecks of Rice" label="Way of the Five Pecks of Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q204077" start="14122" end="14129" title="Cao Cao" label="Cao Cao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201600" start="14196" end="14214" title="Lueyang" label="Lüeyang Commandery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11180185" start="14414" end="14431" title="Qi Wannian" label="Qi Wannian&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069905" start="14466" end="14475" title="Cheng-Han" label="Cheng-Han"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14517" end="14526" title="Gou Quzhi" label="Gou Quzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q189923" start="14558" end="14567" title="Guanzhong" label="Guanzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574107" start="14580" end="14596" title="Han-Zhao" label="Han-Zhao dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513" start="14690" end="14701" title="Lake Baikal" label="Lake Baikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q915517" start="14796" end="14802" title="Kangju" label="Kangju"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471995" start="14997" end="15007" title="Former Qin" label="Former Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333898" start="15034" end="15053" title="Battle of Fei River" label="Battle of Fei River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327602" start="15096" end="15112" title="Zhai Wei" label="Zhai Wei dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290031" start="15252" end="15257" title="Dingling" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320869" start="15259" end="15265" title="Gaoche" label="Gaoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320869" start="15269" end="15281" title="Tiele people" label="Tiele people"/>
<link wikidata="Q165292" start="15326" end="15349" title="Three Kingdoms of Korea" label="Three Kingdoms of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q683551" start="15395" end="15411" title="Sixteen Kingdoms" label="Sixteen Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q28996" start="15578" end="15585" title="Jinzhou" label="Jinzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="15587" end="15595" title="Liaoning" label="Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q718184" start="15611" end="15618" title="Gao Yun (emperor)" label="Gao Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534482" start="15631" end="15648" title="Later Yan" label="Later Yan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006864" start="15773" end="15785" title="Northern Yan" label="Northern Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360089" start="15953" end="15961" title="Xingyang" label="Xingyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q320930" start="15972" end="15979" title="Cao Wei" label="Cao Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q704633" start="16001" end="16031" title="Goguryeo–Wei War" label="Wei campaigns against Goguryeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269374" start="16077" end="16083" title="Wuhuan" label="Wuhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11360131" start="16243" end="16250" title="Shanggu Commandery" label="Shanggu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15929136" start="16252" end="16258" title="Yuyang Commandery" label="Yuyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q10916240" start="16260" end="16270" title="Youbeiping Commandery" label="Youbeiping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208494" start="16272" end="16280" title="Liaodong Commandery" label="Liaodong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642666" start="16285" end="16291" title="Liaoxi Commandery" label="Liaoxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q848062" start="16470" end="16499" title="Battle of White Wolf Mountain" label="Battle of White Wolf Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q910051" start="16831" end="16833" title="Hu (people)" label="hu"/>
<link wikidata="Q770951" start="16922" end="16946" title="War of the Eight Princes" label="War of the Eight Princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817040" start="16951" end="16982" title="Upheaval of the Five Barbarians" label="Upheaval of the Five Barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534482" start="17110" end="17127" title="Later Yan" label="Later Yan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="17152" end="17168" title="History of China" label="History of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="17171" end="17182" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q185043" start="17185" end="17199" title="Three Kingdoms" label="Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="17202" end="17223" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Jin dynasty (266–420)"/>
<link wikidata="Q683551" start="17226" end="17242" title="Sixteen Kingdoms" label="Sixteen Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q49696" start="17245" end="17276" title="Southern and Northern Dynasties" label="Southern and Northern Dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q875305" start="17279" end="17299" title="Northern Wei Dynasty" label="Northern Wei Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150382" start="17301" end="17318" title="Shiliuguo Chunqiu" label="Shiliuguo Chunqiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16141544" start="17320" end="17354" title="List of past Chinese ethnic groups" label="List of past Chinese ethnic groups"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54885" wikidata="Q350220" url="?curid=54885" title="Magnus Ladulås">
<text>Magnus Ladulås (, ) or Magnus Birgersson ( 1240 – 18 December 1290) was King of Sweden from 1275 until his death in 1290. 

He was a son of Birger Jarl, and became a king after a rebellion against his brother Valdemar. He was succeeded by his ten-year-old son Birger Magnusson with Torkel Knutsson acting as his guardian.

Medieval Swedish kings did not use regnal numbers as part of their title. In modern literature he may be referred to as either Magnus I or Magnus III.

== Epithet ==
The origin of the epithet &quot;Ladulås&quot; () is not known for certain, due to the lack of source material from the latter half of the 14th century. It appears widely in written documents from the beginning of the 15th century, with the Visby Chronicle from 1412 being the oldest datable document. &quot;Lilla rimkrönikan&quot; from gives the traditional explanation, ascribing the epithet to the Ordinance of Alsnö. This act by Magnus freed the yeomanry from the duty to provide sustenance for travelling nobles and bishops, and &quot;locked the barns&quot;.

Another theory is that &quot;Ladulås&quot; is a corruption of a second name &quot;Ladislaus,&quot; the Latin equivalent of the Slavic name &quot;Vladislav.&quot; (Magnus&#x27;s maternal great-grandmother was Sophia of Minsk, a Rurikid princess.)&quot;&quot;

== Early life ==
Magnus was born around 1240 as the second son of Birger Jarl (1200–66) and Princess Ingeborg, daughter of King Erik Knutsson and sister of King Erik Eriksson of Sweden. The early life of Magnus is poorly documented, but he seems to have received an extensive education.

Erik Eriksson ruled until 1250 and died without an heir. After his death, Magnus&#x27; elder brother Valdemar (1239–1302) became king, but the true power was held by their father Birger Jarl who acted as a regent. In 1255, Magnus was granted the title of a , &#x27;junior jarl&#x27;.

When Birger died in 1266, Magnus assumed his title as the Duke of Sweden. The title was not accompanied by any unified territory, but by a number of scattered estates and rights to collect taxes and fines. He also received Nyköping Castle in Södermanland. 

There is no indication that he would have received the powers of his father. According to the Erik&#x27;s Chronicle, Magnus wanted to share the Royal power with his brother, which led to a conflict.

== Accession and marriage ==
In 1275, Duke Magnus started a rebellion against Valdemar, supported by his younger brother Erik and King Eric Klipping of Denmark. Valdemar was deposed by Magnus after the Battle of Hova in the forest of Tiveden on 14 June 1275 with the help of Danish and German horsemen. In July, Magnus was elected king at the Stones of Mora.

In 1276, Magnus married Helvig, daughter of Gerard I of Holstein. Through her mother, Elizabeth of Mecklenburg, Helvig was a descendant of Christina, the putative daughter of King Sverker II. A papal annulment of Magnus&#x27; alleged first marriage and a dispensation for the second (necessary because of consanguinity) were issued ten years later, in 1286. Helvig later acted as regent, probably 1290–1302 and 1320–1327.

== Reign ==
The deposed King Valdemar managed, with Danish help in turn, to regain provinces in Götaland in the southern part of the kingdom, and Magnus had to recognize that in 1277. However, Magnus regained them about 1278 and assumed the additional title &quot;rex Gothorum&quot;, King of the Goths, starting the tradition of &quot;King of the Swedes and the Goths&quot;.

King Magnus&#x27;s youngest brother, Bengt (1254–1291), then archdeacon, acted as his Lord High Chancellor of Sweden, and in 1284 Magnus rewarded him with the Duchy of Finland.

Magnus died when his sons were yet underage. Magnus ordered his kinsman Torkel Knutsson, the Lord High Constable of Sweden as the guardian of his heir, the future King Birger, who was about ten years old at father&#x27;s death.

==Modern research==
In spring 2011, archaeologists and osteologists from the University of Stockholm were granted permission to open one of the royal tombs in the Riddarholmen Church, traditionally believed to contain the remains of Magnus Ladulås and some of his relatives. An osteological and odontological examination revealed the presence of five male and two female skeletons. Preliminary studies indicated a notable sickly disposition in one skeleton, previously presumed to belong to Magnus Ladulås based on descriptions of his ailments. Contrary to expectations, radiocarbon dating indicated that the skeletons were from the 15th and early 16th centuries, and could not belong to the king and his family.

In 2012, the research team was permitted to open the adjacent tomb, traditionally believed to contain King Karl Knutsson ( 1408–1470). The analysis showed that these remains were from the 15th and early 16th century, and one skeleton matched the expected profile for King Karl. The location of Magnus Ladulås&#x27;s grave remains unresolved. In 2014, the team discovered a previously unknown brick chamber between the two tombs, but further excavation was halted due to legal and administrative challenges.

== Issue ==
From his alleged first (annulled) marriage to an unknown woman:
* Erik (born c. 1275 – c. 1277)

From his second marriage to Helvig of Holstein:
* Ingeborg (1277 – 1319); married King Eric VI of Denmark.
* Birger (1280 – 1321), King of Sweden from 1290 to 1318
* Erik (c. 1282 – 1318), duke, father to King Magnus Eriksson; the &quot;Erik&#x27;s Chronicle&quot; is named after him
* Valdemar (after 1282 – 1318), Duke of Finland. Erik and Valdemar died of starvation 1318 at Nyköping Castle while imprisoned by his brother, King Birger.
* Rikissa (c. 1285 after 1347), Abbess of the convent of St. Clare&#x27;s Priory, Stockholm.

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q350220" start="0" end="14" title="Magnus Ladulås" label="Magnus Ladulås"/>
<link wikidata="Q350220" start="23" end="40" title="Magnus Ladulås" label="Magnus Birgersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q26796319" start="72" end="86" title="King of Sweden" label="King of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q316828" start="140" end="151" title="Birger Jarl" label="Birger Jarl"/>
<link wikidata="Q357200" start="209" end="217" title="Valdemar, King of Sweden" label="Valdemar"/>
<link wikidata="Q434782" start="260" end="276" title="Birger Magnusson" label="Birger Magnusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q373737" start="282" end="297" title="Torkel Knutsson" label="Torkel Knutsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898038" start="358" end="372" title="Regnal number" label="regnal numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q350220" start="450" end="458" title="Magnus Ladulås" label="Magnus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q350220" start="462" end="472" title="Magnus Ladulås" label="Magnus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433270" start="889" end="907" title="Ordinance of Alsnö" label="Ordinance of Alsnö"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="938" end="946" title="Yeoman" label="yeomanry"/>
<link wikidata="Q157692" start="1180" end="1191" title="Slavic names" label="Slavic name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026887" start="1261" end="1276" title="Sophia of Minsk" label="Sophia of Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q210398" start="1280" end="1287" title="Rurikid" label="Rurikid"/>
<link wikidata="Q316828" start="1378" end="1389" title="Birger Jarl" label="Birger Jarl"/>
<link wikidata="Q467512" start="1413" end="1421" title="Ingeborg Eriksdotter of Sweden" label="Ingeborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q365103" start="1440" end="1453" title="Erik Knutsson" label="Erik Knutsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q350202" start="1473" end="1486" title="Erik Eriksson" label="Erik Eriksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q357200" start="1701" end="1709" title="Valdemar, King of Sweden" label="Valdemar"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="1806" end="1812" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779071" start="2108" end="2123" title="Nyköping Castle" label="Nyköping Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q626062" start="2127" end="2139" title="Södermanland" label="Södermanland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987885" start="2237" end="2258" title="Erik&amp;#x27;s Chronicle" label="Erik&amp;#x27;s Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486875" start="2464" end="2468" title="Erik Birgersson" label="Erik"/>
<link wikidata="Q359588" start="2478" end="2491" title="Eric V of Denmark" label="Eric Klipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794521" start="2545" end="2559" title="Battle of Hova" label="Battle of Hova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752713" start="2577" end="2584" title="Tiveden" label="Tiveden"/>
<link wikidata="Q304555" start="2686" end="2700" title="Stones of Mora" label="Stones of Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q434728" start="2727" end="2733" title="Helvig of Holstein" label="Helvig"/>
<link wikidata="Q566500" start="2747" end="2767" title="Gerhard I, Count of Holstein-Itzehoe" label="Gerard I of Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q365072" start="2878" end="2893" title="Sverker II of Sweden" label="King Sverker II"/>
<link wikidata="Q774347" start="3008" end="3021" title="consanguinity" label="consanguinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q201694" start="3222" end="3230" title="Götaland" label="Götaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930902" start="3410" end="3427" title="King of the Goths" label="King of the Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q817212" start="3539" end="3544" title="Bengt Birgersson" label="Bengt"/>
<link wikidata="Q633730" start="3563" end="3573" title="archdeacon" label="archdeacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259383" start="3588" end="3618" title="Lord High Chancellor of Sweden" label="Lord High Chancellor of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q502432" start="3661" end="3677" title="Duchy of Finland" label="Duchy of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q373737" start="3752" end="3767" title="Torkel Knutsson" label="Torkel Knutsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346906" start="3773" end="3802" title="Lord High Constable of Sweden" label="Lord High Constable of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q434782" start="3843" end="3854" title="King Birger" label="King Birger"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="3945" end="3958" title="archaeologist" label="archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q819121" start="3964" end="3975" title="osteologist" label="osteologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q221645" start="3986" end="4009" title="University of Stockholm" label="University of Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q657118" start="4072" end="4091" title="Riddarholmen Church" label="Riddarholmen Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q12128" start="4204" end="4217" title="odontological" label="odontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="4480" end="4498" title="radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q310433" start="4730" end="4743" title="Karl Knutsson" label="Karl Knutsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q434728" start="5268" end="5286" title="Helvig of Holstein" label="Helvig of Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883688" start="5290" end="5298" title="Ingeborg Magnusdotter" label="Ingeborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q359601" start="5327" end="5345" title="Eric VI of Denmark" label="Eric VI of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q434782" start="5349" end="5355" title="Birger, King of Sweden" label="Birger"/>
<link wikidata="Q547911" start="5406" end="5410" title="Erik Magnusson (duke)" label="Erik"/>
<link wikidata="Q314457" start="5450" end="5465" title="Magnus Eriksson" label="Magnus Eriksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987885" start="5477" end="5498" title="Erik&amp;#x27;s Chronicle" label="Erik&amp;#x27;s Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369581" start="5526" end="5534" title="Valdemar, Duke of Finland" label="Valdemar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779071" start="5618" end="5633" title="Nyköping Castle" label="Nyköping Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974855" start="5682" end="5689" title="Rikissa Magnusdotter" label="Rikissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587608" start="5737" end="5771" title="St. Clare&amp;#x27;s Priory, Stockholm" label="St. Clare&amp;#x27;s Priory, Stockholm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54886" wikidata="Q283026" url="?curid=54886" title="Basil Zaharoff">
<text>Basil Zaharoff (born Zacharias Basileios Zacharoff; 6 October 1849 – 27 November 1936) was a Greek arms dealer and industrialist. One of the richest men in the world during his lifetime, Zaharoff was described as both a &quot;merchant of death&quot; and a &quot;mystery man of Europe&quot;. His success was forged through his cunning, often aggressive and sharp, business tactics. These included the sale of arms to opposing sides in conflicts, sometimes delivering fake or faulty machinery and skilfully using the press to attack business rivals.

Zaharoff maintained close contacts with many powerful political leaders, including British Prime Minister David Lloyd George, Greek Prime Minister Eleftherios Venizelos and Ottoman Sultan Abdul Hamid II.

==Early life==
Zacharias was the only son and eldest of four children of Basilius Zacharoff (d. 1878) of Constantinople, a Greek notary, commodity dealer and importer of attar of roses and his (reportedly blind) wife, Helena Antonides (d. 1879). Zacharias was born in the Ottoman Empire town of Menteşe in southwest Turkey. His family lived in Russia for over two decades as exiles following the anti-Greek &quot;Easter pogroms&quot; of 1821. While there they adopted the surname Zaharoff. They returned to the Ottoman Empire in the 1840s and, by 1855, had returned to Constantinople&#x27;s Greek neighbourhood of Tatavla.
Zacharias&#x27; first job was as a tour guide in the Galata. It is thought he became an arsonist with Constantinople&#x27;s fire brigades, who were paid to recover or salvage treasures for their wealthy owners.

He was summoned to court in London due to irregular exports of goods from Constantinople to London. The London Greeks from Constantinople preferred disputes involving members of their community to be settled outside English courts, and he was discharged on the conditions that he paid £100 restitution to the claimant and remained within the court&#x27;s jurisdiction. Instead, he immediately left for Athens, where the 24-year-old Zaharoff was befriended by a political journalist, Etienne Skouloudis. The eloquent Zaharoff succeeded in convincing Skouloudis of the rightness of his London court case. Skouloudis was a friend of a Swedish captain who was about to leave his job as an agent of arms manufacturer Thorsten Nordenfelt. Skouloudis used his influence to recommend Zaharoff for the role. Zaharoff was hired on 14 October 1877, beginning a spectacular career. The political and military instability in the Balkan states, Turkey and Russia provided an excellent opportunity for the arms sales, as each state spent to match the perceived aggressive intentions of its neighbours, even after the 1878 Treaty of Berlin.

==Arms dealing==
Zaharoff did not make arms dealing his sole business at first. After Cyprus passed under British control in 1878 he returned to the United Kingdom; by 1883 he was working as a shipping agent in Galway, Ireland, where he recruited local girls for work in American factories. He also had a spell in the United States where he worked as a confidence man, and later as a salesman for a St. Louis railcar business. In 1885, posing as &quot;Prince Zacharias Basileus Zacharoff&quot;, he married a Philadelphia heiress, Jennie Billings, and was pursued to Rotterdam by detectives after his exposure as a bigamist by a Briton who recognised him as the same man who had married a British girl in Bristol in 1872.

Zaharoff sold munitions to many nations, including Great Britain, Germany, the Russian and Ottoman Empires, Greece, Spain, Japan and the United States. Despite his reputation for corruption, he was instrumental in marketing military equipment, including various famous weapons such as the Maxim gun (one of the first fully automatic machine guns) and the first working submarine. The British-Swedish Nordenfelt produced a range of anti-torpedo boat guns in Erith, Kent, Stockholm and Spain.

Zaharoff worked for Vickers, the munitions firm, from 1897 to 1927.

===Maxim machine gun===
Hiram Maxim&#x27;s automatic machine gun was a significant improvement over the then-current hand-cranked rotary barrel models. Maxim&#x27;s gun was better than anything that Nordenfelt sold at the time. Zaharoff is believed to have had a hand in the events surrounding Maxim&#x27;s attempts to demonstrate his invention between 1886 and 1888. In the first, Maxim&#x27;s and Nordenfelt&#x27;s machine guns were to be demonstrated at La Spezia, Italy, before a distinguished audience which included the Duke of Genoa. Maxim&#x27;s representatives did not show up; a person unknown had waylaid them with a tour of La Spezia&#x27;s nocturnal establishments leaving them unfit for purpose the next morning.

Round two took place at Vienna, where the exhibitors were instructed to modify their weapons to comply with Austrian Infantry-standard sized cartridges. After shooting a few hundred rounds, the Maxim gun became erratic before stopping altogether. When Maxim took one weapon apart to see what had happened, he discovered that they had been sabotaged, but it was too late to repair. A third demonstration also took place in Vienna, and here the gun worked perfectly but again an unknown person went through the gathering of senior officers, convincing them that the workmanship required to produce such a marvellous weapon could be achieved only by hand, one at a time, and that without the means for mass production, Maxim could never produce machine guns in sufficient quantities to satisfy the needs of a modern army. Nordenfelt and Zaharoff had won. Maxim, who knew he had a good product, successfully sought a merger with Nordenfelt, engaging Zaharoff as their principal salesman on a huge commission.

Under pressure from Rothschild and Vickers, Thorsten Nordenfelt merged with Maxim&#x27;s in 1888 to form the Maxim Nordenfelt Guns and Ammunition Company. Two years later, a bankrupt Nordenfelt was forced out of the company.

===Submarines===
From 1886 to 1889, at the same time that Zaharoff got the Maxim machine gun, he managed to appropriate Isaac Peral&#x27;s submarine; although these facts are less well known. Zaharoff and Nordenfelt tried at this time to develop a submarine for their own business purposes.

One of the most notorious sales by Zaharoff was that of the &quot;Nordenfelt I&quot;, a faulty steam-driven submarine model based on a design by the English inventor and clergyman George Garrett, which US Navy intelligence characterized as capable of &quot;dangerous and eccentric movements.&quot; Thorsten Nordenfelt had already demonstrated his vessel at an international gathering of the military elite, and while the major powers would have none of it, smaller nations, attracted by the prestige, were a different matter.

It was thus that, with a promise of generous payment terms, Zaharoff sold the first model to the Greeks. He then persuaded the Turks that the Greek submarine posed a threat, selling them two. After that, he persuaded the Russians that there was now a new and significant threat on the Black Sea, and they bought another two.

None of these submarines ever saw action. The mechanics, driven by steam propulsion, were completely inadequate for underwater navigation, and failed demonstrably when undergoing sea trials by the respective navies. Besides the underlying problems of the faulty propulsion system, they were also chronically unstable. One of the Turkish Navy&#x27;s submarines sank, capsizing during a torpedo firing test. The vessel reared in a vertical position, from which it sank by the stern.

At this time Spanish inventor Isaac Peral designed and built the first submarine capable of navigating underwater with a decent level of control and with the ability to launch torpedoes both submerged and on the surface. This was the first proper submarine, solving the problems of propulsion, stability and armament all at once. Peral&#x27;s submarine was driven by electric propulsion, and had a periscope, target practice apparatus, compensating compass needle, gyroscope, sliding electric torpedo tube launcher and servomotor (to maintain the stability and the trim of the ship in all circumstances).

Zaharoff found out quickly about this young Spanish Naval officer&#x27;s invention. Previously in shipbuilding, he had already seen the plans and memorandum reports sent by Peral to the Spanish Navy&#x27;s HQ at the Defence Ministry.

Later on, during Peral&#x27;s visit to London, Zaharoff tried meeting with him unsuccessfully, with the help of one of Peral&#x27;s Spanish Navy fellow officers. Peral refused twice, but after several attempts, he had a meeting with Thorsten Nordenfelt, the company owner, who offered him a deal to purchase the patent of the stability servomotor. Isaac Peral rejected both offers but signed his sentence in that same instant, without knowing it.

Zaharoff then got to work with his own Machiavellian plan. The Spanish inventor, as with Maxim, suffered four sabotages during the tests: the first of them, in the previous test, in the presence of the Head of the Spanish State, but, Peral, more cautious than the North American inventor, proved successful in all of them.

Despite this, Zaharoff used underhand methods, which came to light later, and was able to cause a controversy between the inventor and his own government leading to the Spanish Government&#x27;s disapproval of this submarine invention, although it would have been a formidable weapon in the conflict with the United States, several years after.

Zaharoff traveled to Spain several times between 1886 and 1890 with three objectives: boycott Peral&#x27;s submarine, sell weapons to the Spanish Army, and acquire a Spanish munitions factory. He was successful in all three objectives, mainly because his initiation of an amorous relationship with Pilar de Muguiro y Beruete opened many doors for him.

Pilar&#x27;s father, influential banker Fermín Muguiro, Count of Muguiro, was a close friend of the King, and leader of the Spanish Conservative Party. She was a personal friend and niece of Segismundo Moret, a leading Spanish progressive thinker and the Liberal Party Leader&#x27;s right-hand man. Unhappily married to King Alfonso XII&#x27;s cousin, the Spanish Grandee, Francisco de Borbón, Duke of Marchena, she had unrestricted access to the Royal Palaces. During one trip, Zaharoff was spotted at the shipyard where the Spanish submarine was being built, but the Spanish authorities &quot;covered up&quot; the matter.

The acquisition of one of the best Spanish armament companies, Euskalduna, located in north Spain and renamed &quot;Placencia de las Armas Co. Ltd&quot; was in large part thanks to his love affair (later attributing his professional success to his sexual prowess), and through establishing a powerful network among Spanish politicians, journalists and military commanders, who served his business interests well. This influential group of people took his side against the development of Isaac Peral&#x27;s submarine, and the Spanish Government, despite the astounding success in sea trials, finally pulled the rug from the project.

After &quot;Placencia de Armas Co. Ltd&quot; swindled the Spanish Government by selling useless arms during the 1898 War (also handing Maxim important and &quot;sensitive&quot; information, which reached his government during the conflict), the Sociedad Española de Construcciones Navales in Spain, a branch of Vickers were awarded, by the Spanish Government, exclusive naval construction rights for the Spanish Navy.

In the aftermath of this scandal, accusations of bribery and manipulation flew in the direction of this dangerous trafficker of weapons. A Spanish Navy lawyer denounced the Spanish Government for two alleged crimes of &quot;prevarication.&quot; The Spanish Government acted expeditiously and especially cruelly against any naval officers who went public with their discontent. The Central Chief of Staff and the head of the Armada Juridic Service were fired, and hundreds of officers were imprisoned and lost their jobs.

===Other corrupt business tactics===
Zaharoff&#x27;s power and influence in Spain lasted until his death in 1936, the year in which the Spanish Civil War began.

Also, the 1934 United States Senate Nye Committee Memorandum shows that Zaharoff was paid considerable sums for transactions made between foreign companies and the Spanish Government (for example, he got paid between a 5 and 7% commission for the price of American submarines sold to Spain, throughout all these years).

Although very little could be proved, Zaharoff was viewed as a master of bribery and corruption, but the few incidents that did become public, such as the large bribes received by Japanese Admiral Fuji in the 1914 Siemens scandal, indicated that a lot more was going on behind the scenes. In 1890, the Maxim-Nordenfelt association broke up, and Zaharoff chose to go with Maxim. Using his commissions, Zaharoff bought shares in Maxim&#x27;s company until he was in a position to tell Maxim that he was no longer an employee, but an equal shareholder.

By 1897, the Maxim company had become important enough that it received a buyout offer from Vickers, one of the then giants of the armaments industry. This involved substantial settlements in both cash and shares for Maxim and Zaharoff. From then until 1911, while Maxim&#x27;s business enthusiasm waned, Zaharoff&#x27;s enthusiasm grew, and he expanded his portfolio of Vickers shares. After Maxim&#x27;s retirement, Zaharoff was appointed to Vickers&#x27; board of directors.

The 1900s (decade) was a time for many European armies to rebuild and modernize. Germany and the United Kingdom both sought improved naval capability, and Vickers, with Zaharoff, were willing and able to service both sides. After its disastrous defeat by Japan in 1905, the Russian Navy also needed new equipment, but Russia was handcuffed by a wave of protectionism that required domestic industry for the rebuilding. Zaharoff&#x27;s response was to build a huge Russian arms production complex at Tsaritsyn as a subsidiary of Vickers.

The opening of Russian Tsarist archives after World War I led to some insights into the tactics of the arms industry. One 1907 letter, in particular, was written from the Paul von Gontard Factory (a secretly-controlled Vickers company in Germany) to a Vickers-associate in Paris recommending that press releases be sent out to the French press suggesting that the French improve their military to meet the threat posed by German re-armament. These French newspaper articles were recorded by the Reichstag, and instigated a vote to increase military spending, all of which worked to the advantage of Zaharoff.

==World War I==
In the years immediately preceding World War I, Zaharoff&#x27;s fortunes grew in other areas to support his arms business. By purchasing the &quot;L&#x27;Union Parisienne des Banques&quot; (Union Parisienne Bank), which was historically associated with heavy industry, he was better able to control his financing arrangements. By gaining control of &quot;Excelsior&quot;, the popular French daily newspaper, he could guarantee favourable editorials for the arms industry. To gain public recognition and acclaim, he founded a retirement home for ex-French Navy sailors, while a chair in Aerodynamics at the University of Paris led to further honours.

In April 1914, Australian newspapers published reports from London dated 25 April that M. Zaharoff had donated £20,000 &quot;in order to enable France to be worthily represented at the forthcoming Olympic Games in Berlin&quot; in 1916. The 1916 Olympic Games were subsequently cancelled because of the war. Zaharoff&#x27;s donation represented a substantial contribution. On May 10, the French Government announced it would donate £6,000 to its Olympic team, and would distribute £12,000 of Zaharoff&#x27;s donation among its Olympic teams, with the remaining £8,000 to &quot;the furtherance of the Olympic cause.&quot;

On July 31, 1914, coincidentally the same day that the noted antimilitarist Jean Jaurès was assassinated, Raymond Poincaré signed a decree appointing Zaharoff a Commander of the Legion of Honour.

In March 1914, Vickers announced a new dawn of prosperity. During the course of the war, Vickers would produce 4 ships of the line, 3 cruisers, 53 submarines, 3 auxiliary vessels, 62 light vessels, 2,328 cannon, 8,000,000 tonnes of steel ordnance, 90,000 mines, 22,000 torpedoes, 5,500 airplanes and 100,000 machine guns. By 1915, Zaharoff had close ties with both David Lloyd George and Aristide Briand. It is reported that, on the occasion of one visit with Briand, Zaharoff surreptitiously left an envelope on Aristide Briand&#x27;s desk; the envelope contained a million francs for war widows.

One of Zaharoff&#x27;s tasks during the Great War was to ensure that Greece joined the war on the Allied side, helping to reinforce the eastern front. On the surface, this seemed impossible since King Constantine was a brother-in-law of the Kaiser. Setting up a press agency in Greece to publicise British propaganda contacted by Wellington House, Zaharoff led, within a few months, to King Constantine&#x27;s overthrow by Prime Minister Eleftherios Venizelos and Greek entry into the war as an ally of the British Empire.

In 1917 and 1918, on the behest of David Lloyd George, Zaharoff initiated a series of secret peace negotiations with the Ottoman Empire, beginning on 18 July 1917. The British hoped Zaharoff could convince the Three Pashas to abandon the Central Powers and make a separate peace with the Allies. 

By the end of World War I, &quot;The Times&quot; estimated that Zaharoff had laid out £50 million in the Allied cause.

==Post-war dealings==
In the years that followed, Zaharoff involved himself in the affairs of the lesser powers, which the Big Four, involved in remaking Europe, could happily ignore. In particular, he set out to ensure that Greece and Venizelos received a proper share from the spoils from the badly weakened Turkey. In 1920, he donated half a billion gold francs to the Greek State for the Greek cause (Megali Idea). Zaharoff convinced Venizelos to attack but, after some impressive initial success, the Greek Army was eventually driven back. In the elections that followed, Constantine&#x27;s loyalists managed to force Venizelos to flee, but Zaharoff stayed around to persuade the same King that he had to attack Turkey again but with Mustafa Kemal now in charge of Turkey, this venture was bound to fail. Zaharoff&#x27;s war adventures were not well received by the press in Paris and London.

Zaharoff was also involved in two more significant financial ventures in October 1920, becoming involved in the incorporation of a company that was a predecessor to oil giant BP. He foresaw that there was a great future in the oil business.

His association with Prince Louis II of Monaco led to his purchase of the debt-ridden &quot;Société des Bains de Mer&quot;, which ran the world-famous Monte Carlo Casino and was the principal source of revenue for the principality. He succeeded in returning the casino to profit again. At the same time, Zaharoff had prevailed upon Clemenceau to ensure that the Treaty of Versailles included protection of Monaco’s rights as established in 1641. Louis had noted their gradual erosion over the subsequent three centuries.

==Personal life==
Zaharoff was fascinated by aviation, and gave money and other support to pioneers in Great Britain, France and Russia. He encouraged Hiram Maxim&#x27;s attempt to build a flying machine, and claimed he and Maxim were the first men to be lifted off the earth, when Maxim tested his first &quot;flying machine&quot; at Bexley in 1894.

Zaharoff was a good friend of fellow Greek Jacques Damala, from the noble Zaccaria de Damalà family, and his wife, world famous stage actress Sarah Bernhardt, and took in Damala&#x27;s illegitimate daughter with a theatre extra after she was left in a basket on Bernhardt&#x27;s doorstep. Eventually, this girl was baptised &quot;Tereza&quot; (1889–1967) and was raised by a surrogate family that Zaharoff found for her in Adrianople, in Eastern Thrace, later becoming a socialite in royal Athens society, and an impactful lover of both Ernest Hemingway, who called a her a &quot;Greek princess&quot;, and Gabriele d&#x27;Annunzio, as well getting acquainted with Benito Mussolini, and serving as a model for Pablo Picasso in the early 20th century. The life of Tereza Damalas, including having been Zaharoff&#x27;s ward and lifelong friend was the subject of the historical novel &quot;Tereza&quot;, by Greek journalist Freddy Germanos.

In September 1924, Zaharoff, 74, married his mistress María del Pilar Antonia Angela Patrocinio Fermina Simona de Muguiro y Beruete, in her own right 1st Duchess de Villafranca de los Caballeros. Previously married to a cousin of the King of Spain Alfonso XII, the Duchess was reputed to be one of the richest women in Spain.

About eighteen months after their marriage, the Duchess died of an infection. He then began selling his business assets and drafted his memoirs. He apparently burnt the manuscript after it was stolen by a valet and recovered by police.

Zaharoff&#x27;s country house, the Château de Balincourt, at Arronville near Paris, was formerly the property of King Leopold II of Belgium and was filled with works of art and one of the most beautiful in France.

Princess Marthe Bibesco claimed Basil Zaharoff was an illegitimate son of her maternal grandfather.

== Philanthropy ==
Zaharoff was a major financial benefactor to various institutions:

* Chair of Aviation at the University of Paris (cost: FF 700,000)
* Chair of Aviation at Saint Petersburg State University
* Chair of Aviation at Imperial College, London
* Chair of French Literature at Oxford University
* Chair of English Literature at the University of Paris
* Donation of £20,000 to refurbish Paris Zoo&#x27;s monkey house (initially treated as a hoax by Zoo staff who left the cheque in a drawer for two months) 
* Financial contribution to studying aviation problems in England (cost: £125,000)
* The construction of a War Hospital at Biarritz (FF 200,000)
* Donation towards building the Greek Embassy in Paris
* Help for the earthquake victims at Corinth, Greece
* Establishing the &quot;Institut Pasteur à Athènes&quot; in 1919

== Honours ==
* Grand Cross, Legion of Honour
* Honorary Knight Grand Cross, Order of the Bath (&quot;George V, who detested him, resented his use of titles, which, as a French citizen, were only honorary.&quot;)
* Honorary Knight Grand Cross, Order of the British Empire
* Grand Cross, Order of the Redeemer

==In popular culture==
* Zaharoff was portrayed by Leo McKern in the 1983 ITV series &quot;Reilly, Ace of Spies&quot;.
* Zaharoff was depicted in the &quot;Lanny Budd&quot; series by reformer Upton Sinclair.
* Zaharoff appears in the Thomas Pynchon novel &quot;Against the Day&quot;.
* &#x27;Zaroff&#x27; is an unscrupulous arms dealer in the Tom Mix serial &quot;The Miracle Rider&quot; (1935).
* Zaharoff is played by Serhat Tutumluer in the Turkish crime and detective movie series &quot;&#x27;Filinta&quot;&#x27;, portraying crime, secrets and action in late 19th century Ottoman era Constantinople.
* Zaharoff is portrayed as a main antagonist in Jacopo Della Quercia&#x27;s 2015 novel The Great Abraham Lincoln Pocket Watch Conspiracy.
* Zaharoff is played by Adnan Biricik as a weapons dealer and an antagonist on Season 1 of the Turkish Drama series &quot;&#x27;&quot;&#x27;
* In the 2019 Greek series &quot;To Kokkino Potami&quot;, Zaharoff, portrayed by Sotiris Hatzakis, is depicted as a pivotal figure in the protagonist&#x27;s life, urging him to follow him to Paris and become his right-hand man.
* Zaharoff was used by Ian Fleming as the model for Ernst Stavro Blofeld leader of the international criminal organization SPECTRE and a main antagonist in the James Bond series of novels and films.

==See also==

* List of Legion of Honour recipients by name (Z)
* Legion of Honour Museum

==References==
==Sources==

==Further reading==
*Union of Democratic Control, &quot;The Secret International Armament Firms At Work&quot;, Oct., 1932.
*Robert Neumann, &quot;Zaharoff the Armaments King&quot; (1935, revised 1938) London: George Allen &amp; Unwin
*Dimitri Kitsikis, &quot;Propagande et pressions en politique internationale. La Grèce et ses revendications à la Conférence de la Paix 1919-1920&quot;. (1963) Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. (Chapter on Sir Basil Zaharoff)
*Anthony Allfrey, &quot;Man of Arms: the Life and Legend of Sir Basil Zaharoff.&quot; (1989) London: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 
*Donald McCormick, &quot;Peddler of Death: the Life and Times of Sir Basil Zaharoff.&quot; (1965) New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 
*John T. Flynn extract from &quot;Men of Wealth&quot; The Merchant of Death: Basil Zaharoff pp 337–372
* Dr. Richard Lewinsohn &quot;The Man Behind the Scenes: The Career of Sir Basil Zaharoff, &#x27;The Mystery Man of Europe&quot;&#x27; London, Gollancz (1929)
*Dominique Venner, &quot;Le plus grand marchand d&#x27;armes de l&#x27;Histoire: Sir Basil Zaharoff.&quot; Historia N° 368 - juillet 1977 (French periodical).
* Javier Sanmateo, &quot;El submarino Peral La gran conjura&quot; (2008) Cartagena: Divum &amp; Mare, 
* Bohumír Polách, &quot;Muž v pozadí (Basil Zacharov)&quot; - &quot;(Man in the background - Basil Zaharoff)&quot;. (1948) Prague: A. Neubert. Drama by Czech author.
* Paul De Mont : De Internationale der Wapenfabrikanten (1934).
* Edgar Morris - Il re dei mercanti di cannoni. Milano, 1936.

==External links==

* Basil Zaharoff profile, Britannica Online Encyclopedia
* The mysterious Mr. Zedzed, Smithsonianmag.com.
* The Merchant of Death - Basil Zaharoff I WHO DID WHAT IN WW1? -- The Great War, youtube.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q283026" start="0" end="14" title="Basil Zaharoff" label="Basil Zaharoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q283026" start="21" end="50" title="Basil Zaharoff" label="Zacharias Basileios Zacharoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="93" end="98" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="99" end="110" title="arms dealer" label="arms dealer"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="115" end="128" title="industrialist" label="industrialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="655" end="673" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q205545" start="696" end="717" title="Eleftherios Venizelos" label="Eleftherios Venizelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q134817" start="737" end="751" title="Abdul Hamid II" label="Abdul Hamid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="877" end="882" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q189010" start="883" end="889" title="notary" label="notary"/>
<link wikidata="Q62955" start="912" end="920" title="importer" label="importer"/>
<link wikidata="Q83054" start="924" end="938" title="attar of roses" label="attar of roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1026" end="1040" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q216912" start="1049" end="1056" title="Muğla" label="Menteşe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="1323" end="1337" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299454" start="1368" end="1375" title="Tatavla" label="Tatavla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039099" start="1412" end="1422" title="tour guide" label="tour guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q501817" start="1430" end="1436" title="Galata" label="Galata"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895267" start="1465" end="1473" title="Firefighter arson" label="arsonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1617" end="1623" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="1991" end="1997" title="Athens, Greece" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q855726" start="2050" end="2070" title="political journalist" label="political journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q959554" start="2072" end="2090" title="Etienne Skouloudis" label="Etienne Skouloudis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764988" start="2301" end="2320" title="Thorsten Nordenfelt" label="Thorsten Nordenfelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="2505" end="2518" title="Balkan states" label="Balkan states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048169" start="2691" end="2712" title="Treaty of Berlin (1878)" label="1878 Treaty of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="2801" end="2807" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q129610" start="2926" end="2932" title="Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="3068" end="3082" title="Confidence trick" label="confidence man"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="3114" end="3123" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="3223" end="3235" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="3281" end="3290" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q720243" start="3329" end="3337" title="bigamist" label="bigamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="3419" end="3426" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="3516" end="3523" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q282352" start="3726" end="3735" title="Maxim gun" label="Maxim gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="3806" end="3815" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q146671" start="3894" end="3899" title="Erith" label="Erith"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="3901" end="3905" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="3907" end="3916" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195090" start="3949" end="3956" title="Vickers Limited" label="Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="3962" end="3971" title="munitions" label="munitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q315601" start="4022" end="4033" title="Hiram Maxim" label="Hiram Maxim"/>
<link wikidata="Q8611" start="4455" end="4464" title="La Spezia" label="La Spezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253617" start="4524" end="4537" title="Prince Thomas, Duke of Genoa" label="Duke of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="4750" end="4756" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q282352" start="4920" end="4929" title="Maxim gun" label="Maxim gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370517" start="5752" end="5762" title="Rothschild banking family of England" label="Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220673" start="5767" end="5774" title="Vickers" label="Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795609" start="5841" end="5885" title="Maxim Nordenfelt Guns and Ammunition Company" label="Maxim Nordenfelt Guns and Ammunition Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q545065" start="6078" end="6089" title="Isaac Peral" label="Isaac Peral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539639" start="6430" end="6444" title="George Garrett (inventor)" label="George Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967781" start="6452" end="6472" title="Office of Naval Intelligence" label="US Navy intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q165363" start="7488" end="7495" title="torpedo" label="torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="8034" end="8041" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="8050" end="8059" title="gyroscope" label="gyroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137255" start="8104" end="8114" title="servomotor" label="servomotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q562515" start="10088" end="10104" title="Segismundo Moret" label="Segismundo Moret"/>
<link wikidata="Q32347" start="10217" end="10233" title="Alfonso XII of Spain" label="King Alfonso XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252846" start="10585" end="10595" title="Euskalduna" label="Euskalduna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633869" start="10638" end="10668" title="Soraluze-Placencia de las Armas" label="Placencia de las Armas Co. Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="11267" end="11275" title="Spanish-American War" label="1898 War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742109" start="11400" end="11443" title="Sociedad Española de Construcción Naval" label="Sociedad Española de Construcciones Navales"/>
<link wikidata="Q676404" start="11559" end="11571" title="Spanish Navy" label="Spanish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="12232" end="12249" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q71769" start="12294" end="12307" title="Nye Committee" label="Nye Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q824700" start="12793" end="12808" title="Siemens scandal" label="Siemens scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="13843" end="13877" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="disastrous defeat by Japan in 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q914" start="14108" end="14117" title="Tsaritsyn" label="Tsaritsyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="14193" end="14204" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="14420" end="14425" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q207184" start="14444" end="14457" title="press release" label="press release"/>
<link wikidata="Q702246" start="14569" end="14587" title="German re-armament" label="German re-armament"/>
<link wikidata="Q637829" start="14642" end="14651" title="Reichstag (Weimar Republic)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="15379" end="15398" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q506674" start="16106" end="16120" title="antimilitarism" label="antimilitarist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12688" start="16121" end="16132" title="Jean Jaurès" label="Jean Jaurès"/>
<link wikidata="Q191974" start="16151" end="16167" title="Raymond Poincaré" label="Raymond Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="16223" end="16239" title="Légion d’honneur" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="16607" end="16625" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q179888" start="16630" end="16645" title="Aristide Briand" label="Aristide Briand"/>
<link wikidata="Q152099" start="17037" end="17053" title="Constantine I of Greece" label="King Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="17082" end="17088" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971426" start="17139" end="17157" title="British propaganda during World War I" label="British propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765280" start="17171" end="17187" title="Wellington House" label="Wellington House"/>
<link wikidata="Q205545" start="17279" end="17300" title="Eleftherios Venizelos" label="Eleftherios Venizelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="17348" end="17362" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44623" start="17575" end="17587" title="Three Pashas" label="Three Pashas"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="17603" end="17617" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813255" start="17906" end="17914" title="The Big Four (World War I)" label="Big Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509365" start="18136" end="18146" title="gold franc" label="gold franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="18155" end="18166" title="Kingdom of Greece (Glücksburg)" label="Greek State"/>
<link wikidata="Q335081" start="18188" end="18199" title="Megali Idea" label="Megali Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="18522" end="18535" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="18857" end="18859" title="BP" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q316543" start="18945" end="18970" title="Louis II, Prince of Monaco" label="Prince Louis II of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162190" start="19016" end="19040" title="Société des Bains de Mer" label="Société des Bains de Mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779905" start="19075" end="19093" title="Monte Carlo Casino" label="Monte Carlo Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q171730" start="19256" end="19266" title="Georges Clemenceau" label="Clemenceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="19286" end="19306" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="19330" end="19336" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q765633" start="19491" end="19499" title="aviation" label="aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q146416" start="19781" end="19787" title="Bexley" label="Bexley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120528" start="19841" end="19855" title="Jacques Damala" label="Jacques Damala"/>
<link wikidata="Q116894185" start="19872" end="19898" title="Damalas" label="Zaccaria de Damalà family,"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605" start="19940" end="19955" title="Sarah Bernhardt" label="Sarah Bernhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="20335" end="20351" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q193236" start="20404" end="20428" title="D&amp;#x27;Annunzio" label="Gabriele d&amp;#x27;Annunzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="20462" end="20478" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="20507" end="20520" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20719" end="20734" title=":el:Φρέντυ_Γερμανός" label="Freddy Germanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="20971" end="20984" title="King of Spain" label="King of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q32347" start="20985" end="20996" title="Alfonso XII of Spain" label="Alfonso XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q272052" start="21362" end="21372" title="Arronville" label="Arronville"/>
<link wikidata="Q12967" start="21419" end="21440" title="Leopold II of Belgium" label="Leopold II of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q297770" start="21525" end="21539" title="Marthe Bibesco" label="Marthe Bibesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="21758" end="21760" title="French franc" label="FF"/>
<link wikidata="Q27621" start="21793" end="21826" title="Saint Petersburg State University" label="Saint Petersburg State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q189022" start="21850" end="21874" title="Imperial College London" label="Imperial College, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689" start="21886" end="21903" title="French Literature" label="French Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="21907" end="21924" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="21936" end="21954" title="English Literature" label="English Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="21962" end="21981" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q132790" start="22261" end="22269" title="Biarritz" label="Biarritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="22271" end="22273" title="French franc" label="FF"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="22375" end="22382" title="Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="22487" end="22503" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="22535" end="22552" title="Order of the Bath" label="Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="22560" end="22568" title="George V of the United Kingdom" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="22702" end="22729" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q614661" start="22745" end="22766" title="Order of the Redeemer" label="Order of the Redeemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344237" start="22819" end="22829" title="Leo McKern" label="Leo McKern"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="22842" end="22845" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932217" start="22859" end="22879" title="Reilly, Ace of Spies" label="Reilly, Ace of Spies"/>
<link wikidata="Q216134" start="22924" end="22934" title="Lanny Budd" label="Lanny Budd"/>
<link wikidata="Q216134" start="22960" end="22974" title="Upton Sinclair" label="Upton Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q35155" start="23002" end="23016" title="Thomas Pynchon" label="Thomas Pynchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691072" start="23029" end="23044" title="Against the Day" label="Against the Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q345468" start="23111" end="23118" title="Tom Mix" label="Tom Mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985577" start="23132" end="23149" title="The Miracle Rider" label="The Miracle Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623884" start="23188" end="23204" title="Serhat Tutumluer" label="Serhat Tutumluer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19611285" start="23265" end="23272" title="Filinta" label="Filinta"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636337" start="23459" end="23508" title="The Great Abraham Lincoln Pocket Watch Conspiracy" label="The Great Abraham Lincoln Pocket Watch Conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q85413123" start="23684" end="23701" title="To Kokkino Potami" label="To Kokkino Potami"/>
<link wikidata="Q82104" start="23902" end="23913" title="Ian Fleming" label="Ian Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104987" start="23931" end="23951" title="Ernst Stavro Blofeld" label="Ernst Stavro Blofeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069518" start="24002" end="24009" title="SPECTRE" label="SPECTRE"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="24039" end="24049" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577262" start="24095" end="24142" title="List of Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur recipients by name (Z)" label="List of Legion of Honour recipients by name (Z)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329915" start="24145" end="24168" title="Musée de la Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur" label="Legion of Honour Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886565" start="24219" end="24246" title="Union of Democratic Control" label="Union of Democratic Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q939629" start="24433" end="24449" title="Dimitri Kitsikis" label="Dimitri Kitsikis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54887" wikidata="Q350091" url="?curid=54887" title="Svend Robinson">
<text>Svend Robinson (born March 4, 1952) is a Canadian politician. He was a Member of Parliament (MP) from 1979 to 2004, who represented suburban Vancouver-area constituencies of Burnaby for the New Democratic Party (NDP). He is noted as the first member of Parliament in Canadian history to come out as gay while in office. In 2004, he pleaded guilty to stealing an expensive ring and decided not to run in the June 2004 election. At the time, he was one of the longest-serving members in the House of Commons, having been elected and re-elected for seven consecutive terms. In the 2019 Canadian federal election, Robinson was the NDP candidate for the riding of Burnaby North-Seymour, but lost to the Liberal incumbent Terry Beech by 1,560 votes.

==Early life==
Robinson was born in Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States, of Danish descent, to Edith Jensen and Wayne Robinson. His father opposed the Vietnam War and brought his family to live in Canada. Robinson attended high school at Burnaby North Secondary. He later obtained a law degree from the University of British Columbia, and completed post-graduate work in international law at the London School of Economics.

He was called to the British Columbia Bar as a barrister and solicitor in 1978, and practised law with Robert Gardner and Associates until his election to the House of Commons in May 1979.

Prior to coming out as gay, Robinson was married to Patricia Fraser, his high-school girlfriend, from 1972 to 1975.

==Politics==
Robinson was the NDP MP for ridings in the Vancouver suburb of Burnaby, British Columbia, the third-largest city in British Columbia.

As the longest-serving British Columbia MP of his time, in office from 1979 to 2004, Robinson is notable for having been the first Canadian MP to come out as gay, in the spring of 1988. He was the only openly LGBT member of the Canadian House of Commons until Bloc Québécois MP Réal Ménard came out in 1994.

Robinson is known for his negative views on American foreign policy, especially towards Cuba, his challenge of corporate power, his criticism of Israel, and his strong support for Palestinian leaders. Party leader McDonough briefly removed Robinson&#x27;s portfolio over Middle East issues in 2002 for comments he made criticizing the Israeli government for alleged war crimes in Jenin.

One of his earliest political activities was leading a group of NDP MPs who heckled former US President Ronald Reagan while he was speaking at the House of Commons in support of the Strategic Defense Initiative and aid to the Contras. He was a long-time activist in the anti-apartheid movement and was a member of the official Canadian delegation to the 1994 South African election. Robinson has also been critical of the Chinese government for its treatment of political dissidents and for its policies in Tibet. He was a founder of the Canadian wing of Parliamentarians for East Timor. He was active in international parliamentary groups, including serving as rapporteur and chair of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe&#x27;s Parliamentary Assembly Human Rights and Development Committee.

Robinson was a leader in the movement for the right to physician-assisted death, fighting for the right of well-known ALS patient Sue Rodriguez to choose when to end her life with the assistance of a physician. He was ultimately present at her bedside at the time of her physician-assisted death.

A strong environmentalist, he engaged in peaceful civil disobedience to block logging of old-growth forests at Lyell Island in Haida Gwaii in 1985 and at Clayoquot Sound on the west coast of Vancouver Island in 1993. For the latter action, he was sentenced to 14 days of imprisonment. Robinson was also an outspoken advocate of the rights of aboriginal peoples both in Canada and internationally. He stood at barricades with the Penan people in Sarawak, Malaysia and was condemned by Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad. He was adopted into the Haida Nation, and given the Haida name &quot;White Swan&quot; by Haida elder Ada Yovanovich.

Robinson ran to succeed Audrey McLaughlin as leader of the NDP at the 1995 NDP leadership convention. He won the first ballot, and had won regional primaries in Ontario, Quebec, and British Columbia. Ahead of the second ballot between himself and Alexa McDonough, Robinson noticed last-place candidate Lorne Nystrom&#x27;s delegates were moving disproportionately to McDonough. Realizing that McDonough would likely pick up enough support from Nystrom&#x27;s delegates to eliminate any realistic chance of him winning, Robinson conceded to McDonough before the second ballot. On a motion by Robinson, McDonough was acclaimed as leader.

On December 31, 1997, Robinson was injured in a hiking accident on Galiano Island, breaking his jaw and ankle.

Robinson was involved in the New Politics Initiative, an effort to build a new progressive political party in Canada closely linked with social movements and labour, and the NDP&#x27;s renewal process, although he remained committed to the party after the NPI&#x27;s defeat at the 2001 general convention in Winnipeg. He was an early and strong supporter of former national NDP Leader Jack Layton.

In 2003, Liberal Senator Jerry Grafstein suggested that September 11 be designated as &quot;America Day&quot; to commemorate the American victims of September 11, 2001. Robinson proposed that the day also be designated as &quot;Chile Day&quot;, to mark the overthrow of Chilean president Salvador Allende&#x27;s democratically elected government on September 11, 1973. Neither proposal was accepted.

Robinson successfully sponsored legislation in parliament in 2004 to include sexual orientation in federal hate crimes legislation. He was also active on HIV/AIDS issues from the start of the epidemic in the early 1980s.

==Admission to theft and end of political career==
In April 2004, shortly before the 2004 election, Robinson admitted to the theft of an expensive ring from a public auction site. He turned himself in to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, and returned the ring shortly after police visited his home and office, wishing to speak with him. While the auction company publicly stated that they did not wish to pursue charges, Robinson was charged and pleaded guilty. The Crown and defence agreed that he was undergoing major personal stress and mental health issues at the time; Robinson was given a discharge, meaning that he would have no criminal record, but he volunteered for some time at the Burnaby Wildlife Centre as part of a public service commitment. He terminated his candidacy and was replaced by his longtime constituency assistant Bill Siksay, who won the election.

Robinson was subsequently diagnosed with cyclothymia, a form of bipolar disorder, and began to speak as an activist on mental health issues.

Robinson attempted a comeback and ran as an NDP candidate in the 2006 federal election, challenging Liberal MP Hedy Fry in the riding of Vancouver Centre. Despite an improved result for the NDP provincewide, Fry easily won reelection in her riding, where the NDP vote fell by 3.6 per cent.

In the 2019 Canadian General Election Robinson was nominated as the NDP candidate in Burnaby North—Seymour, where he faced Liberal incumbent Terry Beech and lost by 1,560 votes.

==Post-political career==

Since leaving politics, Robinson was employed by the British Columbia Government and Service Employees&#x27; Union as an arbitrator and advocate. He also served on the NDP&#x27;s federal executive as co-chair of the party&#x27;s LGBT Committee.

Robinson took a position in 2007 with the global trade union federation Public Services International in Switzerland, where he moved with his partner Max Riveron. He led PSI&#x27;s work on a range of issues including climate change, pensions, and trade. In 2009, he was co-chair of the International LGBT Human Rights Conference in Copenhagen, and received an award from the Conseil québécois des gais et lesbiennes for his human rights activism.

He served as a consultant with the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, coordinating their parliamentary relations. He retired from the organization when he reached its mandatory retirement age of 65.

In 2020–21, Robinson was the J.S. Woodsworth resident scholar at Simon Fraser University. The position was named after the former CCF leader and MP J. S. Woodsworth.

==Electoral Record==
===Burnaby North—Seymour; 2019===
===Vancouver Centre; 2006===
===Burnaby—Douglas;1997-2004===








===Burnaby—Kingsway; 1988–1997===









===Burnaby; 1979–1988===








==Biography==
&quot;Svend Robinson: A Life in Politics&quot;, written by Graeme Truelove, was released on October 17, 2013, by New Star Books. In the book, Truelove argues that Robinson was the single most influential Member of Parliament in Canadian history never to have served in the Cabinet of Canada.

==Awards and honours==

* L&#x27;Ordre de la Pleiade, Chevalier, 1990 For exceptional service to La Francophonie
* Award for Human Rights, May 1993 Lambda Foundation.
* The Edith Adamson Award for Leadership in Issues of Conscience in 1995.
* Elena Gil Iberoamerican Award on Ethics, June 1995 Felix Varela Centre, Cuba.
* Tom Stoddard National Role Model Award, May 1997 presented by PrideFest America.
* Hero Award, Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity in August 1999 by The Canadian Bar Association.
* Presidents Award, 2003 Canadian Arab Federation.
* Kurdish Human Rights Prize, Adar 2614.
* Grand prix du CQGL 2009, decerned by Conseil québécois des gais et lesbiennes at Gala Arc-en-Ciel
* Panelist at the conference to mark the 20th Anniversary of the &quot;Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms&quot;, discussing &quot;The Making of s.15: Collaboration by Government, Community Activists and Legal Experts.&quot;
* Member of Canadian Committee for 50th Anniversary of United Nations, 1995

==References==
==External links==
* Svend Robinson&#x27;s website (inactive)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q350091" start="0" end="14" title="Svend Robinson" label="Svend Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="41" end="49" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="71" end="91" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="132" end="138" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="141" end="150" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600798" start="151" end="155" title="Greater Vancouver" label="area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973938" start="156" end="170" title="Electoral district (Canada)" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q244025" start="174" end="181" title="Burnaby" label="Burnaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="190" end="210" title="New Democratic Party" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="287" end="295" title="coming out" label="come out"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="299" end="302" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190721" start="578" end="608" title="2019 Canadian federal election" label="2019 Canadian federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954585" start="659" end="680" title="Burnaby North-Seymour" label="Burnaby North-Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q21716242" start="716" end="727" title="Terry Beech" label="Terry Beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="781" end="792" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="794" end="803" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="805" end="818" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="823" end="829" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="898" end="909" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999594" start="985" end="1008" title="Burnaby North Secondary" label="Burnaby North Secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="1050" end="1080" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="1143" end="1169" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="1509" end="1512" title="New Democratic Party" label="NDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="1513" end="1515" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973938" start="1520" end="1527" title="Electoral district (Canada)" label="ridings"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="1535" end="1544" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="1545" end="1551" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q244025" start="1555" end="1562" title="Burnaby" label="Burnaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="1564" end="1580" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="1773" end="1781" title="Coming out" label="come out"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="1785" end="1788" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="1855" end="1880" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="Canadian House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q735105" start="1887" end="1901" title="Bloc Québécois" label="Bloc Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178668" start="1905" end="1916" title="Réal Ménard" label="Réal Ménard"/>
<link wikidata="Q744448" start="1980" end="2003" title="American foreign policy" label="American foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="2024" end="2028" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186854" start="2068" end="2087" title="criticism of Israel" label="criticism of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q374748" start="2316" end="2321" title="Jenin" label="Jenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="2428" end="2441" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211031" start="2506" end="2534" title="Strategic Defense Initiative" label="Strategic Defense Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="2550" end="2557" title="Contras" label="Contras"/>
<link wikidata="Q957012" start="2678" end="2705" title="1994 South African election" label="1994 South African election"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2746" end="2753" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="2831" end="2836" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="2900" end="2910" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="3014" end="3066" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044946" start="3167" end="3189" title="Right to die" label="movement for the right"/>
<link wikidata="Q689846" start="3193" end="3217" title="Assisted suicide" label="physician-assisted death"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="3256" end="3259" title="ALS" label="ALS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634264" start="3268" end="3281" title="Sue Rodriguez" label="Sue Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q210907" start="3563" end="3574" title="Haida Gwaii" label="Haida Gwaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099243" start="3590" end="3605" title="Clayoquot Sound" label="Clayoquot Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q170479" start="3627" end="3643" title="Vancouver Island" label="Vancouver Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="3881" end="3888" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q181383" start="3935" end="3951" title="Mahathir Mohamad" label="Mahathir Mohamad"/>
<link wikidata="Q210332" start="3977" end="3982" title="Haida people" label="Haida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870860" start="4095" end="4112" title="Audrey McLaughlin" label="Audrey McLaughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006916" start="4141" end="4171" title="1995 New Democratic Party leadership election" label="1995 NDP leadership convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="4232" end="4239" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="4241" end="4247" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604970" start="4318" end="4333" title="Alexa McDonough" label="Alexa McDonough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020483" start="4373" end="4386" title="Lorne Nystrom" label="Lorne Nystrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492058" start="4775" end="4789" title="Galiano Island" label="Galiano Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011034" start="4849" end="4872" title="New Politics Initiative" label="New Politics Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="5128" end="5136" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q317842" start="5205" end="5216" title="Jack Layton" label="Jack Layton"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="5228" end="5235" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q841180" start="5236" end="5243" title="Senate of Canada" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177466" start="5244" end="5259" title="Jerry Grafstein" label="Jerry Grafstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q440" start="5507" end="5523" title="Salvador Allende" label="Salvador Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="5697" end="5715" title="sexual orientation" label="sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="5727" end="5738" title="hate crimes" label="hate crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="5774" end="5777" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="5778" end="5782" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637432" start="5927" end="5940" title="2004 Canadian federal election" label="2004 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q335175" start="6050" end="6079" title="Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="Royal Canadian Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q724242" start="6684" end="6695" title="Bill Siksay" label="Bill Siksay"/>
<link wikidata="Q245590" start="6761" end="6772" title="cyclothymia" label="cyclothymia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="6784" end="6800" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q317309" start="6839" end="6852" title="mental health" label="mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723544" start="6927" end="6948" title="2006 Canadian federal election" label="2006 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129348" start="6973" end="6981" title="Hedy Fry" label="Hedy Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554460" start="6999" end="7015" title="Vancouver Centre" label="Vancouver Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190721" start="7160" end="7190" title="2019 Canadian federal election" label="2019 Canadian General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954585" start="7238" end="7259" title="Burnaby North—Seymour" label="Burnaby North—Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846867" start="7412" end="7473" title="British Columbia Government and Service Employees&amp;#x27; Union" label="British Columbia Government and Service Employees&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="7588" end="7592" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188949" start="7677" end="7706" title="Public Services International" label="Public Services International"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="7710" end="7721" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="7937" end="7947" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414657" start="8088" end="8113" title="Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria" label="Global Fund to Fight AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q201603" start="8336" end="8359" title="Simon Fraser University" label="Simon Fraser University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104026" start="8401" end="8404" title="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation" label="CCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983067" start="8419" end="8435" title="J. S. Woodsworth" label="J. S. Woodsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954585" start="8462" end="8483" title="Burnaby North—Seymour" label="Burnaby North—Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914135" start="8496" end="8512" title="Vancouver Centre (provincial electoral district)" label="Vancouver Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928548" start="8525" end="8540" title="Burnaby—Douglas" label="Burnaby—Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928544" start="8565" end="8581" title="Burnaby—Kingsway" label="Burnaby—Kingsway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928541" start="8608" end="8615" title="Burnaby (federal electoral district)" label="Burnaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458227" start="8925" end="8942" title="Cabinet of Canada" label="Cabinet of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q134102" start="9042" end="9057" title="La Francophonie" label="La Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481116" start="9093" end="9110" title="Lambda Foundation" label="Lambda Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029765" start="9424" end="9448" title="Canadian Bar Association" label="Canadian Bar Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029688" start="9475" end="9499" title="Canadian Arab Federation" label="Canadian Arab Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212779" start="9531" end="9535" title="Adar" label="Adar"/>
<link wikidata="Q784786" start="9713" end="9752" title="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="9926" end="9940" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54888" wikidata="Q14872779" url="?curid=54888" title="Telomere">
<text>A telomere (; ) is a region of repetitive nucleotide sequences associated with specialized proteins at the ends of linear chromosomes (see Sequences). Telomeres are a widespread genetic feature most commonly found in eukaryotes. In most, if not all species possessing them, they protect the terminal regions of chromosomal DNA from progressive degradation and ensure the integrity of linear chromosomes by preventing DNA repair systems from mistaking the very ends of the DNA strand for a double-strand break.

== Discovery ==
The existence of a special structure at the ends of chromosomes was independently proposed in 1938 by Hermann Joseph Muller, studying the fruit fly &quot;Drosophila melanogaster&quot;, and in 1939 by Barbara McClintock, working with maize. Muller observed that the ends of irradiated fruit fly chromosomes did not present alterations such as deletions or inversions. He hypothesized the presence of a protective cap, which he coined &quot;telomeres&quot;, from the Greek &quot;telos&quot; (end) and &quot;meros&quot; (part).

In the early 1970s, Soviet theorist Alexey Olovnikov first recognized that chromosomes could not completely replicate their ends; this is known as the &quot;end replication problem&quot;. Building on this, and accommodating Leonard Hayflick&#x27;s idea of limited somatic cell division, Olovnikov suggested that DNA sequences are lost every time a cell replicates until the loss reaches a critical level, at which point cell division ends. According to his theory of marginotomy, DNA sequences at the ends of telomeres are represented by tandem repeats, which create a buffer that determines the number of divisions that a certain cell clone can undergo. Furthermore, it was predicted that a specialized DNA polymerase (originally called a tandem-DNA-polymerase) could extend telomeres in immortal tissues such as germ line, cancer cells and stem cells. It also followed from this hypothesis that organisms with circular genome, such as bacteria, do not have the end replication problem and therefore do not age.

Olovnikov suggested that in germline cells, cells of vegetatively propagated organisms, and immortal cell populations such as most cancer cell lines, an enzyme might be activated to prevent the shortening of DNA termini with each cell division.

In 1975–1977, Elizabeth Blackburn, working as a postdoctoral fellow at Yale University with Joseph G. Gall, discovered the unusual nature of telomeres, with their simple repeated DNA sequences composing chromosome ends. Blackburn, Carol Greider, and Jack Szostak were awarded the 2009 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for the discovery of how chromosomes are protected by telomeres and the enzyme telomerase.

== Structure and function ==

=== End replication problem ===


During DNA replication, DNA polymerase cannot replicate the sequences present at the 3&#x27; ends of the parent strands. This is a consequence of its unidirectional mode of DNA synthesis: it can only attach new nucleotides to an existing 3&#x27;-end (that is, synthesis progresses 5&#x27;-3&#x27;) and thus it requires a primer to initiate replication. On the leading strand (oriented 5&#x27;-3&#x27; within the replication fork), DNA-polymerase continuously replicates from the point of initiation all the way to the strand&#x27;s end with the primer (made of RNA) then being excised and substituted by DNA. The lagging strand, however, is oriented 3&#x27;-5&#x27; with respect to the replication fork so continuous replication by DNA-polymerase is impossible, which necessitates discontinuous replication involving the repeated synthesis of primers further 5&#x27; of the site of initiation (see lagging strand replication). The last primer to be involved in lagging-strand replication sits near the 3&#x27;-end of the template (corresponding to the potential 5&#x27;-end of the lagging-strand). Originally it was believed that the last primer would sit at the very end of the template, thus, once removed, the DNA-polymerase that substitutes primers with DNA (DNA-Pol δ in eukaryotes) would be unable to synthesize the &quot;replacement DNA&quot; from the 5&#x27;-end of the lagging strand so that the template nucleotides previously paired to the last primer would not be replicated. It has since been questioned whether the last lagging strand primer is placed exactly at the 3&#x27;-end of the template and it was demonstrated that it is rather synthesized at a distance of about 70–100 nucleotides which is consistent with the finding that DNA in cultured human cell is shortened by 50–100 base pairs per cell division.

If coding sequences are degraded in this process, potentially vital genetic code would be lost. Telomeres are non-coding, repetitive sequences located at the termini of linear chromosomes to act as buffers for those coding sequences further behind. They &quot;cap&quot; the end-sequences and are progressively degraded in the process of DNA replication.

The &quot;end replication problem&quot; is exclusive to linear chromosomes as circular chromosomes do not have ends lying without reach of DNA-polymerases. Most prokaryotes, relying on circular chromosomes, accordingly do not possess telomeres. A small fraction of bacterial chromosomes (such as those in &quot;Streptomyces&quot;, &quot;Agrobacterium&quot;, and &quot;Borrelia&quot;), however, are linear and possess telomeres, which are very different from those of the eukaryotic chromosomes in structure and function. The known structures of bacterial telomeres take the form of proteins bound to the ends of linear chromosomes, or hairpin loops of single-stranded DNA at the ends of the linear chromosomes.

=== Telomere ends and shelterin ===

At the very 3&#x27;-end of the telomere there is a 300 base pair overhang which can invade the double-stranded portion of the telomere forming a structure known as a T-loop. This loop is analogous to a knot, which stabilizes the telomere, and prevents the telomere ends from being recognized as breakpoints by the DNA repair machinery. Should non-homologous end joining occur at the telomeric ends, chromosomal fusion would result. The T-loop is maintained by several proteins, collectively referred to as the shelterin complex. In humans, the shelterin complex consists of six proteins identified as TRF1, TRF2, TIN2, POT1, TPP1, and RAP1. In many species, the sequence repeats are enriched in guanine, e.g. TTAGGG in vertebrates, which allows the formation of G-quadruplexes, a special conformation of DNA involving non-Watson-Crick base pairing. There are different subtypes depending on the involvement of single- or double-stranded DNA, among other things. There is evidence for the 3&#x27;-overhang in ciliates (that possess telomere repeats similar to those found in vertebrates) to form such G-quadruplexes that accommodate it, rather than a T-loop. G-quadruplexes present an obstacle for enzymes such as DNA-polymerases and are thus thought to be involved in the regulation of replication and transcription.

=== Telomerase ===

Many organisms have a ribonucleoprotein enzyme called telomerase, which carries out the task of adding repetitive nucleotide sequences to the ends of the DNA. Telomerase &quot;replenishes&quot; the telomere &quot;cap&quot; and requires no ATP. In most multicellular eukaryotic organisms, telomerase is active only in germ cells, some types of stem cells such as embryonic stem cells, and certain white blood cells. Telomerase can be reactivated and telomeres reset back to an embryonic state by somatic cell nuclear transfer. The steady shortening of telomeres with each replication in somatic (body) cells may have a role in senescence and in the prevention of cancer. This is because the telomeres act as a sort of time-delay &quot;fuse&quot;, eventually running out after a certain number of cell divisions and resulting in the eventual loss of vital genetic information from the cell&#x27;s chromosome with future divisions.

=== Length ===

Telomere length varies greatly between species, from approximately 300 base pairs in yeast to many kilobases in humans, and usually is composed of arrays of guanine-rich, six- to eight-base-pair-long repeats. Eukaryotic telomeres normally terminate with 3′ single-stranded-DNA overhang ranging from 75 to 300 bases, which is essential for telomere maintenance and capping. Multiple proteins binding single- and double-stranded telomere DNA have been identified. These function in both telomere maintenance and capping. Telomeres form large loop structures called telomere loops, or T-loops. Here, the single-stranded DNA curls around in a long circle, stabilized by telomere-binding proteins. At the very end of the T-loop, the single-stranded telomere DNA is held onto a region of double-stranded DNA by the telomere strand disrupting the double-helical DNA, and base pairing to one of the two strands. This triple-stranded structure is called a displacement loop or D-loop.

== Shortening ==

=== Oxidative damage ===

Apart from the end replication problem, in vitro studies have shown that telomeres accumulate damage due to oxidative stress and that oxidative stress-mediated DNA damage has a major influence on telomere shortening in vivo. There is a multitude of ways in which oxidative stress, mediated by reactive oxygen species (ROS), can lead to DNA damage; however, it is yet unclear whether the elevated rate in telomeres is brought about by their inherent susceptibility or a diminished activity of DNA repair systems in these regions. Despite widespread agreement of the findings, widespread flaws regarding measurement and sampling have been pointed out; for example, a suspected species and tissue dependency of oxidative damage to telomeres is said to be insufficiently accounted for. Population-based studies have indicated an interaction between anti-oxidant intake and telomere length. In the Long Island Breast Cancer Study Project (LIBCSP), authors found a moderate increase in breast cancer risk among women with the shortest telomeres and lower dietary intake of beta carotene, vitamin C or E. These results suggest that cancer risk due to telomere shortening may interact with other mechanisms of DNA damage, specifically oxidative stress.

=== Association with aging ===
Although telomeres shorten during the lifetime of an individual, it is telomere shortening-rate rather than telomere length that is associated with the lifespan of a species. Critically short telomeres trigger a DNA damage response and cellular senescence. Mice have much longer telomeres, but a greatly accelerated telomere shortening-rate and greatly reduced lifespan compared to humans and elephants.

Telomere shortening is associated with aging, mortality, and aging-related diseases in experimental animals. Although many factors can affect human lifespan, such as smoking, diet, and exercise, as persons approach the upper limit of human life expectancy, longer telomeres may be associated with lifespan.

=== Potential effect of psychological stress ===

Meta-analyses found that increased perceived psychological stress was associated with a small decrease in telomere length—but that these associations attenuate to no significant association when accounting for publication bias. The literature concerning telomeres as integrative biomarkers of exposure to stress and adversity is dominated by cross-sectional and correlational studies, which makes causal interpretation problematic. A 2020 review argued that the relationship between psychosocial stress and telomere length appears strongest for stress experienced in utero or early life.

== Lengthening ==

The phenomenon of limited cellular division was first observed by Leonard Hayflick, and is now referred to as the Hayflick limit. Significant discoveries were subsequently made by a group of scientists organized at Geron Corporation by Geron&#x27;s founder Michael D. West, that tied telomere shortening with the Hayflick limit. The cloning of the catalytic component of telomerase enabled experiments to test whether the expression of telomerase at levels sufficient to prevent telomere shortening was capable of immortalizing human cells. Telomerase was demonstrated in a 1998 publication in &quot;Science&quot; to be capable of extending cell lifespan, and now is well-recognized as capable of immortalizing human somatic cells.

Two studies on long-lived seabirds demonstrate that the role of telomeres is far from being understood. In 2003, scientists observed that the telomeres of Leach&#x27;s storm-petrel (&quot;Oceanodroma leucorhoa&quot;) seem to lengthen with chronological age, the first observed instance of such behaviour of telomeres.

A study reported that telomere length of different mammalian species correlates inversely rather than directly with lifespan, and concluded that the contribution of telomere length to lifespan remains controversial. There is little evidence that, in humans, telomere length is a significant biomarker of normal aging with respect to important cognitive and physical abilities.

== Sequences ==
Experimentally verified and predicted telomere sequence motifs from more than 9000 species are collected in research community curated database TeloBase. Some of the experimentally verified telomere nucleotide sequences are also listed in Telomerase Database website (see nucleic acid notation for letter representations).

== Research on disease risk ==

Preliminary research indicates that disease risk in aging may be associated with telomere shortening, senescent cells, or SASP (senescence-associated secretory phenotype).

== Measurement ==

Several techniques are currently employed to assess average telomere length in eukaryotic cells. One method is the Terminal Restriction Fragment (TRF) southern blot. There is a Web-based Analyser of the Length of Telomeres (WALTER), software processing the TRF pictures. A Real-Time PCR assay for telomere length involves determining the Telomere-to-Single Copy Gene (T/S) ratio, which is demonstrated to be proportional to the average telomere length in a cell.

Tools have also been developed to estimate the length of telomere from whole genome sequencing (WGS) experiments. Amongst these are TelSeq, Telomerecat and telomereHunter. Length estimation from WGS typically works by differentiating telomere sequencing reads and then inferring the length of telomere that produced that number of reads. These methods have been shown to correlate with preexisting methods of estimation such as PCR and TRF. Flow-FISH is used to quantify the length of telomeres in human white blood cells. A semi-automated method for measuring the average length of telomeres with Flow FISH was published in Nature Protocols in 2006.

While multiple companies offer telomere length measurement services, the utility of these measurements for widespread clinical or personal use has been questioned. Nobel Prize winner Elizabeth Blackburn, who was co-founder of one company, promoted the clinical utility of telomere length measures.

== In wildlife ==

During the last two decades, eco-evolutionary studies have investigated the relevance of life-history traits and environmental conditions on telomeres of wildlife. Most of these studies have been conducted in endotherms, i.e. birds and mammals. They have provided evidence for the inheritance of telomere length; however, heritability estimates vary greatly within and among species. Age and telomere length often negatively correlate in vertebrates, but this decline is variable among taxa and linked to the method used for estimating telomere length. In contrast, the available information shows no sex differences in telomere length across vertebrates. Phylogeny and life history traits such as body size or the pace of life can also affect telomere dynamics. For example, it has been described across species of birds and mammals. In 2019, a meta-analysis confirmed that the exposure to stressors (e.g. pathogen infection, competition, reproductive effort and high activity level) was associated with shorter telomeres across different animal taxa.

Studies on ectotherms, and other non-mammalian organisms, show that there is no single universal model of telomere erosion; rather, there is wide variation in relevant dynamics across Metazoa, and even within smaller taxonomic groups these patterns appear diverse.

== See also ==

*Epigenetic clock
*Centromere
*DNA damage theory of aging
*Immortality
*Maximum life span
*Rejuvenation (aging)
*Senescence, biological aging
*Tankyrase
*Telomere-binding protein
*G-quartet
*Immortal DNA strand hypothesis

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
*Telomeres and Telomerase: The Means to the End Nobel Lecture by Elizabeth Blackburn, which includes a reference to the impact of stress, and pessimism on telomere length
*Telomerase and the Consequences of Telomere Dysfunction Nobel Lecture by Carol Greider
*DNA Ends: Just the Beginning Nobel Lecture by Jack Szostak</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14872779" start="2" end="10" title="Telomere" label="telomere"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="42" end="52" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="122" end="132" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="139" end="148" title="#Sequences" label="Sequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="217" end="226" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="311" end="326" title="DNA" label="chromosomal DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="417" end="427" title="DNA repair" label="DNA repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="489" end="508" title="double-strand break" label="double-strand break"/>
<link wikidata="Q83598" start="629" end="650" title="Hermann Joseph Muller" label="Hermann Joseph Muller"/>
<link wikidata="Q130888" start="681" end="704" title="Drosophila melanogaster" label="Drosophila melanogaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q199654" start="727" end="745" title="Barbara McClintock" label="Barbara McClintock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832627" start="1089" end="1105" title="Alexey Olovnikov" label="Alexey Olovnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819009" start="1277" end="1293" title="Leonard Hayflick" label="Leonard Hayflick"/>
<link wikidata="Q725508" start="1317" end="1329" title="somatic cell" label="somatic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q26321" start="2327" end="2346" title="Elizabeth Blackburn" label="Elizabeth Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="2384" end="2399" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707057" start="2405" end="2419" title="Joseph G. Gall" label="Joseph G. Gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q26322" start="2544" end="2557" title="Carol Greider" label="Carol Greider"/>
<link wikidata="Q104600" start="2563" end="2575" title="Jack Szostak" label="Jack Szostak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2593" end="2597" title="List of Nobel laureates in Physiology or Medicine#2001–current" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="2598" end="2635" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="2708" end="2714" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q331839" start="2715" end="2725" title="telomerase" label="telomerase"/>
<link wikidata="Q206286" start="2816" end="2830" title="DNA polymerase" label="DNA polymerase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995607" start="2877" end="2889" title="Directionality (molecular biology)" label="3&amp;#x27; ends"/>
<link wikidata="Q334828" start="3113" end="3119" title="Primer (molecular biology)" label="primer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="3353" end="3356" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q130996" start="3690" end="3716" title="lagging strand" label="lagging strand replication"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="4589" end="4598" title="base pair" label="base pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q188909" start="4604" end="4617" title="cell division" label="cell division"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="5136" end="5146" title="prokaryote" label="prokaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="5240" end="5248" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144013" start="5286" end="5298" title="Streptomyces" label="Streptomyces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700446" start="5312" end="5325" title="Agrobacterium" label="Agrobacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q115528" start="5343" end="5351" title="Borrelia" label="Borrelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="5557" end="5565" title="proteins" label="proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q18031948" start="6325" end="6329" title="TERF1" label="TRF1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18031949" start="6331" end="6335" title="TERF2" label="TRF2"/>
<link wikidata="Q18038212" start="6337" end="6341" title="TINF2" label="TIN2"/>
<link wikidata="Q18037791" start="6343" end="6347" title="POT1" label="POT1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18045840" start="6349" end="6353" title="ACD (gene)" label="TPP1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18040989" start="6359" end="6363" title="TERF2IP" label="RAP1"/>
<link wikidata="Q169313" start="6419" end="6426" title="guanine" label="guanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="6443" end="6453" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q411641" start="6486" end="6498" title="G-quadruplex" label="G-quadruplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q106345" start="6732" end="6739" title="ciliate" label="ciliate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="6798" end="6808" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q281579" start="7379" end="7388" title="germ cell" label="germ cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q48196" start="7405" end="7414" title="stem cell" label="stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151519" start="7424" end="7444" title="embryonic stem cells" label="embryonic stem cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q42395" start="7458" end="7474" title="white blood cell" label="white blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939923" start="7557" end="7586" title="somatic cell nuclear transfer" label="somatic cell nuclear transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070979" start="7688" end="7698" title="senescence" label="senescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="7724" end="7730" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="8079" end="8088" title="base pair" label="base pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q169313" start="8165" end="8172" title="guanine" label="guanine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8262" end="8293" title="Sticky and blunt ends#Overhangs and sticky ends" label="3′ single-stranded-DNA overhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697810" start="8674" end="8698" title="telomere-binding protein" label="telomere-binding protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774404" start="8955" end="8972" title="displacement loop" label="displacement loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q221681" start="9069" end="9077" title="in vitro" label="in vitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q898814" start="9137" end="9153" title="oxidative stress" label="oxidative stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="9245" end="9252" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q424361" start="9322" end="9345" title="reactive oxygen species" label="reactive oxygen species"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="10518" end="10528" title="DNA damage" label="DNA damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q9075999" start="10542" end="10561" title="cellular senescence" label="cellular senescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="10951" end="10966" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="11069" end="11082" title="Meta-analysis" label="Meta-analyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500368" start="11114" end="11134" title="psychological stress" label="psychological stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q919364" start="11279" end="11295" title="publication bias" label="publication bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819009" start="11743" end="11759" title="Leonard Hayflick" label="Leonard Hayflick"/>
<link wikidata="Q899798" start="11791" end="11805" title="Hayflick limit" label="Hayflick limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552410" start="11892" end="11909" title="Geron Corporation" label="Geron Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829676" start="11934" end="11949" title="Michael D. West" label="Michael D. West"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="12277" end="12284" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="12436" end="12443" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q211986" start="12565" end="12590" title="Leach&amp;#x27;s storm-petrel" label="Leach&amp;#x27;s storm-petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="13322" end="13332" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068222" start="13395" end="13416" title="nucleic acid notation" label="nucleic acid notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9075999" start="13581" end="13595" title="senescent cell" label="senescent cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q85800340" start="13607" end="13648" title="senescence-associated secretory phenotype" label="senescence-associated secretory phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q176996" start="13954" end="13957" title="Polymerase chain reaction" label="PCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068526" start="14206" end="14229" title="whole genome sequencing" label="whole genome sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462042" start="14576" end="14585" title="Flow-FISH" label="Flow-FISH"/>
<link wikidata="Q26321" start="14970" end="14989" title="Elizabeth Blackburn" label="Elizabeth Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q907248" start="15314" end="15323" title="endotherm" label="endotherm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503548" start="15427" end="15439" title="heritability" label="heritability"/>
<link wikidata="Q587698" start="16170" end="16179" title="ectotherm" label="ectotherm"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="16343" end="16350" title="Metazoa" label="Metazoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154683" start="16442" end="16458" title="Epigenetic clock" label="Epigenetic clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q14762596" start="16460" end="16470" title="Centromere" label="Centromere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205751" start="16472" end="16498" title="DNA damage theory of aging" label="DNA damage theory of aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="16500" end="16511" title="Immortality" label="Immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q13419831" start="16513" end="16530" title="Maximum life span" label="Maximum life span"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297001" start="16532" end="16552" title="Rejuvenation (aging)" label="Rejuvenation (aging)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070979" start="16554" end="16564" title="Senescence" label="Senescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q18033189" start="16584" end="16593" title="Tankyrase" label="Tankyrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697810" start="16595" end="16619" title="Telomere-binding protein" label="Telomere-binding protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q411641" start="16621" end="16630" title="G-quadruplex" label="G-quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892307" start="16632" end="16662" title="Immortal DNA strand hypothesis" label="Immortal DNA strand hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q26321" start="16779" end="16798" title="Elizabeth Blackburn" label="Elizabeth Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q26322" start="16959" end="16972" title="Carol Greider" label="Carol Greider"/>
<link wikidata="Q104600" start="17020" end="17032" title="Jack Szostak" label="Jack Szostak"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54889" wikidata="Q1142841" url="?curid=54889" title="Tonkatsu">
<text>is a Japanese dish that consists of a breaded, deep-fried pork cutlet. It involves coating slices of pork with panko (bread crumbs), and then frying them in oil. The two main types are fillet and loin. Tonkatsu is also the basis of other dishes such as &quot;katsukarē&quot; and &quot;katsudon&quot;.

== Etymology ==
The word &quot;tonkatsu&quot; is a combination of the Sino-Japanese word &quot;ton&quot; () meaning &quot;pig&quot;, and &quot;katsu&quot; (), which is a shortened form of &quot;katsuretsu&quot; (), an old transliteration of the English word &quot;cutlet&quot;, which was in turn adopted from the French word .

== History ==
Tonkatsu originated in Japan during the Meiji Era in the late 19th century, a dish derived from a French dish known as &quot;côtelette de veau&quot;, a veal cutlet coated in breadcrumbs and fried in a pan with butter.

European &quot;katsuretsu&quot; (loanword/gairaigo for cutlet) was usually made with beef; the pork version was created in 1899 at a restaurant serving European-style foods named Rengatei in Tokyo, Japan. It is a type of yōshoku—Japanese versions of European cuisine invented in the late 19th and early 20th centuries—and was called &quot;katsuretsu&quot; or simply &quot;katsu&quot;.

== Preparation and serving ==

Either a or cut may be used; the meat is usually salted, peppered, dredged lightly in flour, dipped into beaten egg and then coated with panko (bread crumbs) before being deep fried.

Tonkatsu is then sliced into bits and served, commonly with shredded cabbage. It is most commonly eaten with a thick Worcestershire-style sauce called tonkatsu sauce or simply &quot;sōsu&quot; (sauce), &quot;karashi&quot; (mustard), and perhaps a slice of lemon. It is usually served with rice, miso soup and &quot;tsukemono&quot; and eaten with chopsticks. It may also be served with &quot;ponzu&quot; and grated &quot;daikon&quot; instead of tonkatsu sauce.

== Variations ==

Tonkatsu is also popular as &quot;katsukarē&quot; served on Japanese curry, or as &quot;katsudon&quot;, simmered with egg and broth, then served on a big bowl of rice; there is also katsu rice, which is pork cutlet served on rice topped with demi-glace sauce. Another popular variation, &quot;katsu-sando&quot; or pork cutlet sandwich, is said to be originated from the Isen, a tonkatsu restaurant. In the 1930s, the manager of the Isen came up with the concept, then improved it by making the sandwich smaller so that its clientele of local geishas could enjoy it without wearing off their lipstick.

In Nagoya and surrounding areas, miso katsu, tonkatsu eaten with a hatchō miso-based sauce, is a speciality.

Variations on tonkatsu may be made by sandwiching an ingredient such as cheese or shiso leaf between the meat, and then breading and frying.

Variations of &quot;katsu&quot; other than pork:

* Chicken katsu () or tori katsu (), which uses chicken instead, often appears in Hawaiian plate lunches.
* Menchi-katsu () or minchi katsu ( mince katsu), is a minced meat patty, breaded and deep fried.
* Hamu katsu ( ham katsu), a similar dish made from ham, is usually considered a budget alternative to tonkatsu.
* Gyū katsu ( beef katsu), also known as bīfu katsu, is popular in the Kansai region around Osaka and Kobe.

In general, breaded and deep-fried foods are called &quot;furai&quot; (&quot;fry&quot;), such as &quot;ebi-furai&quot; (fried prawn) and &quot;aji-furai&quot; (fried horse mackerel), but fried meat such as pork, beef and chicken is referred to as &quot;katsu&quot; (cutlet). &quot;Katsu&quot; and &quot;furai&quot; differ from tempura, which is not breaded but battered and typically fried in sesame oil.

In recent years, chicken katsu curry has become extremely popular in the United Kingdom, to the point that other varieties of Japanese curry and curry sauce are sometimes referred to as katsu erroneously. 
== See also ==
* 
* Japanese cuisine
* List of Japanese dishes – a category of deep-fried dishes in Japanese cuisine
* List of pork dishes
* Milanesa
* Schnitzel
* Dongaseu – a Korean dish derived from &quot;tonkatsu&quot;
* Escalope

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q658413" start="38" end="45" title="breaded" label="breaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q854618" start="47" end="57" title="Deep frying" label="deep-fried"/>
<link wikidata="Q191768" start="58" end="62" title="pork" label="pork"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="111" end="116" title="Bread crumbs#Panko" label="panko"/>
<link wikidata="Q658413" start="118" end="130" title="bread crumbs" label="bread crumbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051978" start="259" end="268" title="katsukarē" label="katsukarē"/>
<link wikidata="Q702028" start="285" end="293" title="katsudon" label="katsudon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872500" start="566" end="572" title="cutlet" label="cutlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="615" end="621" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="684" end="693" title="Meiji Era" label="Meiji Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661" start="742" end="748" title="French cuisine" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="896" end="904" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491365" start="905" end="913" title="gairaigo" label="gairaigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276139" start="1084" end="1091" title="yōshoku" label="yōshoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q579316" start="1113" end="1129" title="European cuisine" label="European cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36465" start="1366" end="1371" title="flour" label="flour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1417" end="1422" title="Bread crumbs#Panko" label="panko"/>
<link wikidata="Q658413" start="1424" end="1436" title="bread crumbs" label="bread crumbs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1581" end="1595" title="Worcestershire sauce#Japan" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636014" start="1615" end="1629" title="tonkatsu sauce" label="tonkatsu sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728977" start="1672" end="1679" title="karashi" label="karashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q471866" start="1759" end="1768" title="miso soup" label="miso soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7480691" start="1779" end="1788" title="tsukemono" label="tsukemono"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722814" start="1855" end="1860" title="ponzu" label="ponzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224757" start="1884" end="1890" title="daikon" label="daikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051978" start="1977" end="1986" title="katsukarē" label="katsukarē"/>
<link wikidata="Q701870" start="2003" end="2017" title="Japanese curry" label="Japanese curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q702028" start="2031" end="2039" title="katsudon" label="katsudon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4247887" start="2236" end="2247" title="katsu-sando" label="katsu-sando"/>
<link wikidata="Q82723" start="2485" end="2492" title="Geisha" label="geishas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="2548" end="2554" title="Nagoya" label="Nagoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q235169" start="2578" end="2582" title="miso" label="miso"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2612" end="2623" title="Okazaki, Aichi#Hatch%C5%8D miso" label="hatchō miso"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="2727" end="2733" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168518" start="2737" end="2742" title="perilla" label="shiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825801" start="2849" end="2862" title="Chicken katsu" label="Chicken katsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825801" start="2869" end="2879" title="Chicken katsu" label="tori katsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496403" start="2929" end="2951" title="plate lunch" label="Hawaiian plate lunches"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816534" start="2955" end="2967" title="Menchi-katsu" label="Menchi-katsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q170486" start="3103" end="3106" title="ham" label="ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q164256" start="3235" end="3241" title="Kansai" label="Kansai"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="3256" end="3261" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="3266" end="3270" title="Kobe" label="Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28692797" start="3331" end="3336" title="furai" label="furai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905623" start="3439" end="3453" title="horse mackerel" label="horse mackerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q328709" start="3600" end="3607" title="tempura" label="tempura"/>
<link wikidata="Q29493" start="3634" end="3642" title="Batter_(cooking)" label="battered"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3752" end="3766" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="3905" end="3921" title="Japanese cuisine" label="Japanese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3924" end="3947" title="List of Japanese dishes#Deep-fried dishes (agemono, 揚げ物)" label="List of Japanese dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098837" start="4004" end="4023" title="List of pork dishes" label="List of pork dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q30326666" start="4026" end="4034" title="Milanesa" label="Milanesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11293688" start="4037" end="4046" title="Schnitzel" label="Schnitzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090435" start="4049" end="4057" title="Dongaseu" label="Dongaseu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099" start="4110" end="4118" title="Escalope" label="Escalope"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54894" wikidata="Q201513" url="?curid=54894" title="Edward Witten">
<text>Edward Witten (born August 26, 1951) is an American theoretical physicist known for his contributions to string theory, topological quantum field theory, and various areas of mathematics. He is a professor emeritus in the school of natural sciences at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. Witten is a researcher in string theory, quantum gravity, supersymmetric quantum field theories, and other areas of mathematical physics. Witten&#x27;s work has also significantly impacted pure mathematics. In 1990, he became the first physicist to be awarded a Fields Medal by the International Mathematical Union, for his mathematical insights in physics, such as his 1981 proof of the positive energy theorem in general relativity, and his interpretation of the Jones invariants of knots as Feynman integrals. He is considered the practical founder of M-theory.

==Early life and education==
Witten was born on August 26, 1951, in Baltimore, Maryland, to a Jewish family, as the eldest of four children. His brother Matt Witten became a writer, and his brother Jesse Amnon Witten became a law partner in the firm Faegre Drinker Biddle &amp; Reath. The three brothers&#x27; sister Celia M. Witten earned a Ph.D. in mathematics from Stanford University and then an M.D. from the University of Miami. Edward Witten is the son of Lorraine (born Wollach) Witten and Louis Witten, a theoretical physicist specializing in gravitation and general relativity.

Witten attended the Park School of Baltimore (class of 1968), and received his Bachelor of Arts degree with a major in history and minor in linguistics from Brandeis University in 1971.

He had aspirations in journalism and politics and published articles in both &quot;The New Republic&quot; and &quot;The Nation&quot; in the late 1960s. In 1972, he worked for six months on George McGovern&#x27;s presidential campaign.

Witten attended the University of Michigan for one semester as an economics graduate student before dropping out. He returned to academia, enrolling in applied mathematics at Princeton University in 1973, then shifting departments and receiving a PhD in physics in 1976 and completing a dissertation, &quot;Some problems in the short distance analysis of gauge theories&quot;, under the supervision of David Gross. He held a fellowship at Harvard University (1976–77), visited Oxford University (1977–78), was a junior fellow in the Harvard Society of Fellows (1977–1980), and held a MacArthur Foundation fellowship (1982).

==Research==
===Fields medal work===
Witten was awarded the Fields Medal by the International Mathematical Union in 1990.

In a written address to the ICM, Michael Atiyah said of Witten:


As an example of Witten&#x27;s work in pure mathematics, Atiyah cites his application of techniques from quantum field theory to the mathematical subject of low-dimensional topology. In the late 1980s, Witten coined the term &quot;topological quantum field theory&quot; for a certain type of physical theory in which the expectation values of observable quantities encode information about the topology of spacetime. In particular, Witten realized that a physical theory now called Chern–Simons theory could provide a framework for understanding the mathematical theory of knots and 3-manifolds. Although Witten&#x27;s work was based on the mathematically ill-defined notion of a Feynman path integral and therefore not mathematically rigorous, mathematicians were able to systematically develop Witten&#x27;s ideas, leading to the theory of Reshetikhin–Turaev invariants.

Another result for which Witten was awarded the Fields Medal was his proof in 1981 of the positive energy theorem in general relativity. This theorem asserts that (under appropriate assumptions) the total energy of a gravitating system is always positive and can be zero only if the geometry of spacetime is that of flat Minkowski space. It establishes Minkowski space as a stable ground state of the gravitational field. While the original proof of this result due to Richard Schoen and Shing-Tung Yau used variational methods, Witten&#x27;s proof used ideas from supergravity theory to simplify the argument.

A third area mentioned in Atiyah&#x27;s address is Witten&#x27;s work relating supersymmetry and Morse theory, a branch of mathematics that studies the topology of manifolds using the concept of a differentiable function. Witten&#x27;s work gave a physical proof of a classical result, the Morse inequalities, by interpreting the theory in terms of supersymmetric quantum mechanics.

===M-theory===
By the mid 1990s, physicists working on string theory had developed five different consistent versions of the theory. These versions are known as type I, type IIA, type IIB, and the two flavors of heterotic string theory (SO(32) and E8×E8). The thinking was that of these five candidate theories, only one was the actual correct theory of everything, and that theory was the one whose low-energy limit matched the physics observed in our world today.

Speaking at Strings &#x27;95 conference at University of Southern California, Witten made the surprising suggestion that these five string theories were in fact not distinct theories, but different limits of a single theory, which he called M-theory. Witten&#x27;s proposal was based on the observation that the five string theories can be mapped to one another by certain rules called dualities and are identified by these dualities. It led to a flurry of work now known as the second superstring revolution.

===Other work===
Another of Witten&#x27;s contributions to physics was to the result of gauge/gravity duality. In 1997, Juan Maldacena formulated a result known as the AdS/CFT correspondence, which establishes a relationship between certain quantum field theories and theories of quantum gravity. Maldacena&#x27;s discovery has dominated high-energy theoretical physics for the past 15 years because of its applications to theoretical problems in quantum gravity and quantum field theory. Witten&#x27;s foundational work following Maldacena&#x27;s result has shed light on this relationship.

In collaboration with Nathan Seiberg, Witten established several powerful results in quantum field theories. In their paper on string theory and noncommutative geometry, Seiberg and Witten studied certain noncommutative quantum field theories that arise as limits of string theory. In another well-known paper, they studied aspects of supersymmetric gauge theory. The latter paper, combined with Witten&#x27;s earlier work on topological quantum field theory, led to developments in the topology of smooth 4-manifolds, in particular the notion of Seiberg–Witten invariants.

With Anton Kapustin, Witten has made deep mathematical connections between S-duality of gauge theories and the geometric Langlands correspondence. Partly in collaboration with Seiberg, one of his recent interests includes aspects of field theoretical description of topological phases in condensed matter and non-supersymmetric dualities in field theories that, among other things, are of high relevance in condensed matter theory. In 2016, he has also brought tensor models to the relevance of holographic and quantum gravity theories, by using them as a generalization of the Sachdev–Ye–Kitaev model.

Witten has published influential and insightful work in many aspects of quantum field theories and mathematical physics, including the physics and mathematics of anomalies, integrability, dualities, localization, and homologies. Many of his results have deeply influenced areas in theoretical physics (often well beyond the original context of his results), including string theory, quantum gravity and topological condensed matter. In particular, Witten is known for collaborating with Ruth Britto on a method calculating scattering amplitudes known as the BCFW recursion relations.

==Awards and honors==
Witten has been honored with numerous awards including a MacArthur Grant (1982), the Fields Medal (1990), the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement (1997), the Nemmers Prize in Mathematics (2000), the National Medal of Science (2002), Pythagoras Award (2005), the Henri Poincaré Prize (2006), the Crafoord Prize (2008), the Lorentz Medal (2010) the Isaac Newton Medal (2010) and the Breakthrough Prize in Fundamental Physics (2012). Since 1999, he has been a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (London), and in March 2016 was elected an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. Pope Benedict XVI appointed Witten as a member of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences (2006). He also appeared in the list of &quot;Time&quot; magazine&#x27;s 100 most influential people of 2004. In 2012, he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society. Witten was elected as a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1984, a member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1988, and a member of the American Philosophical Society in 1993. In May 2022 he was awarded an honorary Doctor of Sciences from the University of Pennsylvania.

In an informal poll at a 1990 cosmology conference, Witten received the largest number of mentions as &quot;the smartest living physicist&quot;.

==Personal life==
Witten has been married to Chiara Nappi, a professor of physics at Princeton University, since 1979. They have two daughters and a son. Their daughter Ilana B. Witten is a neuroscientist at Princeton University, and daughter Daniela Witten is a biostatistician at the University of Washington.

Witten sits on the board of directors of Americans for Peace Now and on the advisory council of J Street. He supports the two-state solution and advocates a boycott of Israeli institutions and economic activity beyond its 1967 borders, though not of Israel itself. Witten lived in Israel for a year in the 1960s.

==Selected publications==
* &quot;Some Problems in the Short Distance Analysis of Gauge Theories&quot;. Princeton University, 1976. (Dissertation.)
* Roman Jackiw, David Gross, Sam B. Treiman, Edward Witten, Bruno Zumino. &quot;Current Algebra and Anomalies: A Set of Lecture Notes and Papers&quot;. World Scientific, 1985.
* Green, M., John H. Schwarz, and E. Witten. &quot;Superstring Theory. Vol. 1, Introduction&quot;. Cambridge Monographs on Mathematical Physics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1988. .
* Green, M., John H. Schwarz, and E. Witten. &quot;Superstring Theory. Vol. 2, Loop Amplitudes, Anomalies and Phenomenology&quot;. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1988. .
* &quot;Quantum fields and strings: a course for mathematicians&quot;. Vols. 1, 2. Material from the Special Year on Quantum Field Theory held at the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ, 1996–1997. Edited by Pierre Deligne, Pavel Etingof, Daniel S. Freed, Lisa C. Jeffrey, David Kazhdan, John W. Morgan, David R. Morrison and Edward Witten. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI; Institute for Advanced Study (IAS), Princeton, NJ, 1999. Vol. 1: xxii+723 pp.; Vol. 2: pp. i–xxiv and 727–1501. , 81–06 (81T30 81Txx).

==References==
==External links==

* Faculty webpage
* Publications on ArXiv
* 
* A Physicist&#x27;s Physicist Ponders the Nature of Reality, Interview with Nathalie Wolchover in &quot;Quanta Magazine&quot;, November 28, 2017</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q201513" start="0" end="13" title="Edward Witten" label="Edward Witten"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="52" end="73" title="theoretical physics" label="theoretical physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33198" start="105" end="118" title="string theory" label="string theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q721094" start="120" end="152" title="topological quantum field theory" label="topological quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="175" end="186" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="232" end="247" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q635642" start="256" end="284" title="Institute for Advanced Study" label="Institute for Advanced Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="288" end="297" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q33198" start="325" end="338" title="string theory" label="string theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q234181" start="340" end="355" title="quantum gravity" label="quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193442" start="357" end="394" title="supersymmetry" label="supersymmetric quantum field theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="561" end="573" title="Fields Medal" label="Fields Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q828490" start="581" end="613" title="International Mathematical Union" label="International Mathematical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179283" start="687" end="710" title="positive energy theorem" label="positive energy theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="714" end="732" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q369638" start="764" end="769" title="Vaughan Jones" label="Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q898323" start="793" end="809" title="Feynman integral" label="Feynman integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q232184" start="854" end="862" title="M-theory" label="M-theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="933" end="942" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="944" end="952" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="959" end="965" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789549" start="1018" end="1029" title="Matt Witten" label="Matt Witten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307714" start="1115" end="1148" title="Faegre Drinker Biddle &amp;amp; Reath" label="Faegre Drinker Biddle &amp;amp; Reath"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="1233" end="1252" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="1279" end="1298" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q620394" start="1363" end="1375" title="Louis Witten" label="Louis Witten"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="1379" end="1400" title="theoretical physicist" label="theoretical physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="1417" end="1428" title="gravity" label="gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="1433" end="1451" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138002" start="1474" end="1498" title="Park School of Baltimore" label="Park School of Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="1533" end="1549" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="1573" end="1580" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="1594" end="1605" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q49119" start="1611" end="1630" title="Brandeis University" label="Brandeis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329873" start="1724" end="1740" title="The New Republic" label="The New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="1757" end="1767" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542316" start="1830" end="1874" title="George McGovern 1972 presidential campaign" label="George McGovern&amp;#x27;s presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="1897" end="1919" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33521" start="2029" end="2048" title="applied mathematics" label="applied mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="2052" end="2072" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="2124" end="2127" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q40262" start="2279" end="2290" title="David Gross" label="David Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="2316" end="2334" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="2354" end="2371" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543268" start="2461" end="2481" title="MacArthur Fellows Program" label="MacArthur Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="2562" end="2574" title="Fields Medal" label="Fields Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q828490" start="2582" end="2614" title="International Mathematical Union" label="International Mathematical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q860611" start="2653" end="2656" title="International Congress of Mathematicians" label="ICM"/>
<link wikidata="Q208356" start="2658" end="2672" title="Michael Atiyah" label="Michael Atiyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="2796" end="2816" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12294298" start="2848" end="2872" title="low-dimensional topology" label="low-dimensional topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q721094" start="2922" end="2954" title="topological quantum field theory" label="topological quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="3012" end="3029" title="expectation value" label="expectation value"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="3085" end="3093" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="3097" end="3106" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528019" start="3173" end="3192" title="Chern–Simons theory" label="Chern–Simons theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188853" start="3264" end="3269" title="knot (mathematics)" label="knots"/>
<link wikidata="Q526901" start="3274" end="3284" title="3-manifold" label="3-manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q898323" start="3371" end="3392" title="Feynman path integral" label="Feynman path integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890076" start="3411" end="3434" title="mathematical rigor" label="mathematically rigorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q85796659" start="3533" end="3561" title="Reshetikhin–Turaev invariant" label="Reshetikhin–Turaev invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179283" start="3655" end="3678" title="positive energy theorem" label="positive energy theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="3682" end="3700" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="3770" end="3776" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="3860" end="3869" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q464794" start="3886" end="3901" title="Minkowski space" label="Minkowski space"/>
<link wikidata="Q558066" start="3966" end="3985" title="gravitational field" label="gravitational field"/>
<link wikidata="Q455610" start="4034" end="4048" title="Richard Schoen" label="Richard Schoen"/>
<link wikidata="Q334760" start="4053" end="4067" title="Shing-Tung Yau" label="Shing-Tung Yau"/>
<link wikidata="Q216861" start="4073" end="4092" title="variational methods" label="variational methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q958871" start="4130" end="4149" title="supergravity theory" label="supergravity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q193442" start="4256" end="4269" title="supersymmetry" label="supersymmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296951" start="4274" end="4286" title="Morse theory" label="Morse theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="4329" end="4337" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="4341" end="4350" title="manifolds" label="manifolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q783507" start="4374" end="4397" title="differentiable function" label="differentiable function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4467" end="4485" title="Morse theory#Morse inequalities" label="Morse inequalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q587607" start="4526" end="4558" title="supersymmetric quantum mechanics" label="supersymmetric quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q33198" start="4616" end="4629" title="string theory" label="string theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276860" start="4722" end="4728" title="type I string" label="type I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556395" start="4730" end="4738" title="type IIA string" label="type IIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556395" start="4740" end="4748" title="type IIB string" label="type IIB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140761" start="4773" end="4789" title="heterotic string" label="heterotic string"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783179" start="4798" end="4804" title="special orthogonal group" label="SO(32)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200244" start="4809" end="4814" title="E8 (mathematics)" label="E8×E8"/>
<link wikidata="Q18359" start="4905" end="4925" title="theory of everything" label="theory of everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q132200651" start="5040" end="5047" title="Strings (conference)" label="Strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="5071" end="5104" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q232184" start="5269" end="5277" title="M-theory" label="M-theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q780099" start="5414" end="5423" title="String duality" label="dualities"/>
<link wikidata="Q608321" start="5507" end="5536" title="second superstring revolution" label="second superstring revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q560811" start="5659" end="5673" title="Juan Maldacena" label="Juan Maldacena"/>
<link wikidata="Q543413" start="5707" end="5729" title="AdS/CFT correspondence" label="AdS/CFT correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="5780" end="5802" title="quantum field theories" label="quantum field theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q234181" start="5819" end="5834" title="quantum gravity" label="quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q706652" start="6154" end="6168" title="Nathan Seiberg" label="Nathan Seiberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746792" start="6277" end="6300" title="noncommutative geometry" label="noncommutative geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049223" start="6337" end="6374" title="noncommutative quantum field theory" label="noncommutative quantum field theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526767" start="6467" end="6494" title="supersymmetric gauge theory" label="supersymmetric gauge theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552958" start="6631" end="6637" title="smooth manifold" label="smooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566544" start="6638" end="6648" title="4-manifold" label="4-manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446569" start="6679" end="6703" title="Seiberg–Witten invariant" label="Seiberg–Witten invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775834" start="6712" end="6726" title="Anton Kapustin" label="Anton Kapustin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20967904" start="6818" end="6852" title="geometric Langlands correspondence" label="geometric Langlands correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q85799082" start="7285" end="7308" title="Sachdev–Ye–Kitaev model" label="Sachdev–Ye–Kitaev model"/>
<link wikidata="Q103285334" start="7798" end="7809" title="Ruth Britto" label="Ruth Britto"/>
<link wikidata="Q15720777" start="7869" end="7893" title="BCFW recursion" label="BCFW recursion relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543268" start="7975" end="7990" title="MacArthur Fellowship" label="MacArthur Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="8003" end="8015" title="Fields Medal" label="Fields Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="8054" end="8085" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q742399" start="8098" end="8126" title="Nemmers Prize in Mathematics" label="Nemmers Prize in Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q737051" start="8139" end="8164" title="National Medal of Science" label="National Medal of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605690" start="8202" end="8222" title="Henri Poincaré Prize" label="Henri Poincaré Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q583069" start="8235" end="8249" title="Crafoord Prize" label="Crafoord Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q838936" start="8262" end="8275" title="Lorentz Medal" label="Lorentz Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q823162" start="8287" end="8305" title="Isaac Newton Medal" label="Isaac Newton Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314470" start="8321" end="8362" title="Breakthrough Prize in Fundamental Physics" label="Breakthrough Prize in Fundamental Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="8419" end="8432" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q117467" start="8499" end="8525" title="Royal Society of Edinburgh" label="Royal Society of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="8527" end="8544" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q938622" start="8581" end="8611" title="Pontifical Academy of Sciences" label="Pontifical Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="8658" end="8662" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="8685" end="8712" title="Time 100" label="100 most influential people"/>
<link wikidata="Q465654" start="8757" end="8786" title="American Mathematical Society" label="American Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="8826" end="8863" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="8889" end="8917" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="8947" end="8977" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="9054" end="9080" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095243" start="9274" end="9286" title="Chiara Nappi" label="Chiara Nappi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="9314" end="9334" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q63854219" start="9398" end="9413" title="Ilana B. Witten" label="Ilana B. Witten"/>
<link wikidata="Q21504196" start="9472" end="9486" title="Daniela Witten" label="Daniela Witten"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="9515" end="9539" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148635" start="9583" end="9606" title="Americans for Peace Now" label="Americans for Peace Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676248" start="9638" end="9646" title="J Street (advocacy group)" label="J Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q719543" start="9664" end="9682" title="two-state solution" label="two-state solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="9960" end="9980" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="9989" end="10001" title="Dissertation" label="Dissertation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164635" start="10006" end="10018" title="Roman Jackiw" label="Roman Jackiw"/>
<link wikidata="Q40262" start="10020" end="10031" title="David Gross" label="David Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q567758" start="10033" end="10047" title="Sam B. Treiman" label="Sam B. Treiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q554631" start="10064" end="10076" title="Bruno Zumino" label="Bruno Zumino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345424" start="10182" end="10191" title="Michael Green (physicist)" label="Green, M."/>
<link wikidata="Q710213" start="10193" end="10208" title="John H. Schwarz" label="John H. Schwarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q334045" start="10774" end="10788" title="Pierre Deligne" label="Pierre Deligne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064571" start="10790" end="10803" title="Pavel Etingof" label="Pavel Etingof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159066" start="10805" end="10820" title="Daniel S. Freed" label="Daniel S. Freed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486338" start="10822" end="10837" title="Lisa C. Jeffrey" label="Lisa C. Jeffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174945" start="10839" end="10852" title="David Kazhdan" label="David Kazhdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q139214" start="10854" end="10868" title="John Morgan (mathematician)" label="John W. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804812" start="10870" end="10887" title="David R. Morrison (mathematician)" label="David R. Morrison"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54895" wikidata="Q41809" url="?curid=54895" title="86 BC">
<text>Year 86 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Cinna and Marius/Flaccus (or, less frequently, year 668 &quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&quot;). The denomination 86 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.

== Events ==
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;

=== By place ===

==== Roman Republic ====
* First Mithridatic War
** March 1 – Sulla captures Athens from the Pontic army, removing the tyrant Aristion.
** Lucius Licinius Lucullus decisively defeats the Mithridatic fleet in the Battle of Tenedos.
** The Roman forces of Lucius Cornelius Sulla defeat the Pontic forces of Archelaus in the Battle of Chaeronea.
** The Dardani ally with Pontus and are defeated by Sulla soon after.
&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;

== Births ==
* October 1 – Sallust, Roman historian (d. 34 BC)
* Fausta Cornelia, twin sister of Faustus Cornelius Sulla, wife of Gaius Memmius and later of Titus Annius Milo
* Faustus Cornelius Sulla, Roman senator, son of the dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla (d. 46 BC)

== Deaths ==
* January 13 – Gaius Marius, Roman general and politician (b. c. 157 BC)
* March 1 – Aristion, Greek philosopher and tyrant 
* Jin Midi, Chinese politician and co-regent (b. 134 BC)
* Sima Qian, Chinese historian (b. 145 BC)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41809" start="5" end="10" title="86 BC" label="86 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="29" end="54" title="Roman calendar" label="pre-Julian Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41809" start="88" end="138" title="86 BC" label="Year of the Consulship of Cinna and Marius/Flaccus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41809" start="161" end="195" title="86 BC" label="year 668 &amp;quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="297" end="308" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="309" end="321" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647768" start="458" end="479" title="First Mithridatic War" label="First Mithridatic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393" start="483" end="490" title="March 1" label="March 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="493" end="498" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="508" end="514" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380487" start="524" end="530" title="Kingdom of Pontus" label="Pontic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861408" start="557" end="565" title="Aristion" label="Aristion"/>
<link wikidata="Q242819" start="570" end="594" title="Lucullus" label="Lucius Licinius Lucullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268397" start="643" end="660" title="Battle of Tenedos (86 BC)" label="Battle of Tenedos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="669" end="674" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="685" end="707" title="Lucius Cornelius Sulla" label="Lucius Cornelius Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380487" start="719" end="725" title="Kingdom of Pontus" label="Pontic"/>
<link wikidata="Q360787" start="736" end="745" title="Archelaus (Pontic army officer)" label="Archelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q233352" start="753" end="772" title="Battle of Chaeronea (86 BC)" label="Battle of Chaeronea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043335" start="781" end="788" title="Dardani" label="Dardani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913" start="881" end="890" title="October 1" label="October 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170" start="893" end="900" title="Sallust" label="Sallust"/>
<link wikidata="Q40073" start="922" end="927" title="34 BC" label="34 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q162456" start="931" end="946" title="Fausta Cornelia" label="Fausta Cornelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q708722" start="963" end="986" title="Faustus Cornelius Sulla (quaestor 54 BC)" label="Faustus Cornelius Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472899" start="996" end="1009" title="Gaius Memmius (praetor 58 BC)" label="Gaius Memmius"/>
<link wikidata="Q355778" start="1023" end="1040" title="Titus Annius Milo" label="Titus Annius Milo"/>
<link wikidata="Q708722" start="1043" end="1066" title="Faustus Cornelius Sulla (quaestor 54 BC)" label="Faustus Cornelius Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="1103" end="1125" title="Lucius Cornelius Sulla" label="Lucius Cornelius Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4180" start="1130" end="1135" title="46 BC" label="46 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255" start="1153" end="1163" title="January 13" label="January 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q177975" start="1166" end="1178" title="Gaius Marius" label="Gaius Marius"/>
<link wikidata="Q46999" start="1216" end="1222" title="157 BC" label="157 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393" start="1226" end="1233" title="March 1" label="March 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861408" start="1236" end="1244" title="Aristion" label="Aristion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="1252" end="1263" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q180095" start="1268" end="1274" title="tyrant" label="tyrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q701276" start="1278" end="1286" title="Jin Midi" label="Jin Midi"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="1314" end="1320" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q47031" start="1325" end="1331" title="134 BC" label="134 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9372" start="1335" end="1344" title="Sima Qian" label="Sima Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44765" start="1368" end="1374" title="145 BC" label="145 BC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54896" wikidata="Q42424" url="?curid=54896" title="85 BC">
<text>Year 85 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Cinna and Carbo (or, less frequently, year 669 &quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&quot;). The denomination 85 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.

== Events ==
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;

=== By place ===

==== Roman Republic ====
* First Mithridatic War: Lucius Cornelius Sulla again defeats Archelaus in the decisive Battle of Orchomenus.
&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;
== Births ==
* Atia, niece of Julius Caesar and mother of Augustus (d. 43 BC)
* Marcus Junius Brutus, conspirator and assassin in the murder of Julius Caesar (approximate date)
* Tiberius Claudius Nero, Roman politician and father of Tiberius (d. 33 BC)

== Deaths ==
* Gaius Julius Caesar, Roman politician (b. c. 140 BC)
*Mnesarchus of Athens, Stoic philosopher (b. c. 160 BC)
* Lucius Valerius Flaccus

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42424" start="5" end="10" title="85 BC" label="85 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="29" end="54" title="Roman calendar" label="pre-Julian Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42424" start="88" end="129" title="85 BC" label="Year of the Consulship of Cinna and Carbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42424" start="152" end="186" title="85 BC" label="year 669 &amp;quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="288" end="299" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="300" end="312" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647768" start="449" end="470" title="First Mithridatic War" label="First Mithridatic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="472" end="494" title="Lucius Cornelius Sulla" label="Lucius Cornelius Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q360787" start="509" end="518" title="Archelaus (Pontic army officer)" label="Archelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509221" start="535" end="555" title="Battle of Orchomenus" label="Battle of Orchomenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q231696" start="593" end="597" title="Atia (mother of Augustus)" label="Atia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="636" end="644" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37636" start="649" end="654" title="43 BC" label="43 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q172248" start="658" end="678" title="Marcus Junius Brutus" label="Marcus Junius Brutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="722" end="735" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q342512" start="757" end="779" title="Tiberius Claudius Nero (father of Tiberius Caesar)" label="Tiberius Claudius Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="812" end="820" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4106" start="825" end="830" title="33 BC" label="33 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q314710" start="848" end="867" title="Gaius Julius Caesar (proconsul of Asia)" label="Gaius Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792" start="893" end="899" title="140 BC" label="140 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q223383" start="902" end="922" title="Mnesarchus of Athens" label="Mnesarchus of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q46640" start="949" end="955" title="160 BC" label="160 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q267534" start="959" end="982" title="Lucius Valerius Flaccus (consul 86 BC)" label="Lucius Valerius Flaccus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54897" wikidata="Q41141" url="?curid=54897" title="84 BC">
<text>Year 84 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Carbo and Cinna (or, less frequently, year 670 &quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&quot;). The denomination 84 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.

== Events ==
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;

=== By place ===
==== Asia ====
* Battle of Cana: The Arab Nabataean Kingdom decisively defeats the Greek Seleucid Empire, slaying King Antiochus XII Dionysus, at modern-day Umm Qais in Jordan.

==== Roman Republic ====
* The First Mithridatic War comes to an end.
* Julius Caesar marries Cornelia
&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;
== Births ==
* Catullus, Roman poet (approximate date) (d. c. 54 BC)
* Servilius Casca, Roman politician (d. c. 42 BC)
* Surena, Parthian general (d. 53 BC)

== Deaths ==
* Apellicon of Teos, Greek book collector (approximate date)
* Gaius Flavius Fimbria, Roman politician and general (suicide)
* Lucius Cornelius Cinna, Roman consul (killed by mutinying troops)
* Antiochus XII Dionysus, king of the Seleucid Empire (killed in battle)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41141" start="5" end="10" title="84 BC" label="84 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="29" end="54" title="Roman calendar" label="pre-Julian Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41141" start="88" end="129" title="84 BC" label="Year of the Consulship of Carbo and Cinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q41141" start="152" end="186" title="84 BC" label="year 670 &amp;quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="288" end="299" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="300" end="312" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q25830915" start="438" end="452" title="Battle of Cana" label="Battle of Cana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11029653" start="463" end="480" title="Nabataean Kingdom" label="Nabataean Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="510" end="525" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q311107" start="540" end="562" title="Antiochus XII Dionysus" label="Antiochus XII Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131955" start="578" end="586" title="Umm Qais" label="Umm Qais"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="590" end="596" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647768" start="630" end="651" title="First Mithridatic War" label="First Mithridatic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="671" end="684" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q163079" start="738" end="746" title="Catullus" label="Catullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41344" start="785" end="790" title="54 BC" label="54 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243545" start="794" end="809" title="Servilius Casca" label="Servilius Casca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201" start="835" end="840" title="42 BC" label="42 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q470523" start="844" end="850" title="Surena" label="Surena"/>
<link wikidata="Q40870" start="873" end="878" title="53 BC" label="53 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158420" start="896" end="913" title="Apellicon of Teos" label="Apellicon of Teos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914943" start="921" end="935" title="Book collecting" label="book collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q182190" start="957" end="978" title="Gaius Flavius Fimbria (cavalry prefect)" label="Gaius Flavius Fimbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q171083" start="1021" end="1043" title="Lucius Cornelius Cinna" label="Lucius Cornelius Cinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="1045" end="1057" title="Roman consul" label="Roman consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q311107" start="1089" end="1111" title="Antiochus XII Dionysus" label="Antiochus XII Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="1125" end="1140" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25830915" start="1142" end="1158" title="Battle of Cana" label="killed in battle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54898" wikidata="Q42348" url="?curid=54898" title="83 BC">
<text>Year 83 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Asiaticus and Norbanus (or, less frequently, year 671 &quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&quot;). The denomination 83 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.

== Events ==
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;

=== By place ===

==== Roman Republic ====
* Spring – Lucius Cornelius Sulla returns to Italy from his campaigns in Greece and lands with his legions unopposed at Brundisium. He defeats the popular forces of Gaius Norbanus in the Battle of Mount Tifata.
* Gnaeus Pompeius, age 22, raises, on his own initiative, a private army of three legions from his father&#x27;s veterans and &quot;&quot; in Picenum.
* Lucius Licinius Murena, the Roman governor of Asia, clashes with the Pontic forces of Mithridates VI, starting the Second Mithridatic War.
* A fire breaks out which burns down the Temple of Jupiter (Jupiter Capitolinus) and destroys the collection of Sibylline Books.
* Two new buildings were completed on the Capitoline Hill in Rome: the Temple of Jupitor Optimus Maximus and the Tabularium.
&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;

== Births ==
* Fulvia, Roman matron and wife of Mark Antony (approximate date)
* Julia, daughter of Julius Caesar and Cornelia
* Mark Antony, Roman politician and General (who later married Cleopatra) (approximate date) (d. 30 BC)

== Deaths ==
* Philip I Philadelphus, Seleucid king (approximate date)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42348" start="5" end="10" title="83 BC" label="83 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="29" end="54" title="Roman calendar" label="pre-Julian Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42348" start="88" end="136" title="83 BC" label="Year of the Consulship of Asiaticus and Norbanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42348" start="159" end="193" title="83 BC" label="year 671 &amp;quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="295" end="306" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="307" end="319" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="465" end="487" title="Lucius Cornelius Sulla" label="Lucius Cornelius Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="499" end="504" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="527" end="533" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="553" end="560" title="Roman legion" label="legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="574" end="584" title="Brindisi" label="Brundisium"/>
<link wikidata="Q705372" start="619" end="633" title="Gaius Norbanus" label="Gaius Norbanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871811" start="641" end="663" title="Battle of Mount Tifata" label="Battle of Mount Tifata"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="667" end="682" title="Pompey" label="Gnaeus Pompeius"/>
<link wikidata="Q510990" start="807" end="814" title="Picenum" label="Picenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622118" start="818" end="840" title="Lucius Licinius Murena (propraetor in Asia)" label="Lucius Licinius Murena"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="846" end="851" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q210718" start="864" end="868" title="Asia (Roman province)" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380487" start="887" end="893" title="Kingdom of Pontus" label="Pontic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185126" start="904" end="918" title="Mithridates VI" label="Mithridates VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991765" start="933" end="955" title="Second Mithridatic War" label="Second Mithridatic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q586468" start="998" end="1015" title="Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus" label="Temple of Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q664251" start="1069" end="1084" title="Sibylline Books" label="Sibylline Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q34925" start="1128" end="1143" title="Capitoline Hill" label="Capitoline Hill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1157" end="1190" title="Temple of Jupitor Optimus Maximus" label="Temple of Jupitor Optimus Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q568342" start="1199" end="1209" title="Tabularium" label="Tabularium"/>
<link wikidata="Q233077" start="1248" end="1254" title="Fulvia" label="Fulvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q235087" start="1314" end="1319" title="Julia (daughter of Julius Caesar)" label="Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="1333" end="1346" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q235423" start="1351" end="1359" title="Cornelia (wife of Caesar)" label="Cornelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="1362" end="1373" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q635" start="1423" end="1432" title="Cleopatra" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4123" start="1457" end="1462" title="30 BC" label="30 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q263489" start="1480" end="1501" title="Philip I Philadelphus" label="Philip I Philadelphus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54899" wikidata="Q42185" url="?curid=54899" title="82 BC">
<text>Year 82 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Marius and Carbo (or, less frequently, year 672 &quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&quot;). The denomination 82 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.

== Events ==
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;

=== By place ===

==== Roman Republic ====
* April: Sulla defeats the consul Gaius Marius the Younger at the Battle of Sacriportus, and takes control of Rome.
* November 1: Sulla defeats an army of Samnites and Lucanians alliance in the Battle of the Colline Gate.
* November 2: Sulla slaughters the Samnite prisoners in the Villa publica; the senate rejects his proscription plan.
* November 3: Sulla passes his proscription through a popular assembly; he publishes a list of 520 senators and equites to be murdered on sight.
* Gaius Marius the Younger is besieged at the fortress city of Praeneste in Latium. After a fierce resistance, Marius commits suicide.
* Pompey is ordered by Sulla to stamp out Marian rebels in Sicily and Africa, after his campaigns in he gets the insulting nickname of &quot;adulescentulus carnifex&quot;, the &quot;teenage butcher&quot;.
* Lucius Licinius Murena launches a raid against Pontus in the Battle of Halys, starting the Second Mithridatic War.

==== Dacia ====
* Burebista unifies the Dacian population forming the first (and biggest) unified Dacian Kingdom, on the territory of modern Romania and surroundings. 82 BC is also the starting year of his reign.

=== By topic ===

==== Astronomy ====
* The Aurigid shower parent comet C/1911 N1 (Kiess) returns to the inner solar system and sheds the dust particles that one revolution later cause the 1935, 1986, 1994, and 2007 Aurigid meteor outbursts on Earth.
&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;

== Births ==
* May 28 – Licinius Macer Calvus, Roman orator and poet (d. c. 47 BC)
* Marcus Caelius Rufus, Roman orator and politician (d. c. 48 BC)
* Varro Atacinus, Roman poet and writer (d. c. 35 BC)
* Vercingetorix, Gaul warrior and leader (d. 46 BC)

== Deaths ==
* Gaius Carrinas, Roman politician and general (executed by order of Sulla)
* Gaius Fabius Hadrianus, Roman politician and governor
* Gaius Marcius Censorinus, Roman politician and general (executed by order of Sulla)
* Gaius Marius the Younger, Roman politician (commits suicide)
* Gaius Norbanus, Roman consul and governor (commits suicide)
* Gnaeus Papirius Carbo, Roman consul (executed by order of Sulla)
* Marcus Marius Gratidianus, Roman praetor and politician (executed by order of Sulla)
* Quintus Mucius Scaevola Pontifex, Roman consul (murdered by order of Marius the Younger)
* Quintus Valerius Soranus, Roman politician and Latin poet (executed by order of Sulla)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42185" start="5" end="10" title="82 BC" label="82 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="29" end="54" title="Roman calendar" label="pre-Julian Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42185" start="88" end="130" title="82 BC" label="Year of the Consulship of Marius and Carbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42185" start="153" end="187" title="82 BC" label="year 672 &amp;quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="289" end="300" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="301" end="313" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="457" end="462" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q462978" start="482" end="506" title="Gaius Marius the Younger" label="Gaius Marius the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872231" start="514" end="535" title="Battle of Sacriportus" label="Battle of Sacriportus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997" start="566" end="576" title="November 1" label="November 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q500272" start="603" end="611" title="Samnites" label="Samnites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264391" start="616" end="625" title="Lucanians" label="Lucanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230563" start="642" end="668" title="Battle of the Colline Gate (82 BC)" label="Battle of the Colline Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996" start="672" end="682" title="November 2" label="November 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489956" start="730" end="743" title="Villa publica" label="Villa publica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995" start="789" end="799" title="November 3" label="November 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924071" start="818" end="830" title="Sulla&amp;#x27;s proscription" label="proscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114821" start="841" end="857" title="Citizens&amp;#x27; assemblies of the Roman Republic" label="popular assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="899" end="906" title="equites" label="equites"/>
<link wikidata="Q462978" start="934" end="958" title="Gaius Marius the Younger" label="Gaius Marius the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q243133" start="995" end="1004" title="Praeneste" label="Praeneste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048669" start="1008" end="1014" title="Latium" label="Latium"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="1069" end="1075" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="1126" end="1132" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="1137" end="1143" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="1190" end="1198" title="nickname" label="nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622118" start="1274" end="1296" title="Lucius Licinius Murena (triumphator)" label="Lucius Licinius Murena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380487" start="1321" end="1327" title="Kingdom of Pontus" label="Pontus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17277303" start="1335" end="1350" title="Battle of Halys" label="Battle of Halys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991765" start="1365" end="1387" title="Second Mithridatic War" label="Second Mithridatic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q309869" start="1408" end="1417" title="Burebista" label="Burebista"/>
<link wikidata="Q173082" start="1488" end="1502" title="Dacia" label="Dacian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="1531" end="1538" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648283" start="1676" end="1693" title="C/1911 N1 (Kiess)" label="C/1911 N1 (Kiess)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588" start="1892" end="1898" title="May 28" label="May 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q551668" start="1901" end="1922" title="Licinius Macer Calvus" label="Licinius Macer Calvus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859263" start="1930" end="1936" title="orator" label="orator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209" start="1953" end="1958" title="47 BC" label="47 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q779217" start="1962" end="1982" title="Marcus Caelius Rufus" label="Marcus Caelius Rufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41143" start="2019" end="2024" title="48 BC" label="48 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q355732" start="2028" end="2042" title="Varro Atacinus" label="Varro Atacinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41236" start="2073" end="2078" title="35 BC" label="35 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q178953" start="2082" end="2095" title="Vercingetorix" label="Vercingetorix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4180" start="2125" end="2130" title="46 BC" label="46 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622544" start="2148" end="2162" title="Gaius Carrinas (praetor 82 BC)" label="Gaius Carrinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="2215" end="2220" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517432" start="2224" end="2246" title="Gaius Fabius Hadrianus" label="Gaius Fabius Hadrianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491483" start="2280" end="2304" title="Gaius Marcius Censorinus (Marian)" label="Gaius Marcius Censorinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="2357" end="2362" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q462978" start="2366" end="2390" title="Gaius Marius the Younger" label="Gaius Marius the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q705372" start="2429" end="2443" title="Gaius Norbanus" label="Gaius Norbanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="2451" end="2457" title="Roman consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q921658" start="2491" end="2512" title="Gnaeus Papirius Carbo (consul 85 BC)" label="Gnaeus Papirius Carbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q378407" start="2558" end="2583" title="Marcus Marius Gratidianus" label="Marcus Marius Gratidianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="2591" end="2598" title="praetor" label="praetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="2636" end="2641" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q503187" start="2645" end="2677" title="Quintus Mucius Scaevola Pontifex" label="Quintus Mucius Scaevola Pontifex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655289" start="2736" end="2760" title="Quintus Valerius Soranus" label="Quintus Valerius Soranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2783" end="2788" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="2816" end="2821" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54900" wikidata="Q41647" url="?curid=54900" title="81 BC">
<text>Year 81 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Decula and Dolabella (or, less frequently, year 673 &quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&quot;). The denomination 81 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.

== Events ==
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;

=== By place ===

==== Roman Republic ====
* Sulla is appointed &quot;dictator&quot;, executes his political enemies in a series of proscriptions, and implements aristocratic reforms to the Roman government.
* The Second Mithridatic War ends with the &quot;status quo&quot;.
* Cicero wins his first case.

==== China ====
*Sang Hongyang and 60 Confucian scholars debate over the state monopoly of Iron and Salt.
&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;

== Births ==

== Deaths ==
* Artaxias I (or Arshak), king of Iberia (Georgia)
* Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus, Roman politician 
* Ptolemy IX Lathyros, king of Ptolemaic Egypt

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41647" start="5" end="10" title="81 BC" label="81 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="29" end="54" title="Roman calendar" label="pre-Julian Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41647" start="88" end="134" title="81 BC" label="Year of the Consulship of Decula and Dolabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q41647" start="157" end="191" title="81 BC" label="year 673 &amp;quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="293" end="304" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="305" end="317" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="454" end="459" title="Lucius Cornelius Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q236885" start="479" end="487" title="Roman dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="599" end="604" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991765" start="623" end="645" title="Second Mithridatic War" label="Second Mithridatic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q201610" start="666" end="676" title="status quo" label="status quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="686" end="692" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q847703" start="732" end="745" title="Sang Hongyang" label="Sang Hongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="753" end="762" title="Confucianism" label="Confucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281767" start="788" end="819" title="Discourses on Salt and Iron" label="state monopoly of Iron and Salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262514" start="872" end="882" title="Artaxias I of Iberia" label="Artaxias I"/>
<link wikidata="Q19083" start="904" end="910" title="Kingdom of Iberia (antiquity)" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="912" end="919" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q579263" start="923" end="950" title="Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus (died 81 BC)" label="Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3340" start="972" end="991" title="Ptolemy IX Lathyros" label="Ptolemy IX Lathyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="1001" end="1016" title="Ptolemaic Kingdom" label="Ptolemaic Egypt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54903" wikidata="Q41814" url="?curid=54903" title="80 BC">
<text>Year 80 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Sulla and Metellus Pius (or, less frequently, year 674 &quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&quot;). The denomination 80 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.

== Events ==
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;

=== By place ===

==== Roman Republic ====
* Quintus Sertorius re-enters Iberia with a tiny army (2,600 men) and opens a successful campaign against the Sullan forces.
* Battle of the Baetis River: A force of Populares exiles under Sertorius defeat the legal Roman army of Lucius Fulfidias in Hispania, starting the Sertorian War; Quintus Caecilius Metellus Pius takes command on behalf of Sulla.
* Pompeii becomes the Roman colony &quot;Colonia Cornelia Veneria Pompei&quot; when Sulla occupies the city with at least 4,000 soldier-colonizers.

==== Egypt ====
* Ptolemy XII Auletes succeeds Ptolemy XI Alexander II to the throne of Egypt.
* Ptolemy XI marries Berenice III, but murders his bride for unknown reasons.
* Alexandria comes under Roman jurisdiction.

=== By topic ===

==== Art ====
* Roman artists begin to extend the space of a room visually with painted scenes of figures on a shallow stage or with a landscape or cityscape.

==== Literature ====
* Meleager publishes his &quot;Garland&quot;, the earliest known anthology of Greek poetry.
&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;

== Births ==
*Scribonia, wife to the Roman Emperor Augustus (approximate date) (d. AD 16)

== Deaths ==
* Berenice III, queen regnant of Egypt (b. 120 BC)
* Caecilia Metella Dalmatica, daughter of Lucius Caecilius Metellus Dalmaticus (approximate date)
* Lucius Cornelius Chrysogonus, Greek freedman
* Ptolemy XI Alexander II, king (pharaoh) of Egypt
* Sang Hongyang, Chinese politician of the Han dynasty
* Shangguan Jie, Chinese politician of the Han dynasty
* Princess Eyi, Han Chinese princess

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41814" start="5" end="10" title="80 BC" label="80 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="29" end="54" title="Roman calendar" label="pre-Julian Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41814" start="88" end="137" title="80 BC" label="Year of the Consulship of Sulla and Metellus Pius"/>
<link wikidata="Q41814" start="160" end="194" title="80 BC" label="year 674 &amp;quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="296" end="307" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="308" end="320" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q296238" start="457" end="474" title="Quintus Sertorius" label="Quintus Sertorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="485" end="491" title="Iberia" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872838" start="582" end="608" title="Battle of the Baetis River" label="Battle of the Baetis River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114493" start="671" end="681" title="Roman army" label="Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126678" start="705" end="713" title="Hispania Citerior" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778726" start="728" end="741" title="Sertorian War" label="Sertorian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q313680" start="743" end="774" title="Quintus Caecilius Metellus Pius" label="Quintus Caecilius Metellus Pius"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="802" end="807" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="811" end="818" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q39991" start="976" end="987" title="Ptolemy XII" label="Ptolemy XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q39996" start="1005" end="1028" title="Ptolemy XI Alexander II" label="Ptolemy XI Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="1046" end="1051" title="History of Ptolemaic Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q231688" start="1074" end="1086" title="Berenice III of Egypt" label="Berenice III"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="1133" end="1143" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q194428" start="1314" end="1319" title="Stage (theatre)" label="stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q107425" start="1330" end="1339" title="landscape" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935974" start="1343" end="1352" title="cityscape" label="cityscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q441460" start="1378" end="1386" title="Meleager of Gadara" label="Meleager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089547" start="1454" end="1459" title="Greek literature" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="1460" end="1466" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q233444" start="1504" end="1513" title="Scribonia (wife of Augustus)" label="Scribonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="1541" end="1549" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23763" start="1573" end="1578" title="AD 16" label="AD 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q231688" start="1596" end="1608" title="Berenice III of Egypt" label="Berenice III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="1627" end="1632" title="Ptolemaic Kingdom" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q44114" start="1637" end="1643" title="120 BC" label="120 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454823" start="1647" end="1673" title="Caecilia Metella Dalmatica" label="Caecilia Metella Dalmatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q703362" start="1687" end="1723" title="Lucius Caecilius Metellus Dalmaticus" label="Lucius Caecilius Metellus Dalmaticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351034" start="1745" end="1773" title="Lucius Cornelius Chrysogonus" label="Lucius Cornelius Chrysogonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="1781" end="1789" title="freedman" label="freedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q39996" start="1792" end="1815" title="Ptolemy XI Alexander II" label="Ptolemy XI Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="1823" end="1830" title="pharaoh" label="pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="1835" end="1840" title="Ptolemaic Kingdom" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q847703" start="1843" end="1856" title="Sang Hongyang" label="Sang Hongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="1884" end="1895" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373903" start="1898" end="1911" title="Shangguan Jie" label="Shangguan Jie"/>
<link wikidata="Q15910043" start="1953" end="1965" title="Princess Eyi" label="Princess Eyi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54910" wikidata="Q960800" url="?curid=54910" title="Chlorofluorocarbon">
<text>Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) are fully or partly halogenated hydrocarbons that contain carbon (C), hydrogen (H), chlorine (Cl), and fluorine (F), produced as volatile derivatives of methane, ethane, and propane.

The most common example is dichlorodifluoromethane (R-12). R-12 is also commonly called Freon and was used as a refrigerant. Many CFCs have been widely used as refrigerants, propellants (in aerosol applications), gaseous fire suppression systems, and solvents. As a result of CFCs contributing to ozone depletion in the upper atmosphere, the manufacture of such compounds has been phased out under the Montreal Protocol, and they are being replaced with other products such as hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and hydrofluoroolefins (HFOs) including R-410A, R-134a and R-1234yf.

== Structure, properties and production ==

As in simpler alkanes, carbon in the CFCs bond with tetrahedral symmetry. Because the fluorine and chlorine atoms differ greatly in size and effective charge from hydrogen and from each other, the methane-derived CFCs deviate from perfect tetrahedral symmetry.

The physical properties of CFCs and HCFCs are tunable by changes in the number and identity of the halogen atoms. In general, they are volatile but less so than their parent alkanes. The decreased volatility is attributed to the molecular polarity induced by the halides, which induces intermolecular interactions. Thus, methane boils at −161 °C whereas the fluoromethanes boil between −51.7 (CF2H2) and −128 °C (CF4). The CFCs have still higher boiling points because the chloride is even more polarizable than fluoride. Because of their polarity, the CFCs are useful solvents, and their boiling points make them suitable as refrigerants. The CFCs are far less flammable than methane, in part because they contain fewer C-H bonds and in part because, in the case of the chlorides and bromides, the released halides quench the free radicals that sustain flames.

The densities of CFCs are higher than their corresponding alkanes. In general, the density of these compounds correlates with the number of chlorides.

CFCs and HCFCs are usually produced by halogen exchange starting from chlorinated methanes and ethanes. Illustrative is the synthesis of chlorodifluoromethane from chloroform:
:HCCl3 + 2 HF → HCF2Cl + 2 HCl
Brominated derivatives are generated by free-radical reactions of hydrochlorofluorocarbons, replacing C-H bonds with C-Br bonds. The production of the anesthetic 2-bromo-2-chloro-1,1,1-trifluoroethane (&quot;halothane&quot;) is illustrative:
:CF3CH2Cl + Br2 → CF3CHBrCl + HBr

==Applications==
CFCs and HCFCs are used in various applications because of their low toxicity, reactivity and flammability. Every permutation of fluorine, chlorine and hydrogen based on methane and ethane has been examined and most have been commercialized. Furthermore, many examples are known for higher numbers of carbon as well as related compounds containing bromine. Uses include refrigerants, blowing agents, aerosol propellants in medicinal applications, and degreasing solvents.

Billions of kilograms of chlorodifluoromethane are produced annually as a precursor to tetrafluoroethylene, the monomer that is converted into Teflon.

==Classes of compounds and Numbering System==
*Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs): when derived from methane and ethane these compounds have the formulae CClmF4−m and C2ClmF6−m, where m is nonzero.
*Hydro-chlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs): when derived from methane and ethane these compounds have the formula CClmFnH4−m−n and C2ClxFyH6−x−y, where m, n, x, and y are nonzero.
* and bromofluorocarbons have formulae similar to the CFCs and HCFCs but also include bromine.
*Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs): when derived from methane, ethane, propane, and butane, these compounds have the respective formulae CFmH4−m, C2FmH6−m, C3FmH8−m, and C4FmH10−m, where m is nonzero.

=== Numbering system ===

A special numbering system is to be used for fluorinated alkanes, prefixed with Freon-, R-, CFC- and HCFC-, where the rightmost value indicates the number of fluorine atoms, the next value to the left is the number of hydrogen atoms &quot;plus&quot; 1, and the next value to the left is the number of carbon atoms &quot;less&quot; one (zeroes are not stated), and the remaining atoms are chlorine.

Freon-12, for example, indicates a methane derivative (only two numbers) containing two fluorine atoms (the second 2) and no hydrogen (1-1=0). It is therefore CCl2F2.

Another equation that can be applied to get the correct molecular formula of the CFC/R/Freon class compounds is to take the numbering and add 90 to it. The resulting value will give the number of carbons as the first numeral, the second numeral gives the number of hydrogen atoms, and the third numeral gives the number of fluorine atoms. The rest of the unaccounted carbon bonds are occupied by chlorine atoms. The value of this equation is always a three figure number. An easy example is that of CFC-12, which gives: 90+12=102 -&gt; 1 carbon, 0 hydrogens, 2 fluorine atoms, and hence 2 chlorine atoms resulting in CCl2F2. The main advantage of this method of deducing the molecular composition in comparison with the method described in the paragraph above is that it gives the number of carbon atoms of the molecule.

Freons containing bromine are signified by four numbers. Isomers, which are common for ethane and propane derivatives, are indicated by letters following the numbers:

==Reactions==
The reaction of the CFCs which is responsible for the depletion of ozone, is the photo-induced scission of a C-Cl bond:
:CCl3F → CCl2F. + Cl.
The chlorine atom, written often as Cl., behaves very differently from the chlorine molecule (Cl2). The radical Cl. is long-lived in the upper atmosphere, where it catalyzes the conversion of ozone into O2. Ozone absorbs UV-B radiation, so its depletion allows more of this high energy radiation to reach the Earth&#x27;s surface. Bromine atoms are even more efficient catalysts; hence brominated CFCs are also regulated.

==Impact as greenhouse gases==

CFCs were phased out via the Montreal Protocol due to their part in ozone depletion.

The atmospheric impacts of CFCs are not limited to their role as ozone-depleting chemicals. Infrared absorption bands prevent heat at that wavelength from escaping Earth&#x27;s atmosphere. CFCs have their strongest absorption bands from C-F and C-Cl bonds in the spectral region of 7.8–15.3 μm—referred to as the &quot;atmospheric window&quot; due to the relative transparency of the atmosphere within this region.

The strength of CFC absorption bands and the unique susceptibility of the atmosphere at wavelengths where CFCs (indeed all covalent fluorine compounds) absorb radiation creates a &quot;super&quot; greenhouse effect from CFCs and other unreactive fluorine-containing gases such as perfluorocarbons, HFCs, HCFCs, bromofluorocarbons, SF6, and NF3. This &quot;atmospheric window&quot; absorption is intensified by the low concentration of each individual CFC. Because CO2 is close to saturation with high concentrations and few infrared absorption bands, the radiation budget and hence the greenhouse effect has low sensitivity to changes in CO2 concentration; the increase in temperature is roughly logarithmic. Conversely, the low concentration of CFCs allow their effects to increase linearly with mass, so that chlorofluorocarbons are greenhouse gases with a much higher potential to enhance the greenhouse effect than CO2.

Groups are actively disposing of legacy CFCs to reduce their impact on the atmosphere.

According to NASA in 2018, the hole in the ozone layer has begun to recover as a result of CFC bans. However, research released in 2019 reports an alarming increase in CFCs, pointing to unregulated use in China.

==History==

Prior to, and during the 1920s, refrigerators used toxic gases as refrigerants, including ammonia, sulphur dioxide, and chloromethane. Later in the 1920s after a series of fatal accidents involving the leaking of chloromethane from refrigerators, a major collaborative effort began between American corporations Frigidaire, General Motors, and DuPont to develop a safer, non-toxic alternative. Thomas Midgley Jr. of General Motors is credited for synthesizing the first chlorofluorocarbons. The Frigidaire corporation was issued the first patent, number 1,886,339, for the formula for CFCs on December 31, 1928. In a demonstration for the American Chemical Society, Midgley flamboyantly demonstrated all these properties by inhaling a breath of the gas and using it to blow out a candle in 1930.

By 1930, General Motors and Du Pont formed the Kinetic Chemical Company to produce Freon, and by 1935, over 8 million refrigerators utilizing R-12 were sold by Frigidaire and its competitors. In 1932, Carrier began using R-11 in the worlds first self-contained home air conditioning unit known as the &quot;atmospheric cabinet&quot;. As a result of CFCs being largely non-toxic, they quickly became the coolant of choice in large air-conditioning systems. Public health codes in cities were revised to designate chlorofluorocarbons as the only gases that could be used as refrigerants in public buildings.

Growth in CFCs continued over the following decades leading to peak annual sales of over 1 billion USD with greater than 1 million metric tonnes being produced annually. It wasn&#x27;t until 1974 that it was first discovered by two University of California chemists, Professor F. Sherwood Rowland and Dr. Mario Molina, that the use of chlorofluorocarbons were causing a significant depletion in atmospheric ozone concentrations. This initiated the environmental effort which eventually resulted in the enactment of the Montreal Protocol.

===Commercial development and use in fire extinguishing===

During World War II, various chloroalkanes were in standard use in military aircraft, although these early halons suffered from excessive toxicity. Nevertheless, after the war they slowly became more common in civil aviation as well. In the 1960s, fluoroalkanes and bromofluoroalkanes became available and were quickly recognized as being highly effective fire-fighting materials. Much early research with Halon 1301 was conducted under the auspices of the US Armed Forces, while Halon 1211 was, initially, mainly developed in the UK. By the late 1960s they were standard in many applications where water and dry-powder extinguishers posed a threat of damage to the protected property, including computer rooms, telecommunications switches, laboratories, museums and art collections. Beginning with warships, in the 1970s, bromofluoroalkanes also progressively came to be associated with rapid knockdown of severe fires in confined spaces with minimal risk to personnel.

By the early 1980s, bromofluoroalkanes were in common use on aircraft, ships, and large vehicles as well as in computer facilities and galleries. However, concern was beginning to be expressed about the impact of chloroalkanes and bromoalkanes on the ozone layer. The Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer did not cover bromofluoroalkanes under the same restrictions, because emergency discharge of extinguishing systems was thought to be too small in volume to produce a significant impact and too important to human safety for restriction. Instead, the consumption of bromofluoroalkanes was frozen at 1986 levels.

===Regulation===
Since the late 1970s, the use of CFCs has been heavily regulated because of their destructive effects on the ozone layer. After the development of his electron capture detector, James Lovelock was the first to detect the widespread presence of CFCs in the air, finding a mole fraction of 60 ppt of CFC-11 over Ireland. In a self-funded research expedition ending in 1973, Lovelock went on to measure CFC-11 in both the Arctic and Antarctic, finding the presence of the gas in each of 50 air samples collected, and concluding that CFCs are not hazardous to the environment. The experiment did however provide the first useful data on the presence of CFCs in the atmosphere. The damage caused by CFCs was discovered by Sherry Rowland and Mario Molina who, after hearing a lecture on the subject of Lovelock&#x27;s work, embarked on research resulting in the first publication suggesting the connection in 1974. It turns out that one of CFCs&#x27; most attractive features—their low reactivity—is key to their most destructive effects. CFCs&#x27; lack of reactivity gives them a lifespan that can exceed 100 years, giving them time to diffuse into the upper stratosphere. Once in the stratosphere, the sun&#x27;s ultraviolet radiation is strong enough to cause the homolytic cleavage of the C-Cl bond. In 1976, under the Toxic Substances Control Act, the EPA banned commercial manufacturing and use of CFCs and aerosol propellants. This was later superseded in the 1990 amendments to the Clean Air Act to address stratospheric ozone depletion.

By 1987, in response to a dramatic seasonal depletion of the ozone layer over Antarctica, diplomats in Montreal forged a treaty, the Montreal Protocol, which called for drastic reductions in the production of CFCs. On 2 March 1989, 12 European Community nations agreed to ban the production of all CFCs by the end of the century. In 1990, diplomats met in London and voted to significantly strengthen the Montreal Protocol by calling for a complete elimination of CFCs by 2000. By 2010, CFCs should have been completely eliminated from developing countries as well.

Because the only CFCs available to countries adhering to the treaty is from recycling, their prices have increased considerably. A worldwide end to production should also terminate the smuggling of this material. However, there are current CFC smuggling issues, as recognized by the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) in a 2006 report titled &quot;Illegal Trade in Ozone Depleting Substances&quot;. UNEP estimates that between 16,000–38,000 tonnes of CFCs passed through the black market in the mid-1990s. The report estimated between 7,000 and 14,000 tonnes of CFCs are smuggled annually into developing countries. Asian countries are those with the most smuggling; as of 2007, China, India and South Korea were found to account for around 70% of global CFC production, South Korea later to ban CFC production in 2010. Possible reasons for continued CFC smuggling were also examined: the report noted that many of the refrigeration systems that were designed to be operated utilizing the banned CFC products have long lifespans and continue to operate. The cost of replacing the equipment of these items is sometimes cheaper than outfitting them with a more ozone-friendly appliance. Additionally, CFC smuggling is not considered a significant issue, so the perceived penalties for smuggling are low. In 2018 public attention was drawn to the issue, that at an unknown place in east Asia an estimated amount of 13,000 metric tons annually of CFCs have been produced since about 2012 in violation of the protocol. While the eventual phaseout of CFCs is likely, efforts are being taken to stem these current non-compliance problems.

By the time of the Montreal Protocol, it was realised that deliberate and accidental discharges during system tests and maintenance accounted for substantially larger volumes than emergency discharges, and consequently halons were brought into the treaty, albeit with many exceptions.

====Regulatory gap====
While the production and consumption of CFCs are regulated under the Montreal Protocol, emissions from existing banks of CFCs are not regulated under the agreement. In 2002, there were an estimated 5,791 kilotons of CFCs in existing products such as refrigerators, air conditioners, aerosol cans and others. Approximately one-third of these CFCs are projected to be emitted over the next decade if action is not taken, posing a threat to both the ozone layer and the climate. A proportion of these CFCs can be safely captured and destroyed by means of high temperature, controlled incineration which destroys the CFC molecule.

====Regulation and DuPont====
In 1978 the United States banned the use of CFCs such as Freon in aerosol cans, the beginning of a long series of regulatory actions against their use. The critical DuPont manufacturing patent for Freon (&quot;Process for Fluorinating Halohydrocarbons&quot;, U.S. Patent #3258500) was set to expire in 1979. In conjunction with other industrial peers DuPont formed a lobbying group, the &quot;Alliance for Responsible CFC Policy&quot;, to combat regulations of ozone-depleting compounds. In 1986 DuPont, with new patents in hand, reversed its previous stance and publicly condemned CFCs. DuPont representatives appeared before the Montreal Protocol urging that CFCs be banned worldwide and stated that their new HCFCs would meet the worldwide demand for refrigerants.

===Phasing-out of CFCs===
Use of certain chloroalkanes as solvents for large scale application, such as dry cleaning, have been phased out, for example, by the IPPC directive on greenhouse gases in 1994 and by the volatile organic compounds (VOC) directive of the EU in 1997. Permitted chlorofluoroalkane uses are medicinal only.

Bromofluoroalkanes have been largely phased out and the possession of equipment for their use is prohibited in some countries like the Netherlands and Belgium, from 1 January 2004, based on the Montreal Protocol and guidelines of the European Union.

Production of new stocks ceased in most (probably all) countries in 1994. However many countries still require aircraft to be fitted with halon fire suppression systems because no safe and completely satisfactory alternative has been discovered for this application. There are also a few other, highly specialized uses. These programs recycle halon through &quot;halon banks&quot; coordinated by the Halon Recycling Corporation to ensure that discharge to the atmosphere occurs only in a genuine emergency and to conserve remaining stocks.

The interim replacements for CFCs are hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), which deplete stratospheric ozone, but to a much lesser extent than CFCs. Ultimately, hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) will replace HCFCs. Unlike CFCs and HCFCs, HFCs have an ozone depletion potential (ODP) of 0. DuPont began producing hydrofluorocarbons as alternatives to Freon in the 1980s. These included Suva refrigerants and Dymel propellants. Natural refrigerants are climate friendly solutions that are enjoying increasing support from large companies and governments interested in reducing global warming emissions from refrigeration and air conditioning.

===Phasing-out of HFCs and HCFCs===
Hydrofluorocarbons are included in the Kyoto Protocol and are regulated under the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol due to their very high Global Warming Potential (GWP) and the recognition of halocarbon contributions to climate change.

On September 21, 2007, approximately 200 countries agreed to accelerate the elimination of hydrochlorofluorocarbons entirely by 2020 in a United Nations-sponsored Montreal summit. Developing nations were given until 2030. Many nations, such as the United States and China, who had previously resisted such efforts, agreed with the accelerated phase out schedule. India successfully achieved the complete phase out of HCFC-141 b in 2020.

It was reported that levels of HCFCs in the atmosphere had started to fall in 2021 due to their phase out under the Montreal Protocol.

===Properly collecting, controlling, and destroying CFCs and HCFCs===

While new production of these refrigerants has been banned, large volumes still exist in older systems and have been said to pose an immediate threat to our environment. Preventing the release of these harmful refrigerants has been ranked as one of the single most effective actions we can take to mitigate catastrophic climate change.

===Development of alternatives for CFCs===
Work on alternatives for chlorofluorocarbons in refrigerants began in the late 1970s after the first warnings of damage to stratospheric ozone were published.

The hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) are less stable in the lower atmosphere, enabling them to break down before reaching the ozone layer. Nevertheless, a significant fraction of the HCFCs do break down in the stratosphere and they have contributed to more chlorine buildup there than originally predicted. Later alternatives lacking the chlorine, the hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) have an even shorter lifetimes in the lower atmosphere. One of these compounds, HFC-134a, were used in place of CFC-12 in automobile air conditioners. Hydrocarbon refrigerants (a propane/isobutane blend) were also used extensively in mobile air conditioning systems in Australia, the US and many other countries, as they had excellent thermodynamic properties and performed particularly well in high ambient temperatures. 1,1-Dichloro-1-fluoroethane (HCFC-141b) has replaced HFC-134a, due to its low ODP and GWP values. And according to the Montreal Protocol, HCFC-141b is supposed to be phased out completely and replaced with zero ODP substances such as cyclopentane, HFOs, and HFC-345a before January 2020.

Among the natural refrigerants (along with ammonia and carbon dioxide), hydrocarbons have negligible environmental impacts and are also used worldwide in domestic and commercial refrigeration applications, and are becoming available in new split system air conditioners.
Various other solvents and methods have replaced the use of CFCs in laboratory analytics.

In Metered-dose inhalers (MDI), a non-ozone effecting substitute was developed as a propellant, known as &quot;hydrofluoroalkane.&quot;

===Development of Hydrofluoroolefins as alternatives to CFCs and HCFCs===

The development of Hydrofluoroolefins (HFOs) as replacements for Hydrochlorofluorocarbons and Hydrofluorocarbons began after the Kigali amendment to the Montreal Protocol in 2016, which called for the phase out of high global warming potential (GWP) refrigerants and to replace them with other refrigerants with a lower GWP, closer to that of carbon dioxide. HFOs have an ozone depletion potential of 0.0, compared to the 1.0 of principal CFC-11, and a low GWP which make them environmentally safer alternatives to CFCs, HCFCs and HFCs.

Hydrofluoroolefins serve as functional replacements for applications where high GWP hydrofluorocarbons were once used. In April 2022, the EPA signed a pre-published final rule Listing of HFO-1234yf under the Significant New Alternatives Policy (SNAP) Program for Motor Vehicle Air Conditioning in Nonroad Vehicles and Servicing Fittings for Small Refrigerant Cans. This ruling allows HFO-1234yf to take over in applications where ozone depleting CFCs such as R-12, and high GWP HFCs such as R-134a were once used. The phaseout and replacement of CFCs and HFCs in the automotive industry will ultimately reduce the release of these gases to atmosphere and in turn have a positive contribution to the mitigation of climate change.

==Tracer of ocean circulation==
Since the time history of CFC concentrations in the atmosphere is relatively well known, they have provided an important constraint on ocean circulation. CFCs dissolve in seawater at the ocean surface and are subsequently transported into the ocean interior. Because CFCs are inert, their concentration in the ocean interior reflects simply the convolution of their atmospheric time evolution and ocean circulation and mixing.

=== CFC and SF6 tracer-derived age of ocean water ===
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are anthropogenic compounds that have been released into the atmosphere since the 1930s in various applications such as in air-conditioning, refrigeration, blowing agents in foams, insulations and packing materials, propellants in aerosol cans, and as solvents. The entry of CFCs into the ocean makes them extremely useful as transient tracers to estimate rates and pathways of ocean circulation and mixing processes. However, due to production restrictions of CFCs in the 1980s, atmospheric concentrations of CFC-11 and CFC-12 has stopped increasing, and the CFC-11 to CFC-12 ratio in the atmosphere have been steadily decreasing, making water dating of water masses more problematic. Incidentally, production and release of sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) have rapidly increased in the atmosphere since the 1970s. Similar to CFCs, SF6 is also an inert gas and is not affected by oceanic chemical or biological activities. Thus, using CFCs in concert with SF6 as a tracer resolves the water dating issues due to decreased CFC concentrations.

Using CFCs or SF6 as a tracer of ocean circulation allows for the derivation of rates for ocean processes due to the time-dependent source function. The elapsed time since a subsurface water mass was last in contact with the atmosphere is the tracer-derived age. Estimates of age can be derived based on the partial pressure of an individual compound and the ratio of the partial pressure of CFCs to each other (or SF6).

====Partial pressure and ratio dating techniques====
The age of a water parcel can be estimated by the CFC partial pressure (pCFC) age or SF6 partial pressure (pSF6) age. The pCFC age of a water sample is defined as:

:formula_1

where [CFC] is the measured CFC concentration (pmol kg−1) and F is the solubility of CFC gas in seawater as a function of temperature and salinity. The CFC partial pressure is expressed in units of 10–12 atmospheres or parts-per-trillion (ppt). The solubility measurements of CFC-11 and CFC-12 have been previously measured by Warner and Weiss Additionally, the solubility measurement of CFC-113 was measured by Bu and Warner and SF6 by Wanninkhof et al. and Bullister et al. Theses authors mentioned above have expressed the solubility (F) at a total pressure of 1 atm as:
:formula_2
where F = solubility expressed in either mol l−1 or mol kg−1 atm−1,
T = absolute temperature,
S = salinity in parts per thousand (ppt),
a1, a2, a3, b1, b2, and b3 are constants to be determined from the least squares fit to the solubility measurements. This equation is derived from the integrated Van &#x27;t Hoff equation and the logarithmic Setchenow salinity dependence.

It can be noted that the solubility of CFCs increase with decreasing temperature at approximately 1% per degree Celsius.

Once the partial pressure of the CFC (or SF6) is derived, it is then compared to the atmospheric time histories for CFC-11, CFC-12, or SF6 in which the pCFC directly corresponds to the year with the same. The difference between the corresponding date and the collection date of the seawater sample is the average age for the water parcel. The age of a parcel of water can also be calculated using the ratio of two CFC partial pressures or the ratio of the SF6 partial pressure to a CFC partial pressure.

==Safety==
According to their material safety data sheets, CFCs and HCFCs are colorless, volatile, non-toxic liquids and gases with a faintly sweet ethereal odor. Overexposure at concentrations of 11% or more may cause dizziness, loss of concentration, central nervous system depression or cardiac arrhythmia. Vapors displace air and can cause asphyxiation in confined spaces. Dermal absorption of chlorofluorocarbons is possible, but low. Where the pulmonary uptake of inhaled chlorofluorocarbons occurs quickly with peak blood concentrations occurring in as little as 15 seconds with steady concentrations evening out after 20 minutes. Absorption of orally ingested chlorofluorocarbons is 35 to 48 times lower compared to inhalation. Although non-flammable, their combustion products include hydrofluoric acid and related species.
Normal occupational exposure is rated at 0.07% and does not pose any serious health risks.

==References==
==External links==

* Gas conversion table
* Nomenclature FAQ
* Class I Ozone-Depleting Substances
* Class II Ozone-Depleting Substances (HCFCs)
* History of halon-use by the US Navy 
* Process using pyrolysis in an ultra high temperature plasma arc, for the elimination of CFCs 
* Freon in car A/C
* Phasing out halons in extinguishers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q960800" start="0" end="19" title="Chlorofluorocarbon" label="Chlorofluorocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q960800" start="21" end="25" title="Chlorofluorocarbon" label="CFCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q960800" start="31" end="55" title="Chlorofluorocarbon" label="hydrochlorofluorocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q960800" start="57" end="62" title="Chlorofluorocarbon" label="HCFCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q888529" start="84" end="95" title="Halogenation" label="halogenated"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="96" end="107" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="122" end="128" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="134" end="142" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="148" end="156" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q650" start="167" end="175" title="fluorine" label="fluorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q908990" start="193" end="201" title="volatility (chemistry)" label="volatile"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="217" end="224" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q52858" start="226" end="232" title="ethane" label="ethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q131189" start="238" end="245" title="propane" label="propane"/>
<link wikidata="Q423021" start="275" end="298" title="dichlorodifluoromethane" label="dichlorodifluoromethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q266790" start="408" end="420" title="refrigerants" label="refrigerants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="422" end="433" title="propellants" label="propellants"/>
<link wikidata="Q104541" start="438" end="445" title="aerosol" label="aerosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q380192" start="461" end="485" title="gaseous fire suppression" label="gaseous fire suppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q146505" start="499" end="507" title="solvents" label="solvents"/>
<link wikidata="Q183140" start="545" end="560" title="ozone depletion" label="ozone depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="574" end="584" title="atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="650" end="667" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031943" start="725" end="742" title="hydrofluorocarbon" label="hydrofluorocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143730" start="755" end="772" title="hydrofluoroolefin" label="hydrofluoroolefin"/>
<link wikidata="Q898806" start="791" end="797" title="R-410A" label="R-410A"/>
<link wikidata="Q423029" start="799" end="805" title="R-134a" label="R-134a"/>
<link wikidata="Q179088" start="810" end="818" title="2,3,3,3-Tetrafluoropropene" label="R-1234yf"/>
<link wikidata="Q41581" start="879" end="886" title="alkanes" label="alkanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q160003" start="917" end="928" title="tetrahedral" label="tetrahedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="1226" end="1233" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193086" start="1390" end="1396" title="halide" label="halide"/>
<link wikidata="Q422994" start="2279" end="2300" title="chlorodifluoromethane" label="chlorodifluoromethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q172275" start="2306" end="2316" title="chloroform" label="chloroform"/>
<link wikidata="Q4990531" start="2500" end="2510" title="anesthetic" label="anesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q32921" start="2511" end="2549" title="halothane" label="2-bromo-2-chloro-1,1,1-trifluoroethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q266790" start="3013" end="3024" title="refrigerant" label="refrigerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343294" start="3027" end="3040" title="blowing agent" label="blowing agent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3043" end="3061" title="Aerosol spray#Aerosol propellants" label="aerosol propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q422994" start="3141" end="3162" title="chlorodifluoromethane" label="chlorodifluoromethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q412460" start="3203" end="3222" title="tetrafluoroethylene" label="tetrafluoroethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q143252" start="3259" end="3265" title="Polytetrafluoroethylene" label="Teflon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026894" start="3636" end="3653" title="bromofluorocarbon" label="bromofluorocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="3771" end="3778" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q52858" start="3780" end="3786" title="ethane" label="ethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q131189" start="3788" end="3795" title="propane" label="propane"/>
<link wikidata="Q134192" start="3801" end="3807" title="butane" label="butane"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="4333" end="4341" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858303" start="5334" end="5339" title="Freon" label="Freon"/>
<link wikidata="Q127950" start="5391" end="5397" title="Isomer" label="Isomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q99180876" start="5597" end="5619" title="photochemical reaction" label="photo-induced scission"/>
<link wikidata="Q879" start="5989" end="5996" title="Bromine" label="Bromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="6142" end="6159" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q183140" start="6181" end="6196" title="ozone depletion" label="ozone depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="6490" end="6492" title="μm" label="μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q757528" start="6512" end="6542" title="infrared window" label="&amp;quot;atmospheric window&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q41560" start="6812" end="6829" title="greenhouse effect" label="greenhouse effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q23305225" start="6895" end="6911" title="perfluorocarbons" label="perfluorocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031943" start="6913" end="6917" title="hydrofluorocarbons" label="HFCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q960800" start="6919" end="6924" title="Hydrochlorofluorocarbon" label="HCFCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026894" start="6926" end="6944" title="bromofluorocarbons" label="bromofluorocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q279055" start="6946" end="6949" title="Sulfur hexafluoride" label="SF6"/>
<link wikidata="Q413835" start="6955" end="6958" title="nitrogen trifluoride" label="NF3"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="7450" end="7464" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="7641" end="7645" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q422709" start="8067" end="8080" title="chloromethane" label="chloromethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q324992" start="8248" end="8266" title="Thomas Midgley Jr." label="Thomas Midgley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q247556" start="8493" end="8518" title="American Chemical Society" label="American Chemical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q731912" start="8852" end="8859" title="Carrier Global" label="Carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9864" end="9876" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q413018" start="10263" end="10273" title="Bromotrifluoromethane" label="Halon 1301"/>
<link wikidata="Q419723" start="10337" end="10347" title="Bromochlorodifluoromethane" label="Halon 1211"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="10656" end="10663" title="warship" label="warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q79995" start="11080" end="11091" title="ozone layer" label="ozone layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q686455" start="11097" end="11152" title="Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer" label="Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q183140" start="11590" end="11601" title="Ozone depletion" label="ozone layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q873214" start="11632" end="11657" title="electron capture detector" label="electron capture detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q210898" start="11659" end="11673" title="James Lovelock" label="James Lovelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q125264" start="11752" end="11765" title="mole fraction" label="mole fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="11772" end="11775" title="parts per trillion" label="ppt"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="11791" end="11798" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q111190" start="12198" end="12212" title="Sherry Rowland" label="Sherry Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19045" start="12217" end="12229" title="Mario Molina" label="Mario Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q108376" start="12636" end="12648" title="stratosphere" label="stratosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="12691" end="12702" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q908109" start="12743" end="12752" title="homolysis (chemistry)" label="homolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="13101" end="13111" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="13126" end="13134" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="13156" end="13173" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="13258" end="13276" title="European Community" label="European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="13379" end="13385" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q182016" start="13873" end="13911" title="United Nations Environmental Programme" label="United Nations Environmental Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="15253" end="15270" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="16832" end="16849" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002734" start="17130" end="17134" title="Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control" label="IPPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="17148" end="17162" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="17184" end="17210" title="volatile organic compounds" label="volatile organic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="17234" end="17236" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="17495" end="17512" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18251" end="18276" title="Haloalkanes#Hydro fluoro compounds (HFC)" label="hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="18705" end="18721" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="18799" end="18813" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q28499112" start="18842" end="18858" title="Kigali Amendment" label="Kigali Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="18866" end="18883" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q901028" start="18907" end="18937" title="Global Warming Potential" label="Global Warming Potential (GWP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="19144" end="19158" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="19169" end="19177" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="19254" end="19267" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="19272" end="19277" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q15278684" start="19298" end="19319" title="Global warming controversy" label="resisted such efforts"/>
<link wikidata="Q108376" start="20154" end="20167" title="stratosphere" label="stratospheric"/>
<link wikidata="Q108376" start="20401" end="20413" title="stratosphere" label="stratosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q423029" start="20649" end="20657" title="HFC-134a" label="HFC-134a"/>
<link wikidata="Q385448" start="20991" end="21018" title="1,1-Dichloro-1-fluoroethane" label="1,1-Dichloro-1-fluoroethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q80260" start="21225" end="21237" title="cyclopentane" label="cyclopentane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16897784" start="21645" end="21665" title="Metered-dose inhaler" label="Metered-dose inhaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q574862" start="26236" end="26261" title="Van &amp;#x27;t Hoff equation" label="Van &amp;#x27;t Hoff equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="27231" end="27249" title="cardiac arrhythmia" label="cardiac arrhythmia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54911" wikidata="Q41097" url="?curid=54911" title="Dew">
<text>Dew is water in the form of droplets that appears on thin, exposed objects in the morning or evening due to condensation. 
As the exposed surface cools by radiating its heat, atmospheric moisture condenses at a rate greater than that at which it can evaporate, resulting in the formation of water droplets.

When temperatures are low enough, dew takes the form of ice, called frost.

Because dew is related to the temperature of surfaces, in late summer it forms most easily on surfaces that are not warmed by conducted heat from deep ground, such as grass, leaves, railings, car roofs, and bridges.

== Formation ==
Water vapor will condense into droplets depending on the temperature. The temperature at which droplets form is called the &quot;dew point&quot;. When surface temperature drops, eventually reaching the dew point, atmospheric water vapor condenses to form small droplets on the surface. This process distinguishes dew from those hydrometeors (meteorological occurrences of water), which form directly in air that has cooled to its dew point (typically around condensation nuclei), such as fog or clouds. The thermodynamic principles of formation, however, are the same. Dew is commonly formed during select times of the day. Nights, early mornings, and early evenings are all times during which dew is likely to be found.

== Occurrence ==
Adequate cooling of the surface typically takes place when it loses more energy by infrared radiation than it receives as solar radiation from the Sun, which is especially the case on clear nights. Poor thermal conductivity restricts the replacement of such losses from deeper ground layers, which are typically warmer at night. Preferred objects of dew formation are thus poor conducting or well isolated from the ground, and non-metallic, while shiny metal coated surfaces are poor infrared radiators. Preferred weather conditions include the absence of clouds and little water vapor in the higher atmosphere to minimize greenhouse effects and sufficient humidity of the air near the ground. Typical dew nights are classically considered calm, because the wind transports (nocturnally) warmer air from higher levels to the cold surface. However, if the atmosphere is the major source of moisture (this type is called dewfall), a certain amount of ventilation is needed to replace the vapor that is already condensed. The highest optimum wind speeds could be found on arid islands. Wind always seems adverse, however, if the wet soil beneath is the major source of vapor (in which case dew is said to form by distillation).

The processes of dew formation do not restrict its occurrence to the night and the outdoors. They are also working when eyeglasses get steamy in a warm, wet room or in industrial processes. However, the term condensation is preferred in these cases.

== Measurement ==
A classical device for dew measurement is the drosometer. A small (artificial) condenser surface is suspended from an arm attached to a pointer or a pen that records the weight changes of the condenser on a drum. Besides being very wind sensitive, however, this, like all artificial surface devices, only provides a measure of the meteorological potential for dew formation. The actual amount of dew in a specific place is strongly dependent on surface properties. For its measurement, plants, leaves, or whole soil columns are placed on a balance with their surface at the same height and in the same surroundings as would occur naturally, thus providing a small lysimeter. Further methods include estimation by means of comparing the droplets to standardized photographs or volumetric measurement of the amount of water wiped from the surface. Some of these methods include guttation, while others only measure dewfall and/or distillation.

== Significance ==
Due to its dependence on radiation balance, dew amounts can reach a theoretical maximum of about 0.8 mm per night; measured values, however, rarely exceed 0.5 mm. In most climates of the world, the annual average is too small to compete with rain. In regions with considerable dry seasons, adapted plants like lichen or pine seedlings benefit from dew. Large-scale, natural irrigation without rainfall, such as in the Atacama and Namib deserts, however, is mostly attributed to fog water. In the Negev Desert in Israel, dew has been found to account for almost half of the water found in three dominant desert species: &quot;Salsola inermis, Artemisia sieberi and Haloxylon scoparium&quot;.

Another effect of dew is its hydration of fungal substrates and the mycelia of species such as pleated inkcaps, often found on lawns, and &quot;Phytophthora infestans&quot; which causes blight on potato plants.

=== Historic ===
The book &quot;On the Universe&quot; (&quot;De Mundo&quot;) (composed before 250 BC or between 350 and 200 BC) stated: &quot;Dew is moisture minute in composition falling from a clear sky; ice is water congealed in a condensed form from a clear sky; hoar-frost is congealed dew, and &#x27;dew-frost&#x27; is dew which is half congealed&quot;.

In Greek mythology, Ersa is the goddess and personification of dew.
Also, according to the myth, the dew in the morning was created when Eos (Ersa&#x27;s aunt), goddess of the dawn, cried for her son&#x27;s death, although later he received immortality.

Dew, known in Hebrew as טל (&quot;tal&quot;), is significant in the Jewish religion for agricultural and theological purposes. On the first day of Passover, the &quot;Chazan&quot;, dressed in a white &quot;kittel&quot;, leads a service in which he prays for dew between that point and Sukkot. During the rainy season between December and Passover there are also additions in the Amidah for blessed dew to come together with rain. There are many midrashim that refer to dew as being the tool for ultimate resurrection. &quot;Dewy&quot; or &quot;my father is the morning dew&quot; are approximate etymologies of the Hebrew given name, Avital.

In the Biblical Torah or Old Testament, dew is used symbolically in : &quot;My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass.&quot;

In the Catholic Mass in the Western Rite, whenever the Second Eucharistic Prayer is used, the priest prays over bread and wine, to God the Father; ‘Make holy, therefore, these gifts, we pray, by sending down your Spirit upon them like the dewfall, so that they may become for us the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ.’ The idea that the Holy Spirit enters the world and our lives in a quiet, undramatic way, ‘like the dewfall’, has great appeal for many Christians.

== Artificial harvesting ==

The potentially allows water availability in areas where supporting weather conditions, such as rain, are lacking. Several man-made devices such as antique big stone piles in Ukraine, medieval dew ponds in Southern England, and volcanic stone covers on the fields of Lanzarote have been thought to be dew-catching devices, but could be shown to work on other principles. At present, the International Organization for Dew Utilization (OPUR) is working on effective, foil-based condensers for regions where rain or fog cannot cover water needs throughout the year.

Large-scale dew harvesting systems have been made by the Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad (IIMA) with the participation of OPUR in the coastal, semiarid region of Kutch. These condensers can harvest more than 200 liters (on average) of dew water per night for about 90 nights in the October-to-May dew season. The IIMA research laboratory has shown that dew can serve as a supplementary source of water in coastal arid areas.

A large-scale dew harvesting scheme envisages circulating cold sea water in EPDM collectors near the seashore. These condense dew and fog to supply clean drinking water. Other, more recent, studies display possible roof integration for dew harvesting devices.

== References ==
== External links ==
* OPUR (International Organisation for Dew Utilization)
* International Conference on Fog, Fog Collection and Dew
* Audio Recording of Cantor Yossele Rosenblatt&#x27;s Dew Service from the Florida Atlantic University Judaica Sound Archives &quot;(Hebrew audio)&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41097" start="0" end="3" title="Dew" label="Dew"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="7" end="12" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q185789" start="28" end="36" title="droplets" label="droplets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722" start="82" end="89" title="morning" label="morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7725" start="93" end="100" title="evening" label="evening"/>
<link wikidata="Q166583" start="108" end="120" title="condensation" label="condensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192593" start="155" end="164" title="thermal radiation" label="radiating"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="250" end="259" title="evaporation" label="evaporate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="376" end="381" title="frost" label="frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="691" end="702" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q178828" start="746" end="755" title="dew point" label="dew point"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="945" end="957" title="Precipitation (meteorology)" label="hydrometeors"/>
<link wikidata="Q906347" start="1075" end="1094" title="condensation nuclei" label="condensation nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="1105" end="1108" title="fog" label="fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074" start="1112" end="1118" title="clouds" label="clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="1124" end="1137" title="Thermodynamics" label="thermodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="1439" end="1447" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="1448" end="1457" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="1478" end="1493" title="solar radiation" label="solar radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="1503" end="1506" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="1559" end="1579" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q255722" start="1936" end="1941" title="vapor" label="vapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="2566" end="2578" title="distillation" label="distillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q166583" start="2790" end="2802" title="condensation" label="condensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260539" start="2897" end="2907" title="drosometer" label="drosometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="3182" end="3196" title="Meteorology" label="meteorological"/>
<link wikidata="Q734533" start="3515" end="3524" title="lysimeter" label="lysimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q623379" start="3727" end="3736" title="guttation" label="guttation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="3779" end="3791" title="distillation" label="distillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292280" start="3838" end="3855" title="radiation balance" label="radiation balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q47141" start="4231" end="4238" title="Atacama" label="Atacama"/>
<link wikidata="Q131377" start="4243" end="4248" title="Namib" label="Namib"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="4291" end="4294" title="fog" label="fog"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4438" end="4453" title="Salsola inermis" label="Salsola inermis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4455" end="4472" title="Artemisia sieberi" label="Artemisia sieberi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28381811" start="4477" end="4496" title="Haloxylon scoparium" label="Haloxylon scoparium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519015" start="4600" end="4615" title="Parasola plicatilis" label="pleated inkcaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q149072" start="4649" end="4671" title="Phytophthora infestans" label="Phytophthora infestans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302782" start="4749" end="4764" title="On the Universe" label="On the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="4984" end="4994" title="Hoar frost" label="hoar-frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q180325" start="5098" end="5102" title="Ersa" label="Ersa"/>
<link wikidata="Q178417" start="5215" end="5218" title="Eos" label="Eos"/>
<link wikidata="Q506781" start="5270" end="5277" title="Memnon (mythology)" label="her son"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="5347" end="5353" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="5401" end="5416" title="Judaism" label="Jewish religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="5438" end="5449" title="theological" label="theological"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="5480" end="5488" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067977" start="5500" end="5506" title="Chazan" label="Chazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704111" start="5539" end="5545" title="kittel" label="kittel"/>
<link wikidata="Q182242" start="5618" end="5624" title="Sukkot" label="Sukkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q341143" start="5712" end="5718" title="Amidah" label="Amidah"/>
<link wikidata="Q202344" start="5778" end="5785" title="midrash" label="midrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q61718103" start="5966" end="5972" title="Avital (given name)" label="Avital"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="5991" end="5996" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="6000" end="6013" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="6882" end="6889" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591778" start="6900" end="6908" title="dew pond" label="dew pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134643" start="6913" end="6929" title="Southern England" label="Southern England"/>
<link wikidata="Q182432" start="6974" end="6983" title="Lanzarote" label="Lanzarote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410676" start="7094" end="7140" title="International Organisation for Dew Utilization" label="International Organization for Dew Utilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q46027" start="7329" end="7369" title="Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad" label="Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063417" start="7443" end="7448" title="Kutch" label="Kutch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54912" wikidata="Q178828" url="?curid=54912" title="Dew point">
<text>The dew point is the temperature the air needs to be cooled to (at constant pressure) in order to produce a relative humidity of 100%. This temperature depends on the pressure and water content of the air. When the air is cooled below the dew point, its moisture capacity is reduced and airborne water vapor will condense to form liquid water known as dew. When this occurs through the air&#x27;s contact with a colder surface, dew will form on that surface. 

The dew point is affected by the air&#x27;s humidity. The more moisture the air contains, the higher its dew point.

When the temperature is below the freezing point of water, the dew point is called the frost point, as frost is formed via deposition rather than condensation.
In liquids, the analog to the dew point is the cloud point.

==Humidity==
If all the other factors influencing humidity remain constant, at ground level the relative humidity rises as the temperature falls; this is because less vapor is needed to saturate the air. The dew point temperature equals the air temperature when the air is saturated with water; in all other cases the dew point will be less than the air temperature. 

In technical terms, the dew point is the temperature at which the water vapor in a sample of air at constant barometric pressure condenses into liquid water at the same rate at which it evaporates. At temperatures below the dew point, the rate of condensation will be greater than that of evaporation, forming more liquid water. The condensed water is called dew when it forms on a solid surface, or frost if it freezes. In the air, the condensed water is called either fog or a cloud, depending on its altitude when it forms. If the temperature is below the dew point, and no dew or fog forms, the vapor is called supersaturated. This can happen if there are not enough particles in the air to act as condensation nuclei.

The dew point depends on how much water vapor the air contains. If the air is very dry and has few water molecules, the dew point is low and surfaces must be much cooler than the air for condensation to occur. If the air is very humid and contains many water molecules, the dew point is high and condensation can occur on surfaces that are only a few degrees cooler than the air.

A high relative humidity implies that the dew point is close to the current air temperature. A relative humidity of 100% indicates the dew point is equal to the current temperature and that the air is maximally saturated with water. When the moisture content remains constant and temperature increases, relative humidity decreases, but the dew point remains constant.

General aviation pilots use dew point data to calculate the likelihood of carburetor icing and fog, and to estimate the height of a cumuliform cloud base.

Increasing the barometric pressure raises the dew point. This means that, if the pressure increases, the mass of water vapor per volume unit of air must be reduced in order to maintain the same dew point. For example, consider New York City ( elevation) and Denver ( elevation). Because Denver is at a higher elevation than New York, it will tend to have a lower barometric pressure. This means that if the dew point and temperature in both cities are the same, the amount of water vapor in the air will be greater in Denver.

==Relationship to human comfort==
When the air temperature is high, the human body uses the evaporation of perspiration to cool down, with the cooling effect directly related to how fast the perspiration evaporates. The rate at which perspiration can evaporate depends on how much moisture is in the air and how much moisture the air can hold. If the air is already saturated with moisture (humid), perspiration will not evaporate. The body&#x27;s thermoregulation will produce perspiration in an effort to keep the body at its normal temperature even when the rate at which it is producing sweat exceeds the evaporation rate, so one can become coated with sweat on humid days even without generating additional body heat (such as by exercising).

As the air surrounding one&#x27;s body is warmed by body heat, it will rise and be replaced with other air. If air is moved away from one&#x27;s body with a natural breeze or a fan, sweat will evaporate faster, making perspiration more effective at cooling the body, thereby increasing comfort. By contrast, comfort decreases as unevaporated perspiration increases.

A wet bulb thermometer also uses evaporative cooling, so it provides a good measure for use in evaluating comfort level.

Discomfort also exists when the dew point is very low (below around ). The drier air can cause skin to crack and become irritated more easily. It will also dry out the airways. The US Occupational Safety and Health Administration recommends indoor air be maintained at with a 20–60% relative humidity, equivalent to a dew point of approximately (by Simple Rule calculation below).

Lower dew points, less than , correlate with lower ambient temperatures and cause the body to require less cooling. A lower dew point can go along with a high temperature only at extremely low relative humidity, allowing for relatively effective cooling.

People inhabiting tropical and subtropical climates acclimatize somewhat to higher dew points. Thus, a resident of Singapore or Miami, for example, might have a higher threshold for discomfort than a resident of a temperate climate like London or Chicago. People accustomed to temperate climates often begin to feel uncomfortable when the dew point gets above , while others might find dew points up to comfortable. Most inhabitants of temperate areas will consider dew points above oppressive and tropical-like, while inhabitants of hot and humid areas may not find this uncomfortable. Thermal comfort depends not just on physical environmental factors, but also on psychological factors.

==Dew point weather records==
* Highest dew point temperature: A dew point of — while the temperature was — was observed at Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, at 3:00 p.m. on 8 July 2003.

==Measurement==
Devices called hygrometers are used to measure dew point over a wide range of temperatures. These devices consist of a polished metal mirror which is cooled as air is passed over it. The dew point is revealed by observing the loss of clarity in the reflection cast by the mirror. Manual devices of this sort can be used to calibrate other types of humidity sensors, and automatic sensors may be used in a control loop with a humidifier or dehumidifier to control the dew point of the air in a building or in a smaller space for a manufacturing process.

==Calculating the dew point==

A well-known empirical approximation used to calculate the dew point, &quot;T&quot;d, given just the actual (&quot;dry bulb&quot;) air temperature, &quot;T&quot; (in degrees Celsius) and relative humidity (in percent), RH, is the Magnus formula:
formula_1
where &quot;b&quot; = 17.625 and &quot;c&quot; = 243.04°C. The values of &quot;b&quot; and &quot;c&quot; were selected by minimizing the maximum deviation over the range -40°C to +50°C.

The more complete formulation and origin of this approximation involves the interrelated saturated water vapor pressure (in units of millibars, also called hectopascals) at &quot;T&quot;, &quot;P&quot;s(&quot;T&quot;), and the actual vapor pressure (also in units of millibars), &quot;P&quot;a(&quot;T&quot;), which can be either found with &quot;RH&quot; or approximated with the barometric pressure (in millibars), &quot;BP&quot;mbar, and &quot;wet-bulb&quot; temperature, &quot;T&quot;w is (unless declared otherwise, all temperatures are expressed in degrees Celsius):
formula_2

For greater accuracy, &quot;P&quot;s(&quot;T&quot;) (and therefore &quot;γ&quot;(&quot;T&quot;, RH)) can be enhanced, using part of the &quot;Bögel modification&quot;, also known as the Arden Buck equation, which adds a fourth constant &quot;d&quot;:
formula_3
where
*&quot;a&quot; = 6.1121 mbar, &quot;b&quot; = 18.678, &quot;c&quot; = 257.14 °C, &quot;d&quot; = 234.5 °C.

There are several different constant sets in use. The ones used in NOAA&#x27;s presentation are taken from a 1980 paper by David Bolton in the &quot;Monthly Weather Review&quot;:
*&quot;a&quot; = 6.112 mbar, &quot;b&quot; = 17.67, &quot;c&quot; = 243.5 °C.
These valuations provide a maximum error of 0.1%, for and .
Also noteworthy is the Sonntag1990,
*&quot;a&quot; = 6.112 mbar, &quot;b&quot; = 17.62, &quot;c&quot; = 243.12 °C; for (error ±0.35 °C).
Another common set of values originates from the 1974 &quot;Psychrometry and Psychrometric Charts&quot;.
*&quot;a&quot; = 6.105 mbar, &quot;b&quot; = 17.27, &quot;c&quot; = 237.7 °C; for (error ±0.4 °C).
Also, in the &quot;Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology&quot;, Arden Buck presents several different valuation sets, with different maximum errors for different temperature ranges. Two particular sets provide a range of −40 °C to +50 °C between the two, with even lower maximum error within the indicated range than all the sets above:
*&quot;a&quot; = 6.1121 mbar, &quot;b&quot; = 17.368, &quot;c&quot; = 238.88 °C; for (error ≤ 0.05%).
*&quot;a&quot; = 6.1121 mbar, &quot;b&quot; = 17.966, &quot;c&quot; = 247.15 °C; for (error ≤ 0.06%).

===Simple approximation===
There is also a very simple approximation that allows conversion between the dew point, temperature, and relative humidity. This approach is accurate to within about ±1 °C as long as the relative humidity is above 50%:
formula_4

This can be expressed as a simple rule of thumb:

For every 1 °C difference in the dew point and dry bulb temperatures, the relative humidity decreases by 5%, starting with RH = 100% when the dew point equals the dry bulb temperature.
The derivation of this approach, a discussion of its accuracy, comparisons to other approximations, and more information on the history and applications of the dew point, can be found in an article published in the &quot;Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society&quot;. 

For temperatures in degrees Fahrenheit, these approximations work out to
formula_5

For example, a relative humidity of 100% means dew point is the same as air temp. For 90% RH, dew point is 3 °F lower than air temperature. For every 10 percent lower, dew point drops 3 °F.

== Frost point ==
The frost point is similar to the dew point in that it is the temperature to which a given parcel of humid air must be cooled, at constant atmospheric pressure, for water vapor to be deposited on a surface as ice crystals without undergoing the liquid phase (compare with sublimation). The frost point for a given parcel of air is always higher than the dew point, as breaking the stronger bonding between water molecules on the surface of ice compared to the surface of (supercooled) liquid water requires a higher temperature.

== See also ==
* Bubble point
* Carburetor heat
* Hydrocarbon dew point
* Psychrometrics
* Thermodynamic diagrams

==References==
{{Reflist|}}

==External links==
* Often Needed Answers about Temp, Humidity &amp; Dew Point from the sci.geo.meteorology

{{Meteorological variables}}
{{Authority control}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Dew Point}}</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q178828" start="4" end="13" title="Dew point" label="dew point"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="108" end="125" title="relative humidity" label="relative humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q217651" start="254" end="262" title="moisture" label="moisture"/>
<link wikidata="Q166583" start="313" end="321" title="Condensation" label="condense"/>
<link wikidata="Q41097" start="352" end="355" title="dew" label="dew"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="505" end="513" title="humidity" label="humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q178828" start="665" end="676" title="Dew point" label="frost point"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="681" end="686" title="frost" label="frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q871279" start="701" end="711" title="deposition (phase transition)" label="deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q490222" start="785" end="796" title="cloud point" label="cloud point"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="895" end="912" title="relative humidity" label="relative humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="1261" end="1264" title="air" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="1277" end="1296" title="barometric pressure" label="barometric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394849" start="1337" end="1341" title="reaction rate" label="rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41097" start="1527" end="1530" title="dew" label="dew"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="1568" end="1573" title="frost" label="frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="1638" end="1641" title="fog" label="fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074" start="1647" end="1652" title="cloud" label="cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q334104" start="1783" end="1797" title="supersaturated" label="supersaturated"/>
<link wikidata="Q906347" start="1870" end="1889" title="condensation nuclei" label="condensation nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="2642" end="2658" title="General aviation" label="General aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515726" start="2716" end="2732" title="carburetor icing" label="carburetor icing"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="2737" end="2740" title="fog" label="fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q14189" start="2774" end="2784" title="cumuliform" label="cumuliform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781211" start="2785" end="2795" title="cloud base" label="cloud base"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="3773" end="3789" title="thermoregulation" label="thermoregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517825" start="4442" end="4462" title="wet bulb thermometer" label="wet bulb thermometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896787" start="4473" end="4492" title="evaporative cooling" label="evaporative cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q746186" start="4746" end="4791" title="Occupational Safety and Health Administration" label="Occupational Safety and Health Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="5218" end="5226" title="tropical climate" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="5231" end="5242" title="humid subtropical climate" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="5315" end="5324" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="5328" end="5333" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="5437" end="5443" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="5447" end="5454" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q268915" start="6015" end="6022" title="Dhahran" label="Dhahran"/>
<link wikidata="Q183173" start="6099" end="6109" title="hygrometer" label="hygrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="6856" end="6873" title="relative humidity" label="relative humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q10273440" start="7201" end="7210" title="Saturated fluid" label="saturated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661322" start="7217" end="7231" title="vapor pressure" label="vapor pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q103510" start="7245" end="7253" title="bar (unit)" label="millibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44395" start="7268" end="7280" title="Pascal (unit)" label="hectopascals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517825" start="7559" end="7567" title="wet-bulb temperature" label="wet-bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q25267" start="7667" end="7682" title="degrees Celsius" label="degrees Celsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787919" start="7882" end="7901" title="Arden Buck equation" label="Arden Buck equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="8138" end="8142" title="NOAA" label="NOAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928091" start="9993" end="10040" title="Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society" label="Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="10482" end="10502" title="atmospheric pressure" label="atmospheric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q190120" start="10508" end="10519" title="water vapor" label="water vapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q871279" start="10526" end="10535" title="deposition (phase transition)" label="deposited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325808" start="10552" end="10564" title="ice crystals" label="ice crystals"/>
<link wikidata="Q131800" start="10615" end="10626" title="sublimation (phase transition)" label="sublimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="10633" end="10638" title="frost" label="frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q213659" start="10815" end="10826" title="supercooled" label="supercooled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991828" start="10890" end="10902" title="Bubble point" label="Bubble point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515721" start="10905" end="10920" title="Carburetor heat" label="Carburetor heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q906739" start="10923" end="10944" title="Hydrocarbon dew point" label="Hydrocarbon dew point"/>
<link wikidata="Q899784" start="10947" end="10961" title="Psychrometrics" label="Psychrometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568890" start="10964" end="10986" title="Thermodynamic diagrams" label="Thermodynamic diagrams"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54920" wikidata="Q319771" url="?curid=54920" title="Cockfighting">
<text>Cockfighting is a blood sport involving domesticated roosters as the combatants. The first documented use of the word gamecock, denoting use of the cock as to a &quot;game&quot;, a sport, pastime or entertainment, was recorded in 1634, after the term &quot;cock of the game&quot; used by George Wilson, in the earliest known book on the sport of cockfighting in &quot;The Commendation of Cocks and Cock Fighting&quot; in 1607. But it was during Ferdinand Magellan&#x27;s voyage of discovery of the Philippines in 1521 when modern cockfighting was first witnessed and documented for Westerners by the Italian Antonio Pigafetta, Magellan&#x27;s chronicler, in the Kingdom of Taytay.

The gamecocks (not to be confused with game birds) are specially bred and conditioned for increased stamina and strength. Male and female chickens of such a breed are referred to as gamefowl. Cocks are also bred to be aggressive towards other males of their species. Wagers are often made on the outcome of the match, held in a ring called a cockpit.

Cockfighting is a blood sport due in some part to the physical trauma the cocks inflict on each other, which is sometimes increased by attaching metal spurs to the cocks&#x27; natural spurs. While not all fights are to the death, the cocks may endure significant physical trauma. In some areas around the world, cockfighting is still practiced as a mainstream event; in some countries it is regulated by law, or forbidden outright.

== Process ==
Two owners place their gamecock in the cockpit. The cocks fight until one of them dies or is critically injured. Historically, this was in a &quot;cockpit&quot;, a term which was also used in the 16th century to mean a place of entertainment or frenzied activity. William Shakespeare used the term in &quot;Henry V&quot; to specifically mean the area around the stage of a theatre. In Tudor times, the Palace of Westminster had a permanent cockpit, called the Cockpit-in-Court.

== History ==
Cockfighting is an ancient spectator sport. There is evidence that cockfighting was a pastime in the Indus Valley civilization. The Encyclopedia Britannica (2008) holds:

Based on his analysis of a Mohenjo-daro seal, Iravatham Mahadevan speculates that the city&#x27;s ancient name could have been Kukkutarma (&quot;the city [-rma] of the cockerel [kukkuta]&quot;). However, according to a recent study, &quot;it is not known whether these birds made much contribution to the modern domestic fowl. Chickens from the Harappan culture of the Indus Valley (2500–2100 BC) may have been the main source of diffusion throughout the world.&quot; Also, &quot;Within the Indus Valley, indications are that chickens were used for sport and not for food (Zeuner 1963)&quot;, cited in R.D. Crawford (1990). and that by 1000 BC they had assumed &quot;religious significance&quot;.

In China, the first recorded cockfight took place in 517 BC.

Some additional insight into the pre-history of European and American secular cockfighting may be taken from &quot;The London Encyclopaedia&quot;:

An early image of a fighting rooster has been found on a 6th-century BC seal of Jaazaniah from the biblical city of Mizpah in Benjamin, near Jerusalem. Remains of these birds have been found at other Israelite Iron Age sites, when the rooster was used as a fighting bird; they are also pictured on other seals from the period as a symbol of ferocity, such as the late-7th-century BC red jasper seal inscribed &quot;Jehoahaz, son of the king&quot;, which likely belonged to Jehoahaz of Judah &quot;while he was still a prince during his father&#x27;s life&quot;.

The anthropologist Clifford Geertz wrote the influential essay &quot;Deep Play: Notes on the Balinese Cockfight&quot;, on the meaning of the cockfight in Balinese culture.
== Regional variations ==

In some regional variations, the birds are equipped with either metal spurs (called &quot;gaffs&quot;) or knives, tied to the leg in the area where the bird&#x27;s natural spur has been partially removed. A &quot;cockspur&quot; is a bracelet (often made of leather) with a curved, sharp spike which is attached to the leg of the bird. The spikes typically range in length from &quot;short spurs&quot; of just over an inch to &quot;long spurs&quot; almost two and a half inches long. In the highest levels of 17th century English cockfighting, the spikes were made of silver. The sharp spurs have been known to injure or even kill the bird handlers. In the &quot;naked heel&quot; variation, the bird&#x27;s natural spurs are left intact and sharpened: fighting is done without gaffs or taping, particularly in India (especially in Tamil Nadu). There it is mostly fought naked heel and either three rounds of twenty minutes with a gap of again twenty minutes or four rounds of fifteen minutes each and a gap of fifteen minutes between them.

Cockfighting is common throughout Southeast Asia, where it is implicated in spreading bird flu. Cockfighting is a popular form of fertility worship in Southeast Asia.

=== India ===

The sport of cockfighting has long been outlawed in India, with the Supreme Court proclaiming the practice to be in direct violation of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1960. According to M Ravindranath Babu Superintendent, Indian Police, it is also considered a hijack of traditional festivals to promote illegal betting and gambling. Despite this, institutional resistance to government bans on cockfighting occurs. At India&#x27;s ‘Sun God’ festival in 2012, the local Bharatiya Janata Party district committee campaigned for the right to have cock-fights. This was then agreed by local police if it took place inside the temples.

Cockfights are currently common in the southern Indian states of Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka despite a countrywide ban imposed in 1960. It is a regional spectacle primarily taking place in January, coinciding with harvest festival celebrations. Like Jallikattu, Cock fighting (Seval Sandai) an ancient spectator sport is mentioned in Sangam literature &quot;Paṭṭiṉappālai&quot; and &quot;Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai.&quot;

=== Indonesia ===

Cockfighting is a very old tradition in Balinese Hinduism, the Batur Bang Inscriptions I (from the year 933) and the Batuan Inscription (dated 944 on the Balinese Caka calendar) disclose that the &quot;tabuh rah&quot; ritual has existed for centuries.

In Bali, cockfights, known as &quot;tajen&quot; or &quot;Sabung ayam&quot;, are practiced in an ancient religious purification ritual to expel evil spirits. This ritual, a form of animal sacrifice, is called &quot;tabuh rah&quot; (&quot;pouring blood&quot;). The purpose of tabuh rah is to provide an offering (the blood of the losing chicken) to the evil spirits. Cockfighting is a religious obligation at every Balinese temple festival or religious ceremony. Cockfights without a religious purpose are considered gambling in Indonesia, although it is still largely practiced in many parts of Indonesia. Women are generally not involved in the tabuh rah process. The tabuh rah process is held on the largest pavilion in a Balinese temple complex, the wantilan.

The American anthropologist Clifford Geertz published his most famous work, &quot;Notes on the Balinese Cockfight&quot;, on the practice of cockfights in Bali. In it, he argued that the cockfight served as a pastiche or model of wider Balinese society from which judgments about other aspects of the culture could be drawn.

=== Philippines ===

Cockfighting was already flourishing in pre-colonial Philippines, as recorded by Antonio Pigafetta, the Italian diarist aboard Ferdinand Magellan&#x27;s 1521 expedition.

Cockfighting, locally termed &quot;sabong&quot;, remains a popular pastime in the Philippines, where both illegal and legal cockfights occur. Legal cockfights are held in cockpits every week, whilst illegal ones, called &quot;tupada&quot; or &quot;tigbakay&quot;, are held in secluded cockpits where authorities cannot raid them. In both types, knives or &quot;gaffs&quot; are used. There are two kinds of knives used in Philippine cockfighting: single-edged blades (used in derbies) and double-edged blades; lengths of knives also vary. All knives are attached on the left leg of the bird, but depending on agreement between owners, blades can be attached on the right or even on both legs. &quot;Sabong&quot; and illegal &quot;tupada&quot;, are judged by a referee called &quot;sentensyador&quot; or &quot;koyme&quot;, whose verdict is final and not subject to any appeal. Bets are usually taken by the &quot;kristo&quot;, so named because of his outstretched hands when calling out wagers from the audience from memory.

The country has hosted several &quot;World Slasher Cup&quot; derbies, held biannually at the Smart Araneta Coliseum, Quezon City, where the world&#x27;s leading game fowl breeders gather. World Slasher Cup is also known as the &quot;Olympics of Cockfighting&quot;. The was held in the World Trade Center Metro Manila.

== Other bird species ==
Male saffron finches and canaries have been used in fights on occasion.

== Legal status ==
=== Argentina ===
Article 3.8 of Law 14.346 on the Ill-Treatment and Acts of Cruelty to Animals of 1954 explicitly prohibits &#x27;carrying out public or private acts of animal fights, fights of bulls and heifers, or parodies [thereof], in which animals are killed, wounded or harassed.&#x27;

=== Australia ===
Cockfighting, and the possession of cockfighting equipment, is illegal in Australia and punishable with prison time.

=== Belgium ===
In Belgium, cockfights have been prohibited since 1867. In 1929 all organised fights between animals were banned. In 1986 and 1991, the animal welfare act was amended by also criminalising attendance of cockfights. Offenders risk six months imprisonment and a fine of 2,000 euros. Since the 1990s, several people have been prosecuted for cockfighting.

=== Brazil ===
Cockfighting (&quot;rinha de galos&quot;) was banned in 1934 with the help of President Getúlio Vargas through Brazil&#x27;s 1934 constitution, passed on 16 July. Based on the recognition of animal rights in the Constitution, a Brazilian Supreme Court ruling resulted in the ban of animal related activities that involve claimed &quot;animal suffering such as cockfighting, and a tradition practiced in southern Brazil, known as &#x27;Farra do Boi&#x27; (the Oxen Festival)&quot;, stating that &quot;animals also have the right to legal protection against mistreatment and suffering&quot;.

=== Canada ===

Canada&#x27;s Criminal Code includes animal cruelty legislation, which criminalize any kind of fighting or baiting of any animal. These laws have been amended and made more restrictive over time, and as of 2018 include bans on fighting, promoting, arranging and profiting from fights, as well as breeding, training and transporting of animals for the purpose of fights and keeping of arenas for the purpose of animal fights, for animals of any kind.

=== Chile ===
Chilean Law no. 20.380 on Animal Protection of 25 August 2009 explicitly exempts various forms of &#x27;animal sports&#x27; in Article 16: &#x27;The norms of this law will not apply to sports in which animals participate, such as rodeo, cowfights, movement to the rein and equestrian sports, which will be governed by their respective regulations.&#x27;

=== Colombia ===
In Colombia, cockfighting is a tradition, especially in the Caribbean region and in some areas of the Andean interior. Cockfights are held during the Festival de la Leyenda Vallenata in Valledupar. In August 2010, the Constitutional Court of Colombia rejected a lawsuit that sought to prohibit bullfighting, and cockfighting with the argument that they constitute animal abuse. In March 2019, the same court confirmed such rule, under the argument that cockfighting and bullfighting are traditions with cultural roots in some municipalities of the country. The &quot;Asociación Nacional de Criadores de Gallos de Pelea&quot; organizes an international cockfighting championship.

Cockfighting was immortalized in the novel &quot;One Hundred Years of Solitude&quot; by Gabriel García Márquez, in episodes such as the events that led to the death of Prudencio Aguilar, or the fondness for it by José Arcadio Segundo. Cockfighting was one of the main subjects of &quot;&quot;, a TV adaptation of Juan Rulfo&#x27;s novel, &quot;El gallo de oro&quot;, aired in Colombia and other countries in the region during the late 90s.

=== Costa Rica ===
Cockfights have been illegal in Costa Rica since 1922. The government deems the activity as animal cruelty, public disorder and a risk for public health and is routinely repressed by the State&#x27;s National Secretary for Animal Welfare. The activity is also rejected by most of the population, as 88% of Costa Ricans dislike cockfights according to recent polls of the National University. Since 2017, the activity is punishable with up to two years of prison.

=== Cuba ===
In Cuba, cockfighting is legal and popular, although gambling on matches has been banned since the 1959 Revolution. The state has opened official arenas, locally known as &quot;galleras&quot;, including a 1,000-seat venue in Ciego de Ávila, but there are also banned underground cockfighting pits.

Cockfighting was so common following the Spanish conquest in the early 16th century that there were arenas in every urban and rural town. The first official known document about cockfighting in Cuba dates from 1737. It is a royal decree asking, to the governor of the island, a report about the inconveniences that might cause cockfights &quot;with the people from land and sea&quot; and asking for information about rentals of the games. The Spaniard Miguel Tacón, Lieutenant General and governor of the colony, banned cockfighting by a decree dated on October 20, 1835, limiting these spectacles only to holidays.

In 1844, a decree dictated by the Captain General of the island, Leopoldo O&#x27;Donnell, forbade non-white people to attend these shows. During the second half of the 19th century, many authorizations were conceded for building arenas, until General Juan Rius Rivera, then civilian governor in Havana, prohibited cockfighting by a decree of October 31, 1899, and later the Cuban governor, General Leonard Wood, dictated the military order no. 165 prohibiting cockfights in the whole country from June 1, 1900.

In the first half of the 20th century, legality of cockfights suffered several ups and downs.

In 1909, the then-Cuban president José Miguel Gómez, with the intention of gaining followers, allowed cockfights once again, and then regulations were agreed for the fights.

Up to the beginning of 1968, cockfights used to be held everywhere in the country, but with the purpose of stopping the bets, the arenas were closed and the fights forbidden by the authorities. In 1980, authorities legalized cockfights again and a state business organization was created with the participation of the private breeders, grouped in territories. Every year the state organization announces several national tournaments from January to April, makes trade shows and sells fighting cocks to clients from other Caribbean countries.

=== Dominican Republic ===

In the Dominican Republic, cockfighting is legal, but according to &quot;Dominican Today&quot; &#x27;increasingly rejected by society&#x27; as of December 2018. There is at least one arena (&quot;gallera)&quot; in every town, whereas in bigger cities larger &quot;coliseos&quot; can be found. Important fights are broadcast on television and newspapers have dedicated pages to cockfights and the different &quot;trabas&quot;, the local name for gamefowl breeding grounds. Those dedicated to the breeding and training of fighting cocks are called or . The cocks are often outfitted with special spurs made from various materials (ranging from plastic to metal or even carey shell) and fights are typically to the death. Public perception of the sport is as normal as that of baseball or any other major sport.

=== East Timor ===
Cockfighting and cockfighting betting is legal on licensed venues.

=== France ===
Holding cockfights is a crime in France, but there is an exemption under subparagraph 3 of article 521–1 of the French penal code for cockfights and bullfights in locales where an uninterrupted tradition exists for them. Thus, cockfighting is allowed in the Nord-Pas de Calais region, where it takes place in a small number of towns including Raimbeaucourt, La Bistade and other villages around Lille. However, the construction of new cockfighting areas is prohibited, a law upheld by the Constitutional Council of France in 2015.

Cockfighting is also legal in some French Overseas Territories.

=== Germany ===
Cockfights have no tradition in Germany. They are illegal under increasingly stringent criminal law since 1871.

=== Haiti ===
Cockfighting is legal in Haiti. Nevins (2015) described it as &#x27;the closest thing to a national sport in Haiti&#x27;, being organised every Sunday morning in places across the country. Sharp spurs are attached to the roosters&#x27; feet to make them extra lethal, and the fight usually ends with the death of one of the animals.

=== Honduras ===
In Honduras, under Article 11 of &#x27;Decree no. 115-2015 ─ Animal Protection and Welfare Act&#x27; that went into effect in 2016, dog and cat fights and duck races are prohibited, while &#x27;bullfighting shows and cockfights are part of the National Folklore and as such allowed&#x27;.

=== India ===
The Supreme Court of India has banned cockfighting as a violation of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, but it remains popular, especially in the rural coast of Andhra Pradesh, with large amount of betting involved, especially around the festival of Sankranti.

=== Indonesia ===
All forms of gambling, including the gambling within secular cockfighting, were made illegal in 1981 by the Indonesian government, while the religious aspects of cockfighting within Balinese Hinduism remain protected. However, secular cockfighting remains widely popular in Bali, despite its illegal status.

=== Iraq ===
Cockfighting is illegal but widespread in Iraq. The attendees come to gamble or just for the entertainment. A rooster can cost up to $8,000, or ₹23,000.00. The most-prized birds are called Harati, which means that they are of Turkish or Indian origin, and have muscular legs and necks.

=== Japan ===
Cockfighting was introduced to Japan from China in the early 8th century and rose to popularity in the Kamakura period and the Edo period. Cockfighting endured in some Japanese regions even after being banned in 1873, during the Meiji period.

=== Malaysia ===

Only ritual cockfighting as done for Gawai celebrations in the state of Sarawak is allowed under strict regulations; licenses given however can be frozen or revoked at will by the Sarawakian government. Cockfighting venues are often raided by Sarawakian police from time to time. All other forms of animal fighting and baiting are prohibited under the Animal Welfare Act (2015).

=== Madagascar ===
Betting on cock fights is a common and legal way of gambling in Madagascar.

=== Mexico ===

There are cockfight bans in the country&#x27;s capital, Mexico City, and in the states of Sonora and Coahuila since September 11, 2012, and in Veracruz since November 6, 2018.

Cockfighting is tolerated in the Mexican states of Michoacán, Aguascalientes, Jalisco, Sinaloa, and Veracruz, mostly during regional fairs and other celebrations. Cockfights are performed in &quot;palenques&quot; (pits). Cockfighting remains legal in the municipality of Ixmiquilpan and throughout Mexico.

The two parties to the bird fights are traditionally distinguished by red and green, typically by wearing a scarf or badge hanging on the belt. Cockfighting may be combined with a musical show. Fairs and regional festivals of the country&#x27;s municipalities are held in venues called &quot;palenques&quot; of roosters. These consist of a ring made of wood whose center is full of compacted earth for the best &#x27;performance&#x27; of the roosters. In the center, a box 4 meters per side and lines that cross from center to center each side are marked with lime. Finally, the last square, measuring 40 cm on each side, is marked in the center of the arena, where the roosters are taken the third time they are released.

=== Netherlands ===
In the Netherlands, organising or attending cockfights is illegal and punishable by up to three years imprisonment, or a fine of up to 20,500 euros.

=== New Zealand ===
The act of cockfighting is illegal under the Animal Welfare Act 1999, as is the possession, training and breeding of cocks for fighting.

=== Pakistan ===
Cockfighting was a popular sport in rural Pakistan; however, &quot;betting is illegal under the Prevention of Gambling Act 1977&quot;. Betting is illegal, but police often turn a blind eye towards it. In Sindh, people are fond of keeping a fighting cock breed known as &quot;Sindhi Aseel&quot;. These cocks are noted for being tall, heavy and good at fighting. Another popular breed is called &quot;Mianwali Aseel&quot;. In Sindh, gamblers use almonds and other enhancing medicines to feed the fighter cocks.

=== Panama ===
Law 308 on the Protection of Animals was approved by the National Assembly of Panama on 15 March 2012. Article 7 of the law states: &#x27;Dog fights, animal races, bullfights – whether of the Spanish or Portuguese style – the breeding, entry, permanence and operation in the national territory of all kinds of circus or circus show that uses trained animals of any species, are prohibited.&#x27; However, horse racing and cockfighting were exempt from the ban.

=== Paraguay ===
Organising fights between all animals, both in public and private, is prohibited in Paraguay under Law No. 4840 on Animal Protection and Welfare, promulgated on 28 January 2013. Specifically:
* &#x27;The use of animals in shows, fights, popular festivals and other activities that imply cruelty or mistreatment, that can cause death, suffering or make them the object of unnatural and unworthy treatments&#x27; is prohibited (Article 30).
* &#x27;Training domestic animals to carry out provoked fights, with the goal of holding a public or private show&#x27; is considered an &#x27;act of mistreatment&#x27;. (Article 31)
* &#x27;The use of animals in shows, fights, popular festivals, and other activities that imply cruelty or mistreatment, which may cause death, suffering or make them subject to unnatural or humiliating treatment&#x27; is considered a &#x27;very serious infraction&#x27; (Article 32), which are punishable by between 501 and 1500 minimum daily wages (&quot;jornales mínimos&quot;, Article 39), and the perpetrator may be barred from &#x27;acquiring or possessing other animals for a period that may be up to 10 years&#x27; (Article 38).

=== Peru ===
According to the &quot;Encyclopedia of Latino Culture&quot;, Peru &quot;has probably the longest historical tradition&quot; with cockfighting, with the practice possibly dating back to the 16th century. Cockfighting is legal and regulated by the government in Peru. Most pits (&quot;coliseos&quot;) in the country are located in Lima. Cockfighting and bullfighting are exempt from Peru&#x27;s animal protection laws.

In October 2018, over 5,000 Peruvians signed a petition that called for a constitutional ban on &quot;all cruel shows using animals&quot; including cockfighting and bullfighting, which was accepted and taken into consideration by the Supreme Court of Peru. However, with only three of the five required judges agreeing with the petition, on 25 February 2020 the Court ruled that it could not declare the animal fighting practices unconstitutional, leaving the applicants with no further option of appeal. A week before the verdict, thousands of other people had marched through the streets of Lima in support of the animal fighting practices.

=== Philippines ===

There is no nationwide ban of cockfighting in the Philippines but since 1948, cockfighting is prohibited every Rizal Day on December 30 where violators can be fined or imprisoned due to the Republic Act No. 229. It further is supplemented by Presidential Decree No. 449 or the Anti-Cockfighting Law of 1974 which allows cockfights only on Sundays, certain holidays, and on certain other occasions, and only at licensed cockpits.

On March 14, 2020, the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG) announced that cockfighting is temporarily banned in the Philippines due to the prohibition of mass gatherings amid the coronavirus pandemic and community quarantines across the Philippines.

Davao City Mayor Sara Duterte banned cockfighting in Davao City since April 16, 2020, also due to the coronavirus pandemic.

The Philippines has deep cultural roots connected to cockfighting that goes back to ancient times. It can be said that the Filipinos brought a major wave of cockfighting over to Hawaii when the Filipinos first arrived, even though it was widely condemned by locals of the area.

The popularity of cockfighting in the Philippines has extended into the digital space, with the advent of online sabong or e-sabong. This virtual iteration allows enthusiasts to participate in and bet on cockfights via internet streaming. The surge in online cockfighting has been significantly facilitated by the integration of modern technologies, particularly through online casino platforms that host these events. Payment apps like GCash have also played a crucial role, offering a convenient and secure method for placing bets and managing transactions online.

=== Poland ===
Cockfighting in Poland is banned. The law bans any animal cruelty in general, there are no specific laws for cockfighting. Likewise in many other European countries, this activity used to be popular up to the 18th century. In the Silesia area it used to be popular longer, even in the 19th century. It was usually held on the Day of Saint Gall (16 October). This activity was banned on most of the territory of Poland after the Partitions of Poland and before the country regained its independence in 1918. In western areas that were held by Germany, it was banned in 1871 by § 360 p. 13 of the Penal Code of the German Reich. In eastern areas that were held by Russia, it was banned in 1903 by § 287 of the Penal Code of Nikolay Stefanovich Tagantsev. After regaining independence these laws were still in power until new laws were passed. The first animal-cruelty law in independent Poland was passed in 1928 as a presidential decree and it was in power until 1997. It was added to the official Penalty Code in 1997 by § 35 points 1–2 in chapter 11. Currently, the penalty for the act is up to 3 years in prison or it might be up to 5 years if the cruelty is more drastic.

=== Romania ===
Cockfights are illegal in Romania under article 25.3 lit. c) of the Law 205/2004, with punishments ranging from 2 to 7 years imprisonment.

=== Spain ===
Cockfighting is banned in Spain except in two Spanish regions: the Canary Islands and Andalusia. In Andalusia, however, the activity has virtually disappeared, surviving only within a program to maintain the fighting breed &quot;combatiente español&quot; coordinated by the University of Córdoba. Spain&#x27;s Animal Protection Law of 1991 recognizes an exception for these regions based on cultural heritage and a history of cockfighting in the region. Animal rights organizations have sought to ban the bloodsport nationwide, but have not been successful in advancing legislation through the Spanish Parliament.

=== Ukraine === 
In Ukraine, cockfights, as well as fights involving other animals (dogs, geese, etc.) are prohibited by Art. 25 of the Law of Ukraine &quot;On the Protection of Animals from Cruelty&quot; and Art. 299 of the Criminal Code of Ukraine. For organizing cockfights, the culprit can be sentenced to a fine of up to 850 hryvnias (ukrainan currency) or imprisonment for up to six months. 
=== United Kingdom ===
Cockfighting was banned outright in England and Wales and in the British Overseas Territories with the Cruelty to Animals Act 1835. Sixty years later, in 1895, cockfighting was also banned in Scotland, where it had been relatively common in the 18th century. A reconstructed cockpit from Denbigh in North Wales may be found at St Fagans National History Museum in Cardiff and a reference exists in 1774 to a cockpit at Stanecastle in Scotland. One of the few perfect examples of a cockpit which still exist today can be found on Chislehurst common, London.

According to a 2017 report by the RSPCA, cockfighting in England and Wales was at a five-year high.

=== United States ===
, cockfighting is illegal in all 50 U.S. states, the District of Columbia, and all U.S. territories. The last state to implement a state law banning cockfighting was Louisiana; the Louisiana State Legislature voted to approve a ban in June 2007, which went into effect in August 2008.

As of 2013:
*Cockfighting is a felony in 40 states and the District of Columbia. 
*The possession of birds for fighting is prohibited in 39 states and the District of Columbia.
*Being a spectator at a cockfight is prohibited in 43 states and the District of Columbia.
*The possession of cockfighting implements is prohibited in 15 states.

Additionally, the 2014 farm bill, signed into law by President Barack Obama, contained a provision making it a federal crime to attend an animal fighting event or bring a child under the age of 16 to an animal fighting event.

The cockfighting ban was further extended by federal law to include U.S. territories—American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands—effective at the end of 2019, as signed into law in the 2018 farm bill by President Donald Trump. In Puerto Rico, cockfighting is popular and has been considered a &quot;national sport&quot; since at least the 1950s. According to a National Park Service report, it generates about $100 million annually. There are some 200,000 fighting birds annually on the island. Puerto Rico&#x27;s Cockfighting Commission regulates 87 clubs, but many non-government sanctioned &quot;underground&quot; cockfighting operations exist. On December 18, 2019, estimating that cockfighting employs 27,000 people and has a value to the economy of about $18 million, Puerto Rico passed a law attempting to keep the practice legal despite the imminent federal ban. In 2021, governor Pedro Pierluisi announced the government would support a legal effort before the U.S. Supreme Court to overturn the ban. The Supreme Court refused to hear the case, &quot;Ortiz-Diaz v. United States&quot;, in October 2021, leaving the federal ban in place.

The Animal Fighting Prohibition Enforcement Act, a federal law that made it a federal crime to transfer cockfighting implements across state or national borders and increasing the penalty for violations of federal animal fighting laws to three years in prison, became law in 2007. It passed the House of Representatives 368–39 and the Senate by unanimous consent and was signed into law by President George W. Bush.

The Animal Welfare Act was amended again in 2008 when provisions were included in the 2008 Farm Bill (P.L. 110–246). These provisions tightened prohibitions on dog and other animal fighting activities, and increased penalties for violations of the act.

Major law enforcement raids against cockfighting occurred in February 2014 in New York State (when 3,000 birds were seized and nine men were charged with felony animal-fighting in &quot;Operation Angry Birds&quot;, the state&#x27;s largest-ever cockfighting bust) and in May 2017 in California (when the Los Angeles County Sheriff&#x27;s Department seized 7,000 cockfighting birds at a ranch in Val Verde, California, one of the largest cockfighting busts in U.S. history).

===Vietnam===
Cockfighting is popular in Vietnam, with a long history dating back to the Lý dynasty. According to historical records, the soldiers of Lý Thường Kiệt brought the practice back to Vietnam after conquering Champa. During the feudal era, cockfighting was a popular form of entertainment for the emperor, officials, and the upper class. The emperors often held cockfights during festivals such as Tết Nguyên Đán (Vietnamese New Year) and Tết Trung Thu (Mid-Autumn Festival) to entertain their guests.

While cockfighting was initially popular amongst ethnic minorities in rural and mountainous areas, it is no longer limited to any particular demographic, or geographic region. Though still popular amongst amateurs, with local tournaments organized across the country, a commercialized, professional cockfighting industry has emerged. Large-scale cockfighting arenas, have been built with modern sound and lighting systems, attracting a large number of participants.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Dog fighting
* Dubbing (poultry)
* Illegal sports
* Insect fighting
* Ram fighting
* Shamo (chicken)
* Bloodsport
* Cruelty to animals

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q319771" start="0" end="12" title="Cockfighting" label="Cockfighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929372" start="18" end="29" title="blood sport" label="blood sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="53" end="61" title="roosters" label="roosters"/>
<link wikidata="Q319771" start="118" end="126" title="Cockfighting" label="gamecock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11410" start="167" end="171" title="game" label="game"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="181" end="186" title="sport" label="sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q47728" start="188" end="195" title="pastime" label="pastime"/>
<link wikidata="Q173799" start="199" end="212" title="entertainment" label="entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q319771" start="257" end="273" title="Cockfighting" label="cock of the game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="445" end="463" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Ferdinand Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225170" start="471" end="490" title="Magellan&amp;#x27;s circumnavigation" label="voyage of discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="498" end="509" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q310922" start="608" end="625" title="Antonio Pigafetta" label="Antonio Pigafetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q111730" start="673" end="679" title="Taytay, Palawan" label="Taytay"/>
<link wikidata="Q223930" start="721" end="730" title="game bird" label="game bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q38829" start="747" end="751" title="Breed" label="bred"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="820" end="827" title="chicken" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q38829" start="839" end="844" title="breed" label="breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q319771" start="864" end="872" title="Cockfighting" label="gamefowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="940" end="947" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q319771" start="1024" end="1031" title="Cockfighting" label="cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12421818" start="1088" end="1103" title="Injury" label="physical trauma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1210" end="1223" title="Spur (zoology)#In birds" label="natural spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q173799" start="1709" end="1722" title="entertainment" label="entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1745" end="1764" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q495954" start="1788" end="1795" title="Henry V (play)" label="Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="1854" end="1861" title="theatre" label="theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="1883" end="1904" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981291" start="1941" end="1957" title="Cockpit-in-Court" label="Cockpit-in-Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="2075" end="2100" title="Indus Valley civilization" label="Indus Valley civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q185562" start="2490" end="2498" title="Harrapa" label="Harappan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="2514" end="2526" title="Indus Valley civilisation" label="Indus Valley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3125" end="3142" title="Jaazaniah#Onyx seal" label="seal of Jaazaniah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755389" start="3169" end="3187" title="Mizpah in Benjamin" label="Mizpah in Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="3194" end="3203" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="3288" end="3295" title="rooster" label="rooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q336832" start="3526" end="3543" title="Jehoahaz of Judah" label="Jehoahaz of Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q310956" start="3635" end="3650" title="Clifford Geertz" label="Clifford Geertz"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3685" end="3727" title="Deep Play: Notes on the Balinese Cockfight" label="Deep Play: Notes on the Balinese Cockfight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="4645" end="4655" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="4889" end="4903" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43987" start="4941" end="4949" title="Avian influenza" label="bird flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514663" start="4995" end="5002" title="worship" label="worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="5006" end="5020" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048097" start="5955" end="5965" title="Jallikattu" label="Jallikattu"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5982" end="5994" title=":ta:சேவல் சண்டை" label="Seval Sandai"/>
<link wikidata="Q14472476" start="6063" end="6076" title="Paṭṭiṉappālai" label="Paṭṭiṉappālai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809357" start="6093" end="6112" title="Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai" label="Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai"/>
<link wikidata="Q82821" start="6167" end="6176" title="tradition" label="tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850935" start="6180" end="6197" title="Balinese Hinduism" label="Balinese Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="6396" end="6400" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6450" end="6461" title=":id:Sabung ayam" label="Sabung ayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="6520" end="6526" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142916" start="6573" end="6589" title="animal sacrifice" label="animal sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="6908" end="6916" title="gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566175" start="7145" end="7153" title="wantilan" label="wantilan"/>
<link wikidata="Q310956" start="7184" end="7199" title="Clifford Geertz" label="Clifford Geertz"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7238" end="7269" title="Deep Play: Notes on the Balinese Cockfight" label="Notes on the Balinese Cockfight"/>
<link wikidata="Q310922" start="7583" end="7600" title="Antonio Pigafetta" label="Antonio Pigafetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="7629" end="7647" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Ferdinand Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="7755" end="7766" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q625986" start="8790" end="8812" title="Smart Araneta Coliseum" label="Smart Araneta Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475" start="8814" end="8825" title="Quezon City" label="Quezon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580" start="9001" end="9013" title="Metro Manila" label="Metro Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064372" start="9046" end="9059" title="saffron finch" label="saffron finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q253941" start="9066" end="9074" title="Domestic Canary" label="canaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q156844" start="10035" end="10049" title="Getúlio Vargas" label="Getúlio Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911940" start="11541" end="11573" title="Vallenato Legend Festival" label="Festival de la Leyenda Vallenata"/>
<link wikidata="Q376903" start="11577" end="11587" title="Valledupar" label="Valledupar"/>
<link wikidata="Q184940" start="11685" end="11697" title="bullfighting" label="bullfighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q40053" start="11755" end="11767" title="animal abuse" label="animal abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q178869" start="12120" end="12149" title="One Hundred Years of Solitude" label="One Hundred Years of Solitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q200661" start="12384" end="12394" title="Juan Rulfo" label="Juan Rulfo"/>
<link wikidata="Q31867" start="12902" end="12921" title="National University of Costa Rica" label="National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264" start="13107" end="13122" title="Cuban Revolution" label="1959 Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q115465" start="13233" end="13247" title="Ciego de Ávila" label="Ciego de Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756382" start="13759" end="13771" title="Miguel Tacón y Rosique" label="Miguel Tacón"/>
<link wikidata="Q454265" start="13989" end="14012" title="Leopoldo O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Leopoldo O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6300953" start="14175" end="14191" title="Juan Rius Rivera" label="Juan Rius Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q887716" start="14322" end="14334" title="Leonard Wood" label="Leonard Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q554259" start="14565" end="14582" title="José Miguel Gómez" label="José Miguel Gómez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290851" start="15350" end="15365" title="Dominican Today" label="Dominican Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q203538" start="15944" end="15949" title="Hawksbill sea turtle" label="carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776019" start="16301" end="16318" title="Law enforcement in France" label="French penal code"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987" start="16447" end="16465" title="Nord-Pas de Calais" label="Nord-Pas de Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099476" start="16532" end="16545" title="Raimbeaucourt" label="Raimbeaucourt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16547" end="16557" title="La Bistade" label="La Bistade"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="16584" end="16589" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127218" start="16678" end="16710" title="Constitutional Council of France" label="Constitutional Council of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327385" start="16756" end="16783" title="French Overseas Territories" label="French Overseas Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="17588" end="17610" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758114" start="17657" end="17693" title="Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act" label="Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="17752" end="17766" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7255935" start="17841" end="17850" title="Sankranti" label="Sankranti"/>
<link wikidata="Q236205" start="18597" end="18612" title="Kamakura period" label="Kamakura period"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="18621" end="18631" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="18723" end="18735" title="Meiji period" label="Meiji period"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262216" start="18793" end="18811" title="Gawai Dayak" label="Gawai celebrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="18828" end="18835" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q131286357" start="19207" end="19229" title="gambling in Madagascar" label="gambling in Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="19304" end="19315" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q46422" start="19338" end="19344" title="Sonora" label="Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q53079" start="19349" end="19357" title="Coahuila" label="Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="19391" end="19399" title="Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q28912963" start="19458" end="19472" title="Mexican states" label="Mexican states"/>
<link wikidata="Q79861" start="19476" end="19485" title="Michoacán" label="Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q79952" start="19487" end="19501" title="Aguascalientes" label="Aguascalientes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13160" start="19503" end="19510" title="Jalisco" label="Jalisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q80252" start="19512" end="19519" title="Sinaloa" label="Sinaloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="19525" end="19533" title="Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918590" start="19696" end="19707" title="Ixmiquilpan" label="Ixmiquilpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191022" start="19840" end="19845" title="scarf" label="scarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q250423" start="20292" end="20296" title="Lime (material)" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764916" start="20691" end="20714" title="Animal Welfare Act 1999" label="Animal Welfare Act 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="21005" end="21010" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21076" end="21088" title="Asil chicken#Sindhi Aseel" label="Sindhi Aseel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307925" start="21200" end="21208" title="Mianwali" label="Mianwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545507" start="21245" end="21252" title="almonds" label="almonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368588" start="21383" end="21410" title="National Assembly (Panama)" label="National Assembly of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="23307" end="23311" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q5789494" start="23630" end="23651" title="Supreme Court of Peru" label="Supreme Court of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339069" start="24172" end="24181" title="Rizal Day" label="Rizal Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543505" start="24514" end="24561" title="Department of the Interior and Local Government" label="Department of the Interior and Local Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="24689" end="24709" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q90127645" start="24714" end="24735" title="2020 Philippine community quarantines" label="community quarantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473" start="24761" end="24771" title="Davao City" label="Davao City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491004" start="24778" end="24790" title="Sara Duterte" label="Sara Duterte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473" start="24814" end="24824" title="Davao City" label="Davao City"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="25978" end="25985" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180936" start="26081" end="26091" title="Saint Gall" label="Saint Gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="26176" end="26196" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655838" start="26470" end="26499" title="Nikolai Tagantsev" label="Nikolay Stefanovich Tagantsev"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="27140" end="27155" title="Spanish regions" label="Spanish regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="27161" end="27175" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="27180" end="27189" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q734010" start="27368" end="27389" title="University of Córdoba (Spain)" label="University of Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q219692" start="27688" end="27706" title="Spanish Parliament" label="Spanish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="28195" end="28223" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189913" start="28233" end="28260" title="Cruelty to Animals Act 1835" label="Cruelty to Animals Act 1835"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176486" start="28391" end="28425" title="Hawk and Buckle Inn cockpit" label="reconstructed cockpit from Denbigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954765" start="28457" end="28490" title="St Fagans National History Museum" label="St Fagans National History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="28494" end="28501" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598690" start="28549" end="28560" title="Stanecastle" label="Stanecastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q584819" start="28722" end="28727" title="RSPCA" label="RSPCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="28847" end="28857" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="28864" end="28884" title="Washington, D.C." label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603706" start="28942" end="28951" title="State law (United States)" label="state law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="28977" end="28986" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689290" start="28992" end="29019" title="Louisiana State Legislature" label="Louisiana State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q178844" start="29128" end="29134" title="felony" label="felony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4627025" start="29455" end="29469" title="Agricultural Act of 2014" label="2014 farm bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="29500" end="29512" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750769" start="29898" end="29912" title="2018 United States farm bill" label="2018 farm bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="29926" end="29938" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="29943" end="29954" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="30074" end="30095" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277878" start="30602" end="30617" title="Pedro Pierluisi" label="Pedro Pierluisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="30683" end="30701" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006612" start="30911" end="30922" title="federal law" label="federal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="30995" end="31020" title="Commerce Clause" label="state or national borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="31155" end="31179" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="31195" end="31201" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882284" start="31205" end="31222" title="unanimous consent" label="unanimous consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="31260" end="31274" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764919" start="31281" end="31299" title="Animal Welfare Act of 1966" label="Animal Welfare Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465257" start="31363" end="31377" title="2008 Farm Bill" label="2008 Farm Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="31609" end="31623" title="New York (state)" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929372" start="31692" end="31707" title="animal-fighting" label="animal-fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259709" start="31835" end="31879" title="Los Angeles County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Department" label="Los Angeles County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268355" start="31926" end="31947" title="Val Verde, California" label="Val Verde, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q878309" start="32095" end="32105" title="Lý dynasty" label="Lý dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q702734" start="32156" end="32170" title="Lý Thường Kiệt" label="Lý Thường Kiệt"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="32225" end="32231" title="Champa" label="Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q912988" start="32414" end="32428" title="Tết Nguyên Đán" label="Tết Nguyên Đán"/>
<link wikidata="Q112075710" start="32455" end="32468" title="Tết Trung Thu" label="Tết Trung Thu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066914" start="33017" end="33029" title="Dog fighting" label="Dog fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310681" start="33032" end="33049" title="Dubbing (poultry)" label="Dubbing (poultry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5999051" start="33052" end="33066" title="Illegal sports" label="Illegal sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037238" start="33069" end="33084" title="Insect fighting" label="Insect fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134267" start="33087" end="33099" title="Ram fighting" label="Ram fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q935349" start="33102" end="33117" title="Shamo (chicken)" label="Shamo (chicken)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929372" start="33120" end="33130" title="Blood sport" label="Bloodsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q40053" start="33133" end="33151" title="Cruelty to animals" label="Cruelty to animals"/>
</links>
</doc>
