<doc id="52630" wikidata="Q2293292" url="?curid=52630" title="History of the Russian Federation">
<text>The modern history of Russia began with the Russian SFSR, a constituent republic of the Soviet Union, gaining more political and economical autonomy amidst the imminent dissolution of the USSR during 1988–1991, proclaiming its sovereignty inside the Union in June 1990, and electing its first President Boris Yeltsin a year later. The Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic was the largest Soviet Socialist Republic, but it had no significant independence before, being the only Soviet republic to not have its own branch of the Communist Party.

The RSFSR was the largest of the fifteen republics that made up the USSR, accounting for over 60% of its GDP and over 50% of its population. Russians also dominated the Soviet military and the Communist Party. As such, the Russian Federation was widely accepted as the USSR&#x27;s successor state in diplomatic affairs and it assumed the USSR&#x27;s permanent membership and veto in the UN Security Council (see Russia and the United Nations).

Prior to the dissolution of the USSR, Yeltsin had been elected President of the RSFSR in June 1991 in the first direct presidential election in Russian history. This ensured that he would be the political leader of the Russian successor state following dissolution. This situation resulted in political turmoil as the Soviet and Russian leadership wrestled for control, which culminated in the 1991 August coup, where the Soviet military attempted to overthrow Mikhail Gorbachev. Although the coup was ultimately averted, this situation contributed to rising instability in the Soviet Union. As the USSR was on the verge of collapse by October 1991, Yeltsin announced that Russia would proceed with radical reforms, including shock therapy policies to introduce capitalism. This caused a sustained economic recession, and GDP per capita levels eventually returned to their 1991 levels by the mid-2000s. Following Yeltsin&#x27;s resignation in 1999, Russia&#x27;s politics have since been dominated by Vladimir Putin, serving as either President or Prime Minister. Although the Russian economy has improved significantly under Putin&#x27;s leadership following relative economic chaos under Yeltsin, Putin has also been widely accused of corruption, authoritarian leadership, and widespread human rights abuses.

For the most part, the Russian armed forces were in near complete disarray by 1992, one year after dissolution. This degraded military effectiveness would become all too clear during the 1994 Chechen War, and in the interim posed significant practical challenges for global security and arms control. Under Russian leadership, the Lisbon Protocol ensured that former Soviet republics would disarm themselves of nuclear weapons. This affected Kazakhstan in particular, as it hosted a significant share of the world&#x27;s nuclear weapons immediately following the dissolution of the Soviet Union. However, the former Soviet republics were able to maintain transnational cooperation in other military areas, like establishing shared responsibility for the rocket and space infrastructure such as the Baikonur Cosmodrome.

==Reforms==

===&quot;Shock therapy&quot;===

:&quot;See also: Shock doctrine &quot;

With the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact and COMECON and other treaties that served to bind its satellite states to the Soviet Union, the conversion of the world&#x27;s largest state-controlled economy into a market-oriented economy would have been extraordinarily difficult regardless of the policies chosen. The policies chosen for this transition were (1) liberalization, (2) stabilization and (3) privatization. These policies were based on the Washington Consensus of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank and Treasury Department.

On 2 January 1992, Yeltsin—acting as his own prime minister—enacted the most comprehensive components of economic reform by decree, thereby circumventing the Supreme Soviet of Russia and Congress of People&#x27;s Deputies of Russia, which had been elected in March 1990, before the dissolution of the USSR. While this spared Yeltsin from the prospects of bargaining and wrangling with Soviet deputies, it also eliminated any meaningful discussion of the right course of action for the country.

The programs of liberalization and stabilization were designed by Yeltsin&#x27;s deputy prime minister Yegor Gaidar, a liberal economist inclined toward radical reform, and widely known as an advocate of &quot;shock therapy&quot;. Shock therapy was originally used in Bolivia by notable economist Jeffery Sachs to combat inflation in the 1980s. Having achieved some major successes in Bolivia, shock therapy was then imported to the Polish context following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, and Russia shortly after.

The partial results of liberalization (lifting price controls) included worsening already apparent hyperinflation, initially due to monetary overhang and exacerbated after the central bank, an organ under parliament, which was skeptical of Yeltsin&#x27;s reforms, was short of revenue and printed money to finance its debt. This resulted in the near bankruptcy of much of Russian industry.

The process of liberalization would create winners and losers, depending on how particular industries, classes, age groups, ethnic groups, regions, and other sectors of Russian society were positioned. Some would benefit by the opening of competition; others would suffer. Among the winners were the new class of entrepreneurs and black marketeers that had emerged under Mikhail Gorbachev&#x27;s &quot;perestroika&quot;. But liberalizing prices meant that the elderly and others on fixed incomes would suffer a severe drop in living standards, and people would see a lifetime of savings wiped out.

With inflation at double-digit rates per month as a result of printing, macroeconomic stabilization was enacted to curb this trend. Stabilization, also called structural adjustment, is a harsh austerity regime (tight monetary policy and fiscal policy) for the economy in which the government seeks to control inflation. Under the stabilization program, the government let most prices float, raised interest rates to record highs, raised heavy new taxes, sharply cut back on government subsidies to industry and construction, and made massive cuts in state welfare spending. These policies caused widespread hardship as many state enterprises found themselves without orders or financing. A deep credit crunch shut down many industries and brought about a protracted depression.

The rationale of the program was to squeeze the built-in inflationary pressure out of the economy so that producers would begin making sensible decisions about production, pricing and investment instead of chronically overusing resources—a problem that resulted in shortages of consumer goods in the Soviet Union in the 1980s. By letting the market rather than central planners determine prices, product mixes, output levels, and the like, the reformers intended to create an incentive structure in the economy where efficiency and risk would be rewarded and waste and carelessness were punished. Removing the causes of chronic inflation, the reform architects argued, was a precondition for all other reforms: Hyperinflation would wreck both democracy and economic progress, they argued; they also argued that only by stabilizing the state budget could the government proceed to dismantle the Soviet planned economy and create a new capitalist Russia.

Nonetheless, radical reform continued to face some critical political barriers. The Central Bank was still subordinate to the conservative Supreme Soviet who continued to support socialist policies in opposition to Yeltsin and the presidency. During the height of hyperinflation in 1992–1993, the Central Bank actually tried to derail reforms by actively printing even more money during this period of inflation. After all, the Russian government was short of revenue and was forced to print money to finance its debt. As a result, inflation exploded into hyperinflation, and the Russian economy continued into an evermore serious slump.

===Privatization===

Upon the Soviet Union&#x27;s collapse, the new Russian government was forced to manage the huge state enterprise sector inherited from the Soviet economy. Privatization was carried out by the State Committee for State Property Management of the Russian Federation under Anatoly Chubais with the primary goal being to transform the formerly state-owned enterprises into profit-seeking businesses, which would not be dependent on government subsidies for their survival. To distribute property quickly and to win over popular support, the reformers decided to rely mostly on the mechanism of free voucher privatization, which was earlier implemented in Czechoslovakia. The Russian government believed that the open sale of state-owned assets, as opposed to the voucher program, would have likely resulted in the further concentration of ownership among the Russian mafia and the nomenklatura, which they sought to avoid. Nevertheless, contrary to the government&#x27;s expectations, insiders managed to acquire control over most of the assets, which remained largely dependent on government support for years to come. From 1992 to 1994, ownership of 15,000 firms was transferred from state control via the voucher program.

Privatization of the oil sector was regulated by presidential decree No.1403 approved on 17 November 1992. Vertically integrated companies were created by joining some oil-producing enterprises and refineries into open-stock companies. Starting in 1994 many former state oil companies were privatized. This privatization had been partial because the federal government had obtained ownership positions in several companies and had also retained full control over the transport of oil to lucrative world markets.

In 1995, facing severe fiscal deficit and in desperate need of funds for the 1996 presidential elections, the government of Boris Yeltsin adopted a &quot;loans-for-share&quot; scheme proposed by banker Vladimir Potanin and endorsed by Anatoly Chubais, then a deputy prime minister, whereby some of the largest state industrial assets (including state-owned shares in Norilsk Nickel, Yukos, Lukoil, Sibneft, Surgutneftegas, Novolipetsk Steel, and Mechel) were leased through auctions for money lent by commercial banks to the government. The auctions were rigged and lacked competition, being largely controlled by favored insiders with political connections or used for the benefit of the commercial banks themselves. As neither the loans nor the leased enterprises were returned in time, this effectively became a form of selling, or privatizing, state assets at very low prices.

The privatization facilitated the transfer of significant wealth to a relatively small group of business oligarchs and New Russians, particularly natural gas and oil executives.

===Obstacles to reform===
The former Soviet Union had to deal with a number of unique obstacles during the post-Soviet transition including political reform, economic restructuring and the redrawing of political boundaries. The discomfort associated with these changes was not felt the same in each former Soviet republic. As a general rule, states to Russia&#x27;s west, such as Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic, have fared slightly better than their eastern neighbors since the collapse of the Eastern bloc, while Russia itself and countries to Russia&#x27;s east experienced greater difficulties and found themselves on worse footing immediately after dissolution. A major reason that Russia&#x27;s transition has been so wrenching is that it is remaking both its Soviet-era political and economic institutions at once. In addition to institutional reforms designed to create a new political-economic system, Russia was also charged with remaking itself into a new national state following the disintegration of the Soviet Union.

The first major problem facing Russia was the legacy of the Soviet Union&#x27;s enormous commitment to the Cold War. In the late 1980s, the Soviet Union devoted a quarter of its gross economic output to the defense sector (at the time most Western analysts believed that this figure was 15 percent). At the time, the military-industrial complex employed at least one of every five adults in the Soviet Union. In some regions of Russia, at least half of the workforce was employed in defense plants (the comparable U.S. figures were roughly one-sixteenth of gross national product and about one of every sixteen in the workforce). These over-reliance on the military sector made Russian industry and human capital relatively noncompetitive upon entry into a market-oriented system. Furthermore, the end of the Cold War and the cutback in military spending affected industry quite dramatically making it difficult to quickly retool equipment, retrain workers, and find new markets. In the process of economic re-tooling, an enormous body of experience, qualified specialists and know-how was lost or misallocated, as the plants were sometimes switching from, for example, producing hi-tech military equipment to making kitchen utensils.

A second obstacle, partly related to the sheer vastness and geographical diversity of the Russian landmass, was the sizable number of &quot;mono-industrial&quot; regional economies (regions dominated by a single industrial employer) that Russia inherited from the Soviet Union. The concentration of production in a relatively small number of big state enterprises meant that many local governments were entirely dependent on the economic health of a single employer; when the Soviet Union collapsed and the economic ties between Soviet republics and even regions were severed, the production in the whole country dropped by more than fifty percent. Roughly half of Russia&#x27;s cities had only one large industrial enterprise, and three fourths had no more than four. Consequently, the decrease in production caused tremendous unemployment and underemployment.

Thirdly, post-Soviet Russia did not inherit a system of state social security and welfare from the USSR. Instead the companies, mainly large industrial firms, were traditionally responsible for a broad range of social welfare functions—building and maintaining housing for their work forces, and managing health, recreational, educational, and similar facilities. The towns in contrast possessed neither the apparatus nor the funds for the provision of basic social services. Industrial employees were left heavily dependent on their firms. Thus, economic transformation created severe problems in maintaining social welfare since local governments were unable to assume finance or operational responsibility for these functions.

Finally, there is a human capital dimension to the failure of post-Soviet reforms in Russia. The former Soviet population was not necessarily uneducated. Literacy was nearly universal, and the educational level of the Soviet population was among the highest in the world with respect to science, engineering, and some technical disciplines, although the Soviets devoted little to what would be described as &quot;liberal arts&quot; in the West. With the move to a post-Communist system, the Russian university system collapsed. Rampant credential inflation in the Russian university system made it difficult for employers to determine who was really skilled and the problems of the higher education system more generally made it difficult to remedy other issues of human capital that came from the transition to a market-oriented system, such as upskilling and re-skilling. For example, former state enterprise managers were highly skilled at coping with the demands on them under the Soviet system of planned production targets, but discouraged the risk-and-reward centered behavior of market capitalism. These managers were responsible for a broad array of social welfare functions for their employees, their families, and the population of the towns and regions where they were located. Profitability and efficiency, however, were generally not the most prominent priorities for Soviet enterprise managers. Thus, almost no Soviet employees or managers had firsthand experience with decision-making in the conditions of a market economy.

===Depression===

After the initial turmoil and euphoria of early marketizations, Russia&#x27;s economy sank into deep depression by the mid-1990s due to botched reform efforts and low commodity prices globally but not before George H. W. Bush helped Yeltsin with &quot;an unparalleled opportunity to change the nuclear posture of both the United States and the Soviet Union&quot; and to end the Cold War peacefully with the Nunn–Lugar cash-for-weapons scheme, in order to avoid the worst of the dissolution of the vast Soviet technological empire. Russia&#x27;s economy was hit further by the financial crash of 1998 before experiencing a modest recovery in 1999–2000 as commodity prices began to rise again. According to Russian government statistics, the economic decline was far more severe than the Great Depression was in the United States in terms of gross domestic product.

In 1995, a little over 3% of the work force was officially registered as unemployed, but, in addition to the technically jobless, 4.4% of the labour force were working only part time, while a further 3.9% had been sent on involuntary leave. Also millions of Russians turned up for work each day, but were not paid by the employers. If all these categories of jobless, semi-employed and unpaid workers were taken into account, the 18% Russian unemployment figure cited in June 1995 by labour market expert Tatyana Maleva of the Institute of Economic Analysis seemed real. With unemployment benefits sufficient only to buy a small loaf of bread each day, trying to survive without some other income was not an option for those who lost jobs. They were toiling during the warmer months to grow food in family vegetable plots, selling newspapers or lottery tickets on the streets, busking, begging, turning to prostitution. Often they sank into the criminal underworld.

In 1997, at least 98,400 companies were defaulting on payments to employees. It was estimated that one out of four Russian workers, or close on 20 million people, were not paid for months. Some were paid &quot;in kind&quot;: for example, women workers were paid in brassieres and shoes that they resold in the streets, workers of Moskvich, the auto plant in Moscow, were paid in spare parts, those of the Ivanovo textile plants were paid in bedsheets, and those of the Gus-Khrustalny porcelain factory were paid in crystal and ceramic vases.

By way of a domestic comparison, the post-Soviet economic decline was about half as severe as the economic catastrophe borne out of the immediate consequence of World War I, the fall of Tsarism, and the Russian Civil War.

Following the economic collapse of the early 1990s, Russia suffered from a sharp increase in the rates of poverty and economic inequality. Estimates by the World Bank based on both macroeconomic data and surveys of household incomes and expenditures indicate that whereas 1.5% of the population was living in poverty (defined as income below the equivalent of $25 per month) in the late Soviet era, by mid-1993 between 39% and 49% of the population was living in poverty. Per capita incomes fell by another 15% by 1998, according to government figures.

Public health indicators show a dramatic corresponding decline. Although all post-Soviet countries experience an immediate decline in birth-rates due to economic turmoil this may have been particularly acute in Russia. In 1999, total population fell by about three-quarters of a million people. Meanwhile, life expectancy dropped for men from 64 years in 1990 to 57 years by 1994, while women&#x27;s dropped from 74 to about 71. Both health factors and a sharp increase in deaths of the youth demographic from unnatural causes (such as murders, suicides, and accidents) have significantly contributed to this trend. Closely related to the declining life expectancy, alcohol-related deaths skyrocketed 60% in the 1990s and deaths from infectious and parasitic diseases shot up 100%, mainly because medicines were no longer affordable to the poor.

While the opening of the Russian market to imports in the early 1990s meant the nation no longer suffered from the supply shortages of consumer goods that was often characteristic of the USSR (&quot;see&quot; Consumer goods in the Soviet Union), the relative impoverishment of the Russian people during this time meant only a limited number saw any significant benefit. Russians on fixed incomes (the vast majority of the workforce) saw their purchasing power drastically reduced, so while the stores might have been well stocked in the Yeltsin era, average people could now afford to buy little, if anything from these stores. By 2011, the average income has risen to more than $700 per month, emblematic of the mild recovery in recent years largely due to high oil prices. The growing revenue, however, has not been evenly distributed. Social inequality has risen sharply since the 1990s with the Gini coefficient, for example, reaching 42% by the end of 2010. Russia&#x27;s income disparities are now nearly as large as Brazil (which has long been a world leader in the area) while regional disparities in the level of poverty continue to trend upwards.

===Backlash===
Structural reform and a severe devaluation of the ruble lowered the standard of living for most segments of the Russian population. As a result, there was powerful political opposition to reform. Democratization opened the political channels for venting these frustrations, which translated into votes for anti-reform candidates, especially those of the Communist Party of the Russian Federation and its allies in the Duma. Russian voters, able to vote for opposition parties in the 1990s, often rejected economic reforms and yearned for the stability and personal security of the Soviet era. These were the groups that had enjoyed the benefits of Soviet-era state-controlled wages and prices, high state spending to subsidize priority sectors of the economy, protection from competition with foreign industries, and welfare entitlement programs. During the Yeltsin years in the 1990s, these anti-reformist groups were well organized, voicing their opposition to reform through strong trade unions, associations of directors of state-owned firms, and political parties in the popularly elected parliament whose primary constituencies were among those vulnerable to reform. A constant theme of Russian history in the 1990s was the conflict between economic reformers and those hostile to the new capitalism.

In the 1990s, former Soviet bureaucrats, factory directors, aggressive businessmen and criminal organizations used insider deals, bribery and simple brute force in order to grab lucrative assets, which were previously state-owned. Russia&#x27;s new &quot;capitalists&quot; spent millions of dollars for protection. However, almost every business in Russia, from curbside vendors to huge oil and gas companies, made payments to the organized crime for protection (&quot;krysha&quot;). Businessmen said that they needed the &quot;krysha&quot; because the laws and the court system were not functioning properly in Russia. The only way for them to enforce a contract was to turn to a criminal &quot;krysha&quot;. They also used it to intimidate competitors, collect debts or take over new markets. It was also increasingly common for businesses to turn to the &quot;red krysha&quot; — corrupt police who ran protection rackets. Within this system, a sharp rise in contract killings developed.

==Crisis==

===Constitutional crisis===

The struggle for the center of power in Soviet Russia following the collapse of the Soviet Union and for the nature of the economic reforms culminated in a political crisis and bloodshed in the autumn of 1993. Yeltsin, who represented a course of radical privatization, was opposed by the Supreme Soviet. Confronted with opposition to the presidential power of decree and threatened with impeachment, he &quot;dissolved&quot; the parliament on 21 September, in contravention of the existing constitution, and ordered new elections and a referendum on a new constitution. The parliament then declared Yeltsin deposed and appointed Aleksandr Rutskoy acting president on 22 September. Tensions built quickly, and matters came to a head after street riots on 2 – 3 October. On 4 October, Yeltsin ordered Special Forces and elite army units to storm the parliament building, the &quot;White House&quot; as it is called. With tanks thrown against the small-arms fire of the parliamentary defenders, the outcome was not in doubt. Rutskoy, Ruslan Khasbulatov, and the other parliamentary supporters surrendered and were immediately arrested and jailed. The official count was 147 dead, 437 wounded (with several men killed and wounded on the presidential side).

Thus the transitional period in post-Soviet Russian politics came to an end. A new constitution was approved by referendum in December 1993. Russia was given a strongly presidential system. Radical privatization went ahead. Although the old parliamentary leaders were released without trial on 26 February 1994, they would not play an open role in politics thereafter. Though its clashes with the executive would eventually resume, the remodeled Russian parliament had greatly circumscribed powers. (&quot;For details on the constitution passed in 1993 see Constitution and government structure of Russia.&quot;)

===First Chechen War===

In 1994, Yeltsin dispatched 40,000 troops to the southern region of Chechnya to prevent its secession from Russia. Living south of Moscow, the predominantly Muslim Chechens for centuries had gloried in defying Russia. Dzhokhar Dudayev, Chechnya&#x27;s nationalist president, was driven to take his republic out of the Russian Federation, declaring independence in 1991. Gripped by the chaos of the Soviet Union&#x27;s ongoing dissolution, Chechnya initially operated as a de facto independent nation-though this status was never recognized by Russia. In 1994, the Russian Armed Forces invaded and quickly became submerged in a military quagmire. In January 1995, the Russian army and air force commenced a siege of the Chechen capital of Grozny; about 25,000 Chechen civilians died under week-long air raids and artillery fire in the sealed-off city. Massive use of artillery and air-strikes remained the dominating strategy throughout the Russian campaign. Even so, Chechen forces seized thousands of Russian hostages, while inflicting humiliating losses on the demoralized and ill-equipped Russian troops.

The Russians finally managed to gain control of Grozny by February 1995 after heavy fighting. In August 1996, Yeltsin agreed to a ceasefire with Chechen leaders, and a peace treaty was formally signed in May 1997. However, the conflict resumed in 1999; this time the rebellion was crushed by Vladimir Putin.

===Rise of the oligarchs===

The new capitalist opportunities presented by the opening of the Russian economy in the late 1980s and early 1990s affected many people&#x27;s interests. As the Soviet system was being dismantled, well-placed bosses and technocrats in the Communist Party, KGB, and Komsomol (Soviet Youth League) were cashing in on their Soviet-era power and privileges. Some quietly liquidated the assets of their organization and secreted the proceeds in overseas accounts and investments. Others created banks and business in Russia, taking advantage of their insider positions to win exclusive government contracts and licenses and to acquire financial credits and supplies at artificially low, state-subsidized prices in order to transact business at high, market-value prices. Great fortunes were made almost overnight.

Between 1987 and 1992, trading of natural resources and foreign currencies, as well as imports of highly demanded consumer goods and then domestic production of their rudimentary substitutes, rapidly enabled these pioneering entrepreneurs to accumulate considerable wealth. In turn, the emerging cash-based, highly opaque markets provided a breeding ground for a large number of racket gangs.

By the mid-1990s, the best-connected former nomenklatura leaders accumulated considerable financial resources, while on the other hand, the most successful entrepreneurs became acquainted with government officials and public politicians. The privatization of state enterprises was a unique opportunity because it gave many of those who had gained wealth in the early 1990s a chance to convert it into shares of privatized enterprises.

The Yeltsin government hoped to use privatization to spread ownership of shares in former state enterprises as widely as possible to create political support for his government and his reforms. The government used a system of free vouchers as a way to give mass privatization a jump-start. But it also allowed people to purchase shares of stock in privatized enterprises with cash. Even though initially each citizen received a voucher of equal face value, within months most of the vouchers converged in the hands of intermediaries who were ready to buy them for cash right away.

As the government ended the voucher privatization phase and launched cash privatization, it devised a program that it thought would simultaneously speed up privatization and yield the government a much-needed infusion of cash for its operating needs. Under the scheme, which quickly became known in the West as &quot;loans for shares,&quot; the Yeltsin regime auctioned off substantial packages of stock shares in some of its most desirable enterprises, such as energy, telecommunications, and metallurgical firms, as collateral for bank loans.

In exchange for the loans, the state handed over assets worth many times as much. Under the terms of the deals, if the Yeltsin government did not repay the loans by September 1996, the lender acquired title to the stock and could then resell it or take an equity position in the enterprise. The first auctions were held in the fall of 1995. The auctions themselves were usually held in such a way so to limit the number of banks bidding for shares and thus to keep the auction prices extremely low. By summer 1996, major packages of shares in some of Russia&#x27;s largest firms had been transferred to a small number of major banks, thus allowing a handful of powerful banks to acquire substantial ownership shares over major firms at shockingly low prices. These deals were effectively giveaways of valuable state assets to a few powerful, well-connected, and wealthy financial groups.

The concentration of immense financial and industrial power, which loans for shares had assisted, extended to the mass media. One of the most prominent of the financial barons Boris Berezovsky, who controlled major stakes in several banks and companies, exerted an extensive influence over state television programming for a while. Berezovsky and other ultra-wealthy, well-connected tycoons who controlled these great empires of finance, industry, energy, telecommunications, and media became known as the &quot;Russian oligarchs&quot;. Along with Berezovsky, Mikhail Khodorkovsky, Roman Abramovich, Vladimir Potanin, Vladimir Bogdanov, Rem Viakhirev, Vagit Alekperov, Viktor Chernomyrdin, Viktor Vekselberg, and Mikhail Fridman emerged as Russia&#x27;s most powerful and prominent oligarchs.

A tiny clique who used their connections built up during the last days of the Soviet years to appropriate Russia&#x27;s vast resources during the rampant privatizations of the Yeltsin years, the oligarchs emerged as the most hated men in the nation. The Western world generally advocated a quick dismantling of the Soviet planned economy to make way for free-market reforms but later expressed disappointment over the newfound power and corruption of the oligarchs.

===Presidential election of 1996===
====Campaigns====
Early in the campaign it had been thought that Yeltsin, who was in uncertain health (after recuperating from a series of heart attacks) and whose behavior was sometimes erratic, had little chance for reelection. When campaigning opened at the beginning of 1996, Yeltsin&#x27;s popularity was close to zero. Meanwhile, the opposition Communist Party of the Russian Federation had already gained ground in parliamentary voting on 17 December 1995, and its candidate, Gennady Zyuganov, had a strong grassroots organization, especially in the rural areas and small towns, and appealed effectively to memories of the old days of Soviet prestige on the international stage and the socialist domestic order.

Panic struck the Yeltsin team when opinion polls suggested that the ailing president could not win; members of his entourage urged him to cancel presidential elections and effectively rule as dictator from then on. Instead, Yeltsin changed his campaign team, assigning a key role to his daughter, Tatyana Dyachenko, and appointing Anatoly Chubais campaign manager. Chubais, who was not just Yeltsin&#x27;s campaign manager but also the architect of Russia&#x27;s privatization program, set out to use his control of the privatization program as the key instrument of Yeltsin&#x27;s reelection campaign.

In addition, American lobbyists spent millions of dollars to see Yeltsin elected.

The president&#x27;s inner circle assumed that it had only a short time in which to act on privatization; it, therefore, needed to take steps that would have a large and immediate impact, making the reversal of reform prohibitively costly for their opponents. Chubais&#x27; solution was to co-opt potentially powerful interests, including enterprise directors and regional officials, in order to ensure Yeltsin&#x27;s reelection.

The position of the enterprise directors to the program was essential to maintaining economic and social stability in the country. The managers represented one of the most powerful collective interests in the country; it was the enterprise managers who could ensure that labor did not erupt in a massive wave of strikes. The government, therefore, did not strenuously resist the tendency for voucher privatization to turn into &quot;insider privatization,&quot; as it was termed, in which senior enterprise officials acquired the largest proportion of shares in privatized firms. Thus, Chubais allowed well-connected employees to acquire majority stakes in the enterprises. This proved to be the most widely used form of privatization in Russia. Three-quarters of privatized enterprises opted for this method, most often using vouchers. Real control thus wound up in the hands of the managers.

Support from the oligarchs was also crucial to Yeltsin&#x27;s reelection campaign. The &quot;loans for shares&quot; giveaway took place in the run-up to the 1996 presidential election—at a point when it had appeared that Zyuganov might defeat Yeltsin. Yeltsin and his entourage gave the oligarchs an opportunity to scoop up some of Russia&#x27;s most desirable assets in return for their help in his reelection effort. The oligarchs, in turn, reciprocated the favor.

In the spring of 1996, with Yeltsin&#x27;s popularity at a low ebb, Chubais and Yeltsin recruited a team of six leading Russian financiers and media barons (all oligarchs) who bankrolled the Yeltsin campaign with $3 million and guaranteed coverage on television and in leading newspapers directly serving the president&#x27;s campaign strategy. The media painted a picture of a fateful choice for Russia, between Yeltsin and a &quot;return to totalitarianism.&quot; The oligarchs even played up the threat of civil war if a Communist were elected president.

In the outlying regions of the country, the Yeltsin campaign relied on its ties to other allies—the patron-client ties of the local governors, most of whom had been appointed by the president.

The Zyuganov campaign had a strong grass-roots organization, but it was simply no match for the financial resources and access to patronage that the Yeltsin campaign could marshal.

Yeltsin campaigned energetically, dispelling concerns about his health, exploiting all the advantages of incumbency to maintain a high media profile. To assuage voters&#x27; discontent, he made the claim that he would abandon some unpopular economic reforms and boost welfare spending, end the war in Chechnya, pay wage and pension arrears, and abolish military conscription (he did not live up to his promises after the election, except for ending the Chechen war, which was halted for 3 years). Yeltsin&#x27;s campaign also got a boost from the announcement of a $10 billion loan to the Russian government from the International Monetary Fund.

Grigory Yavlinsky was the liberal alternative to Yeltsin and Zyuganov. He appealed to a well-educated middle class that saw Yeltsin as an incompetent alcoholic and Zyuganov as a Soviet-era throwback. Seeing Yavlinsky as a threat, Yeltsin&#x27;s inner circle of supporters worked to bifurcate political discourse, thus excluding a middle ground—and convince voters that only Yeltsin could defeat the Communist &quot;menace.&quot; The election became a two-man race, and Zyuganov, who lacked Yeltsin&#x27;s resources and financial backing, watched helplessly as his strong initial lead was whittled away.

====Elections====
Voter turnout in the first round of the polling on 16 June was 69.8%. According to returns announced on 17 June, Yeltsin won 35% of the vote; Zyuganov won 32%; Aleksandr Lebed, a populist ex-general, a surprisingly high 14.5%; liberal candidate Grigory Yavlinsky 7.4%; far-right nationalist Vladimir Zhirinovsky 5.8%; and former Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev 0.5%. With no candidate securing an absolute majority, Yeltsin and Zyuganov went into a second round of voting. In the meantime, Yeltsin co-opted a large segment of the electorate by appointing Lebed to the posts of national security adviser and secretary of the Security Council.

In the end, Yeltsin&#x27;s election tactics paid off. In the run-off on 3 July, with a turnout of 68.9%, Yeltsin won 53.8% of the vote and Zyuganov 40.3%, with the rest (5.9%) voting &quot;against all&quot;. Moscow and Saint Petersburg (formerly Leningrad) together provided over half of the incumbent president&#x27;s support, but he also did well in large cities in the Urals and in the north and northeast. Yeltsin lost to Zyuganov in Russia&#x27;s southern industrial heartland. The southern stretch of the country became known as the &quot;red belt&quot;, underscoring the resilience of the Communist Party in elections since the breakup of the Soviet Union.

Although Yeltsin promised that he would abandon his unpopular neoliberal austerity policies and increase public spending to help those suffering from the pain of capitalist reforms, within a month of his election, Yeltsin issued a decree canceling almost all of these promises.

Right after the election, Yeltsin&#x27;s physical health and mental stability were increasingly precarious. Many of his executive functions thus devolved upon a group of advisers (most of whom had close links with the oligarchs).

===Financial collapse===

The global recession of 1998, which started with the Asian financial crisis in July 1997, exacerbated Russia&#x27;s continuing economic crisis. Given the ensuing decline in world commodity prices, countries heavily dependent on the export of raw materials such as oil were among those most severely hit. Oil, natural gas, metals, and timber account for more than 80% of Russian exports, leaving the country vulnerable to swings in world prices. Oil is also a major source of government tax revenue which brought significant negative implications for Russia&#x27;s fiscal situation, foreign exchange stores and ultimately, the value of the ruble.

The pressures on the ruble, reflecting the weakness of the economy, resulted in a disastrous fall in the value of the currency. Massive tax evasion continued and accelerated due to financial instability and decreasing government capacity. This further decreased government revenues and soon, the central government found itself unable to service the massive loans it had accumulated and ultimately was even unable to pay its employees. The government stopped making timely payment of wages, pensions, and debts to suppliers; and when workers were paid, it was often with bartered goods rather than rubles. Coal miners were especially hard hit, and for several weeks in the summer they blocked sections of the Trans-Siberian railroad with protests, effectively cutting the country in two. As time wore on, they added calls for the resignation of Yeltsin in addition to their demands for wages.

A political crisis came to a head in March when Yeltsin suddenly dismissed Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin and his entire cabinet on 23 March. Yeltsin named a virtually unknown technocrat, Energy Minister Sergei Kiriyenko, aged 35, as acting prime minister. Russian observers expressed doubts about Kiriyenko&#x27;s youth and inexperience. The Duma rejected his nomination twice. Only after a month-long standoff, during which Yeltsin threatened to dissolve the legislature, did the Duma confirm Kiriyenko on a third vote on 24 April.

Kiriyenko appointed a new cabinet strongly committed to stemming the fall in the value of Russia&#x27;s currency. The oligarchs strongly supported Kiriyenko&#x27;s efforts to maintain the exchange rate. A high exchange rate meant that they needed fewer rubles to buy imported goods, especially luxury items.

In an effort to prop up the currency and stem the flight of capital, Kiriyenko hiked interest rates to 150% in order to attract buyers for government bonds. But concerns about the financial crisis in Asia and the slump in world oil prices were already prompting investors to withdraw from Russia. By mid-1998, it was clear Russia would need help from IMF to maintain its exchange rate.

The Russian crisis caused alarm in the West. Pouring more money into the Russian economy would not be a long-term solution, but the U.S. in particular feared that Yeltsin&#x27;s government would not survive a looming financial crisis without IMF help. U.S. President Bill Clinton&#x27;s treasury secretary, Robert Rubin, also feared that a Russian collapse could create a panic on world money markets (and it indeed did help bring down one major US hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management). The IMF approved a $22.6 billion emergency loan on 13 July.

Despite the bailout, Russia&#x27;s monthly interest payments still well exceeded its monthly tax revenues. Realizing that this situation was unsustainable, investors continued to flee Russia despite the IMF bailout. Weeks later the financial crisis resumed and the value of the ruble resumed its fall, and the government fell into a self-perpetuating trap. To pay off the interest on the loans it had taken, it needed to raise still more cash, which it did through foreign borrowing. As lenders became increasingly certain that the government could not make good on its obligations, they demanded ever-higher interest rates, deepening the trap. Ultimately the bubble burst.

On 17 August, Kiriyenko&#x27;s government and the central bank were forced to suspend payment on Russia&#x27;s foreign debt for 90 days, restructure the nation&#x27;s entire debt, and devalue the ruble. The ruble went into free fall as Russians sought frantically to buy dollars. Western creditors lost heavily, and a large part of Russia&#x27;s fledgling banking sector was destroyed, since many banks had substantial dollar borrowings. Foreign investment rushed out of the country, and financial crisis triggered an unprecedented flight of capital from Russia.

====Political fallout====

The financial collapse produced a political crisis, as Yeltsin, with his domestic support evaporating, had to contend with an emboldened opposition in the parliament. A week later, on 23 August, Yeltsin fired Kiryenko and declared his intention of returning Chernomyrdin to office as the country slipped deeper into economic turmoil. Powerful business interests, fearing another round of reforms that might cause leading concerns to fail, welcomed Kiriyenko&#x27;s fall, as did the Communists.

Yeltsin, who began to lose his hold as his health deteriorated, wanted Chernomyrdin back, but the legislature refused to give its approval. After the Duma rejected Chernomyrdin&#x27;s candidacy twice, Yeltsin, his power clearly on the wane, backed down. Instead, he nominated Foreign Minister Yevgeny Primakov, who on 11 September was overwhelmingly approved by the Duma.

Primakov&#x27;s appointment restored political stability because he was seen as a compromise candidate able to heal the rifts between Russia&#x27;s quarreling interest groups. There was popular enthusiasm for Primakov as well. Primakov promised to make the payment of wage and pension arrears his government&#x27;s first priority, and invited members of the leading parliamentary factions into his Cabinet.

Communists and trade unionists staged a nationwide strike on 7 October, and called on President Yeltsin to resign. On 9 October, Russia, which was also suffering from a bad harvest, appealed for international humanitarian aid, including food.

====Recovery====
Russia bounced back from the August 1998 financial crash with surprising speed. Much of the reason for the recovery is that world oil prices rapidly rose during 1999–2000 (just as falling energy prices on the world market had deepened Russia&#x27;s financial troubles) so that Russia ran a large trade surplus in 1999 and 2000. Another reason is that domestic industries such as food processing have benefited from the devaluation, which caused a steep increase in the prices of imported goods. Also, since Russia&#x27;s economy was operating to such a large extent on barter and other non-monetary instruments of exchange, the financial collapse had far less of an impact on many producers than it would had the economy been dependent on a banking system. Finally, the economy has been helped by an infusion of cash; as enterprises were able to pay off arrears in back wages and taxes, it, in turn, allowed consumer demand for the goods and services of Russian industry to rise. For the first time in many years, unemployment in 2000 fell as enterprises added workers.

Nevertheless, the political and social equilibrium of the country remains tenuous to this day, and power remains a highly personalized commodity. The economy remains vulnerable to downturn if, for instance, world oil prices fall at a dramatic pace.

===Succession crisis===

Yevgeny Primakov did not remain in his post long. Yeltsin grew suspicious that Primakov was gaining in strength and popularity and dismissed him in May 1999, after only eight months in office. Yeltsin then named Sergei Stepashin, who had formerly been head of the FSB (the successor agency to the KGB) and later been Interior Minister, to replace him. The Duma confirmed his appointment on the first ballot by a wide margin.

Stepashin&#x27;s tenure was even shorter than Primakov&#x27;s. In August 1999, Yeltsin once again abruptly dismissed the government and named Vladimir Putin as his candidate to head the new government. Like Stepashin, Putin had a background in the secret police, having made his career in the foreign intelligence service and later as head of the FSB. Yeltsin went so far as to declare that he saw Putin as his successor as president. The Duma narrowly voted to confirm Putin.

When appointed, Putin was a relatively unknown politician, but he quickly established himself both in public opinion and in Yeltsin&#x27;s estimation as a trusted head of government, largely due to the Second Chechen War. Just days after Yeltsin named Putin as a candidate for prime minister, Chechen forces engaged the Russian army in Dagestan, a Russian autonomy near Chechnya. In the next month, several hundred people died in apartment building bombings in Moscow and other cities, bombings Russian authorities attributed to Chechen rebels. In response, the Russian army entered Chechnya in late September 1999, starting the Second Chechen War. The Russian public at the time, angry over the terrorist bombings, widely supported the war. The support translated into growing popularity for Putin, who had taken decisive action in Chechnya.

After the success of political forces close to Putin in the December 1999 parliamentary elections, Yeltsin evidently felt confident enough in Putin that he resigned from the presidency on 31 December, six months before his term was due to expire. This made Putin acting president and gave Putin ample opportunity to position himself as the frontrunner for the Russian presidential election held on 26 March 2000, which he won. The Chechen War figured prominently in the campaign. In February 2000, Russian troops entered Grozny, the Chechen capital, and a week before the election, Putin flew to Chechnya on a fighter jet, claiming victory.

==Putin era==
In August 2000, the Russian submarine K-141 Kursk suffered an explosion, causing the submarine to sink in the shallow area of the Barents Sea. Russia organized a vigorous but hectic attempt to save the crew, and the entire futile effort was surrounded by unexplained secrecy. This, as well as the slow initial reaction to the event and especially to the offers of foreign aid in saving the crew, brought much criticism on the government and personally on President Putin.

On 23 October 2002, Chechen separatists took over a Moscow theater. Over 700 people inside were taken hostage in what has been called the Moscow theater hostage crisis. The separatists demanded the immediate withdrawal of Russian forces from Chechnya and threatened to blow up the building if authorities attempted to enter. Three days later, Russian commandos stormed the building after the hostages had been subdued with a sleeping gas, shooting the unconscious militants, and killing over 100 civilian hostages with the sleeping gas in the process.

In the aftermath of the theater siege, Putin began renewed efforts to eliminate the Chechen insurrection. (&quot;For additional details on the war in Chechnya under Putin, see Second Chechen War.&quot;) The government canceled scheduled troop withdrawals, surrounded Chechen refugee camps with soldiers, and increased the frequency of assaults on separatist positions.

Chechen militants responded in kind, stepping up guerrilla operations and rocket attacks on federal helicopters. Several high-profile attacks have taken place. In May 2004, Chechen separatists assassinated Akhmad Kadyrov, the pro-Russia Chechen leader who became the president of Chechnya 8 months earlier after an election conducted by Russian authorities. On 24 August 2004, two Russian aircraft were bombed. This was followed by the Beslan school hostage crisis in which Chechen separatists took 1,300 hostages. The initially high public support for the war in Chechnya has declined.

Putin has confronted several very influential oligarchs (Vladimir Gusinsky, Boris Berezovsky and Mikhail Khodorkovsky, in particular) who attained large stakes of state assets, allegedly through illegal schemes, during the privatization process. Gusinsky and Berezovsky have been forced to leave Russia and give up parts of their assets. Khodorkovsky was jailed in Russia and has lost his YUKOS company, formerly the largest oil producer in Russia. Putin&#x27;s stand against oligarchs is generally popular with the Russian people, even though the jailing of Khodorkovsky was mainly seen as part of a takeover operation by government officials, according to another Levada-Center poll.

These confrontations have also led to Putin establishing control over Russian media outlets previously owned by the oligarchs. In 2001 and 2002, TV channels NTV (previously owned by Gusinsky), TV6 and TVS (owned by Berezovsky) were all taken over by media groups loyal to Putin. Similar takeovers have also occurred with print media.

Putin&#x27;s popularity, which stems from his reputation as a strong leader, stands in contrast to the unpopularity of his predecessor, but it hinges on a continuation of economic recovery. Putin came into office at an ideal time: after the devaluation of the ruble in 1998, which boosted demand for domestic goods, and while world oil prices were rising. Indeed, during the seven years of his presidency, real GDP grew on average 6.7% a year, average income increased 11% annually in real terms, and a consistently positive balance of the federal budget enabled the government to cut 70% of the external debt (according to the Institute for Complex Strategic Studies). Thus, many credited him with the recovery, but his ability to withstand a sudden economic downturn has been untested. Putin won the Russian presidential election in March 2004 without any significant competition.

Some researchers assert that most Russians (as of 2007) have come to regret the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991. On repeated occasions, even Vladimir Putin—Boris Yeltsin&#x27;s handpicked successor — stated that the fall of Soviet rule had led to few gains and many problems for most Russian citizens. In a campaign speech in February 2004, for example, Putin called the dismantlement of the Soviet Union a &quot;national tragedy on an enormous scale,&quot; from which &quot;only the elites and nationalists of the republics gained.&quot; He added, &quot;I think that ordinary citizens of the former Soviet Union and the post-Soviet space gained nothing from this. On the contrary, people have faced a huge number of problems.&quot;

Putin&#x27;s international prestige suffered a major blow in the West during the disputed 2004 Ukrainian presidential election. Putin had twice visited Ukraine before the election to show his support for the pro-Russian Viktor Yanukovych against opposition leader Viktor Yushchenko, a pro-Western liberal economist. He congratulated Yanukovych, followed shortly afterwards by Belarusian president Alexander Lukashenko, on his victory before election results were even made official and made statements opposing the rerun of the disputed second round of elections, won by Yanukovych, amid allegations of large-scale voting fraud. The second round was ultimately rerun; Yushchenko won the round and was eventually declared the winner on 10 January 2005. In the West, the reaction to Russia&#x27;s handling of, or perhaps interference in, the Ukrainian election evoked echoes of the Cold War, but relations with the U.S. remained stable.

On 14 March 2004, Putin was elected to the presidency for a second term, receiving 71% of the vote. The Beslan school hostage crisis took place in September 2004, in which hundreds died. Many in the Russian press and in the international media warned that the death of 130 hostages in the special forces&#x27; rescue operation during the 2002 Moscow theater hostage crisis would severely damage President Putin&#x27;s popularity. However, shortly after the siege had ended, the Russian president enjoyed record public approval ratings – 83% of Russians declared themselves satisfied with Putin and his handling of the siege.

In 2005, the Russian government replaced the broad in-kind Soviet-era benefits, such as free transportation and subsidies for heating and other utilities for socially vulnerable groups by cash payments. The reform, known as monetization, has been unpopular and caused a wave of demonstrations in various Russian cities, with thousands of retirees protesting against the loss of their benefits. This was the first time such wave of protests took place during the Putin administration. The reform hurt the popularity of the Russian government, but Putin personally remained popular, with a 77% approval rating.

The near 10-year period prior to the rise of Putin after the dissolution of Soviet rule was a time of upheaval in Russia. In a 2005 Kremlin speech, Putin characterized the collapse of the Soviet Union as the &quot;greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the Twentieth Century.&quot; Putin elaborated: &quot;Moreover, the epidemic of disintegration infected Russia itself.&quot; The country&#x27;s cradle-to-grave social safety net was gone and life expectancy declined in the period preceding Putin&#x27;s rule. In 2005, the National Priority Projects were launched to improve Russia&#x27;s health care, education, housing and agriculture.
The continued criminal prosecution of Russia&#x27;s then richest man, President of Yukos oil and gas company Mikhail Khodorkovsky, for fraud and tax evasion was seen by the international press as a retaliation for Khodorkovsky&#x27;s donations to both liberal and communist opponents of the Kremlin. The government said that Khodorkovsky was &quot;corrupting&quot; a large segment of the Duma to prevent changes to the tax code. Khodorkovsky was arrested, Yukos was bankrupted and the company&#x27;s assets were auctioned at below-market value, with the largest share acquired by the state company Rosneft. The fate of Yukos was seen as a sign of a broader shift of Russia towards a system of state capitalism. This was underscored in July 2014 when shareholders of Yukos were awarded $50  billion in compensation by the Permanent Arbitration Court in The Hague.

On 7 October 2006, Anna Politkovskaya, a journalist who exposed corruption in the Russian army and its conduct in Chechnya, was shot in the lobby of her apartment building, on Putin&#x27;s birthday. The death of Politkovskaya triggered international criticism, with accusations that Putin has failed to protect the country&#x27;s new independent media. Putin himself said that her death caused the government more problems than her writings.

In 2007, &quot;Dissenters&#x27; Marches&quot; were organized by the opposition group The Other Russia, led by former chess champion Garry Kasparov and national-Bolshevist leader Eduard Limonov. Following prior warnings, demonstrations in several Russian cities were met by police action, which included interfering with the travel of the protesters and the arrests of as many as 150 people who attempted to break through police lines.

On 12 September 2007, Putin dissolved the government upon the request of Prime Minister Mikhail Fradkov. Fradkov commented that it was to give the President a &quot;free hand&quot; in the run-up to the parliamentary election. Viktor Zubkov was appointed the new prime minister.

In the December 2007 election, United Russia won 64.30% of the popular vote in their run for State Duma. This victory was seen by many as an indication of strong popular support of the then Russian leadership and its policies.

At the end of Putin&#x27;s second term, Jonathan Steele has commented on Putin&#x27;s legacy: &quot;What, then, is Putin&#x27;s legacy? Stability and growth, for starters. After the chaos of the 90s, highlighted by Yeltsin&#x27;s attack on the Russian parliament with tanks in 1993 and the collapse of almost every bank in 1998, Putin has delivered political calm and a 7% annual rate of growth. Inequalities have increased and many of the new rich are grotesquely crass and cruel, but not all the Kremlin&#x27;s vast revenues from oil and gas have gone into private pockets or are being hoarded in the government&#x27;s &quot;stabilisation fund&quot;. Enough has gone into modernising schools and hospitals so that people notice a difference. Overall living standards are up. The second Chechen war, the major blight on Putin&#x27;s record, is almost over&quot;.

Putin was barred from a third term by the Constitution of Russia. First Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev was elected his successor. In a power-switching operation on 8 May 2008, only a day after handing the presidency to Medvedev, Putin was appointed Prime Minister of Russia, maintaining his political dominance.

In 2008, Kosovo&#x27;s declaration of independence saw a marked deterioration in Russia&#x27;s relationship with the West. It also saw South Ossetia war against Georgia, that followed Georgia&#x27;s attempt to take over the breakaway region of South Ossetia. Russian troops entered South Ossetia and forced Georgian troops back, establishing their control on this territory. In the fall of 2008, Russia unilaterally recognized the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia.

Putin has said that overcoming the consequences of the world economic crisis was one of the two main achievements of his second Premiership. The other was the stabilizing the size of Russia&#x27;s population between 2008 and 2011 following a long period of demographic collapse that began in the 1990s.

At the United Russia Congress in Moscow on 24 September 2011, Medvedev officially proposed that Putin stand for the Presidency in March 2012, an offer Putin accepted. Given United Russia&#x27;s near-total dominance of Russian politics, many observers believed that Putin was assured of a third term. The move was expected to see Medvedev stand on the United Russia ticket in the parliamentary elections in December, with a goal of becoming Prime Minister at the end of his presidential term.

After the parliamentary elections on 4 December 2011, tens of thousands of Russians engaged in protests against alleged electoral fraud, the largest protests in Putin&#x27;s time. Protesters criticized Putin and United Russia and demanded annulment of the election results. Those protests sparked the fear of a colour revolution in society. Putin allegedly organized a number of paramilitary groups loyal to himself and to the United Russia party in the period between 2005 and 2012.

On 4 March 2012, Putin won the 2012 Russian presidential elections in the first round, with 63.6% of the vote, despite widespread accusations of vote-rigging. Opposition groups accused Putin and the United Russia party of fraud. While efforts to make the elections transparent were publicized, including the usage of webcams in polling stations, the vote was criticized by the Russian opposition and by international observers from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe for procedural irregularities.

Anti-Putin protests took place during and directly after the presidential campaign. The most notorious protest was the Pussy Riot performance on 21 February, and subsequent trial. An estimated 8,000–20,000 protesters gathered in Moscow on 6 May, when eighty people were injured in confrontations with police, and 450 were arrested, with another 120 arrests taking place the following day.

In 2012 and 2013, Putin and the United Russia party backed stricter legislation against the LGBT community, in Saint Petersburg, Archangelsk and Novosibirsk; a law called the Russian gay propaganda law, that is against &quot;homosexual propaganda&quot; (which prohibits such symbols as the rainbow flag as well as published works containing homosexual content) was adopted by the State Duma in June 2013. Responding to international concerns about Russia&#x27;s legislation, Putin asked critics to note that the law was a &quot;ban on the propaganda of pedophilia and homosexuality&quot; and he stated that homosexual visitors to the 2014 Winter Olympics should &quot;leave the children in peace&quot; but denied there was any &quot;professional, career or social discrimination&quot; against homosexuals in Russia.

===Russo-Ukrainian War===

On 22 February 2014, the Yanukovych government of Ukraine collapsed as a result of the Revolution of Dignity, which the Russian government called a foreign backed proxy movement. On the same day, according to Russian president Vladimir Putin, he called an all-night meeting of his military leaders, at the end of which he ordered them to &quot;begin the work to bring Crimea back into Russia.&quot; By 27 February, unmarked Russian troops in Ukraine were establishing a blockade of the borders and Ukrainian military bases in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, and took armed control of its regional parliament.

A new Ukrainian government was formed and scheduled new elections for May 2014. On , from exile, Viktor Yanukovych requested that Russia use military forces &quot;to establish legitimacy, peace, law and order, stability and defending the people of Ukraine&quot;. On the same day, Vladimir Putin requested and received authorization from the Russian Parliament to deploy Russian troops to Ukraine in response to the crisis and gained complete control over Crimean Peninsula within a day.

On 6 March 2014, the Crimean Parliament voted to &quot;enter into the Russian Federation with the rights of a subject of the Russian Federation&quot; and later held a referendum asking the people of these regions whether they wanted to join Russia as a federal subject, or if they wanted to restore the 1992 Crimean constitution and Crimea&#x27;s status as a part of Ukraine. Though passed with an overwhelming majority, the results are contested by some and approved by others. 
Crimea and Sevastopol formally declared independence as the Republic of Crimea and requested that they be admitted as constituents of the Russian Federation. On 18 March 2014, Russia and Crimea signed a treaty of accession of the Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol in the Russian Federation, while the United Nations General Assembly voted in favor of a non-binding Resolution 68/262 to oppose Russia&#x27;s annexation of the peninsula.

On 24 February 2022, Russia launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine, although it was described as a &quot;special military operation&quot; by Putin. The invasion led to international condemnation followed by political, economic and cultural sanctions. The invasion also sparked protests around the world as well as within Russia.

On 21 September 2022, Vladimir Putin announced a partial mobilization. He also said that his country will use &quot;all means&quot; to &quot;defend itself&quot;. Later that day, the minister of defence Sergei Shoigu stated that 300,000 reservists would be called on a compulsory basis. Following president Putin&#x27;s announcement of partial mobilization, massive Russian emigration began, with estimates of hundreds of thousands of male citizens fleeing, many going to Kazakhstan, Serbia, Georgia and Finland.

In late September 2022, Russian-installed officials in Ukraine organized referendums on annexation of occupied territories of Ukraine, including the Donetsk People&#x27;s Republic and the Luhansk People&#x27;s Republic in Russian occupied Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts of Ukraine, as well as the Russian-appointed military administrations of Kherson Oblast and Zaporizhzhia Oblast. Denounced by Ukraine&#x27;s government and its allies as sham, the official results showed overwhelming majorities in favor of annexation. On 2022, Russia&#x27;s president Vladimir Putin announced the annexation of Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhia oblasts of Ukraine in an address to both houses of the Russian parliament. The United Nations, Ukraine, and many other countries condemned the annexation.

On 23 June 2023, the private military company Wagner Group, which had been assisting Russia in its invasion of Ukraine, declared a rebellion against the Russian military. Several cities along the M-4 Highway, including Rostov and Vorenhzh, were seized by Wagner forces, as they began to march towards Moscow. The following day, Wagner forces stepped down and the rebellion ended.

==Relations with the West==

In the early period after Russia became independent, Russian foreign policy repudiated Marxism–Leninism as a putative guide to action, emphasizing cooperation with the West in solving regional and global problems, and soliciting economic and humanitarian aid from the West in support of internal economic reforms.

However, although Russia&#x27;s leaders now described the West as its natural ally, they grappled with defining new relations with the East European states, the new states formed upon the disintegration of Yugoslavia, and Eastern Europe. Russia opposed the expansion of NATO into the former Soviet bloc nations of the Czech Republic, Poland, and Hungary in 1997 and, particularly, the second NATO expansion into Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia in 2004. In 1999, Russia opposed the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia for more than two months (&quot;see&quot; Kosovo War), but later joined NATO peace-keeping forces in the Balkans in June 1999.

Relations with the West have also been stained by Russia&#x27;s relationship with Belarus. Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko, an authoritarian leader, has shown no interest in implementing Western-backed economic and political reforms and has aligned his country with Russia, and no interest in deepening ties with NATO. A union agreement between Russia and Belarus was formed on 2 April 1996. The agreement was tightened, becoming the Union of Russia and Belarus on 3 April 1997. Further strengthening of the union occurred on 25 December 1998, and in 1999.

Under Putin, Russia has sought to strengthen ties with the People&#x27;s Republic of China by signing the Treaty of Good-Neighborliness and Friendly Cooperation as well building the Trans-Siberian oil pipeline geared toward growing Chinese energy needs. He also made a number of appearances in the media with President of the United States George W. Bush in which the two described each other as &quot;friends&quot;.

==See also==
*Economic history of the Russian Federation
*Military history of the Russian Federation
*Politics of Russia
*Timeline of largest projects in the Russian economy
*Human rights in Russia
== Notes ==
== References ==
==Further reading==
* Rosefielde, Steven. &quot;Putin&#x27;s Russia: Economy, Defence and Foreign Policy&quot; (2020) excerpt

==External links==
*Articles on Russia in the 1990s and 2000s
*Charles H. Fairbanks, Jr., &quot;What Went Wrong in Russia?: The Feudalization of the State,&quot; &quot;Journal of Democracy&quot; (April 1999), p. 47–53. (an analysis of the state of democratic transition in Russia by Charles H. Fairbanks, Jr., a leading specialist in Russian politics published in the &quot;Journal of Democracy&quot;)
*Post-Soviet Russia and Its Neighbors from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
*Paul J. Saunders, &quot;Why &quot;Globalization&quot; Didn&#x27;t Rescue Russia&quot; (Paul J. Saunders is a specialist in U.S.-Russian relations and executive director of the Center for the National Interest)
*Up for Debate: Shock Therapy: Bolivia, Poland, Russia. Same Policies-Different Results From the PBS series &quot;Commanding Heights&quot;
*Up for Debate: Privatization: Who Wins? Russia&#x27;s Reform Compromise (interviews with Yegor Gaidar, Grigory Yavlinsky, Anatoly Chubais, Joseph Stiglitz, and Jeffrey Sachs from the PBS series &quot;Commanding Heights&quot;)
*Nick Paton Walsh, &quot;The Guardian&quot;, 6 July 2005, &quot;Meet the chief exec of Kremlin inc ...&quot;
*&quot;Failed Expectations, Or What Is Behind the Marshall Plan for Post-Socialist Reconstruction&quot;, by Tanya Narozhna
*&quot;The Uncertain Return of Russian Power&quot;, by Mike Haynes, analyses Putin&#x27;s Russia and looks at claims that the reassertion of Russian power is leading to a new Cold War.
*Mike Edwards: &quot;Russia — Playing by new rules&quot; &quot;National Geographic Magazine&quot; March 1993
Mark Hollingsworth &amp; Stewart Lansley, Londongrad: From Russia With Cash, 2009, 4th Estate</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="22" end="28" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="44" end="56" title="Russian SFSR" label="Russian SFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="88" end="100" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="160" end="180" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="imminent dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="303" end="316" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Boris Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="535" end="550" title="CPSU" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="658" end="661" title="gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="694" end="702" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915590" start="722" end="737" title="Soviet military" label="Soviet military"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054283" start="834" end="849" title="successor state" label="successor state"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="940" end="959" title="United Nations Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510339" start="965" end="994" title="Russia and the United Nations" label="Russia and the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363982" start="1104" end="1157" title="1991 Russian presidential election" label="first direct presidential election in Russian history"/>
<link wikidata="Q221382" start="1392" end="1408" title="1991 Soviet coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="1991 August coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="1459" end="1476" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648240" start="1724" end="1737" title="Shock therapy (economics)" label="shock therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="1760" end="1770" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="1796" end="1814" title="economic recession" label="economic recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="1820" end="1834" title="GDP per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="1999" end="2013" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972130" start="2235" end="2245" title="Corruption in Russia" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="2247" end="2260" title="authoritarianism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q953879" start="2288" end="2300" title="Human rights in Russia" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q193159" start="2333" end="2353" title="Russian Armed Forces" label="Russian armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q29269" start="2497" end="2513" title="First Chechen War" label="1994 Chechen War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263317" start="2641" end="2656" title="Lisbon Protocol" label="Lisbon Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="2670" end="2693" title="Post-Soviet states" label="former Soviet republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q177477" start="3108" end="3127" title="Baikonur Cosmodrome" label="Baikonur Cosmodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137556" start="3193" end="3207" title="Shock doctrine" label="Shock doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="3244" end="3255" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q191582" start="3260" end="3267" title="COMECON" label="COMECON"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964068" start="3616" end="3629" title="Privatization in Russia" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q948495" start="3664" end="3684" title="Washington Consensus" label="Washington Consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="3692" end="3719" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="3727" end="3737" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="3742" end="3761" title="United States Department of the Treasury" label="Treasury Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626571" start="3922" end="3946" title="Supreme Soviet of Russia" label="Supreme Soviet of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358985" start="3951" end="3995" title="Congress of People&amp;#x27;s Deputies of Russia" label="Congress of People&amp;#x27;s Deputies of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044515" start="4023" end="4033" title="1990 Russian legislative election" label="March 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q82695" start="4362" end="4374" title="Yegor Gaidar" label="Yegor Gaidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648240" start="4469" end="4482" title="Shock therapy (economics)" label="shock therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="4880" end="4894" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11790297" start="4913" end="4930" title="monetary overhang" label="monetary overhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="4957" end="4969" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="5543" end="5560" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="5574" end="5585" title="perestroika" label="perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="5988" end="6003" title="monetary policy" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187021" start="6008" end="6021" title="fiscal policy" label="fiscal policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179179" start="6169" end="6182" title="interest rate" label="interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q590998" start="6466" end="6479" title="credit crunch" label="credit crunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164701" start="6828" end="6862" title="consumer goods in the Soviet Union" label="consumer goods in the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900936" start="7170" end="7187" title="chronic inflation" label="chronic inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994254" start="7444" end="7466" title="Economy of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q806651" start="7588" end="7600" title="Central Bank of Russia" label="Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="7768" end="7782" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994254" start="8303" end="8317" title="Economy of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659060" start="8356" end="8427" title="State Committee for State Property Management of the Russian Federation" label="State Committee for State Property Management of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q201005" start="8434" end="8449" title="Anatoly Chubais" label="Anatoly Chubais"/>
<link wikidata="Q458332" start="8759" end="8780" title="voucher privatization" label="voucher privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="8815" end="8829" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q817144" start="9019" end="9032" title="Russian mafia" label="Russian mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156728" start="9041" end="9053" title="nomenklatura" label="nomenklatura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061228" start="9435" end="9454" title="Decree of the President of Russia" label="presidential decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317814" start="9922" end="9936" title="fiscal deficit" label="fiscal deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298358" start="9976" end="10003" title="1996 Russian presidential election" label="1996 presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4185462" start="10053" end="10068" title="Loans for shares scheme" label="loans-for-share"/>
<link wikidata="Q739315" start="10101" end="10117" title="Vladimir Potanin" label="Vladimir Potanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q201005" start="10134" end="10149" title="Anatoly Chubais" label="Anatoly Chubais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284261" start="10266" end="10280" title="Norilsk Nickel" label="Norilsk Nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q835692" start="10282" end="10287" title="Yukos" label="Yukos"/>
<link wikidata="Q329347" start="10289" end="10295" title="Lukoil" label="Lukoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461799" start="10297" end="10304" title="Sibneft" label="Sibneft"/>
<link wikidata="Q680776" start="10306" end="10320" title="Surgutneftegas" label="Surgutneftegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768082" start="10322" end="10339" title="Novolipetsk Steel" label="Novolipetsk Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915579" start="10345" end="10351" title="Mechel" label="Mechel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903976" start="10454" end="10460" title="Bid rigging" label="rigged"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919633" start="10877" end="10895" title="Russian oligarch" label="business oligarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980287" start="10900" end="10912" title="New Russians" label="New Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="10927" end="10938" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="10943" end="10946" title="petroleum" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="11340" end="11346" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="11348" end="11355" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="11365" end="11379" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="12108" end="12116" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165687" start="14851" end="14864" title="human capital" label="human capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="14985" end="14993" title="Literacy" label="Literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="15244" end="15256" title="liberal arts" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q26911" start="16121" end="16134" title="Profit (economics)" label="Profitability"/>
<link wikidata="Q615445" start="16139" end="16149" title="efficiency (economics)" label="efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="16355" end="16369" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="16598" end="16615" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="16768" end="16776" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097363" start="16797" end="16831" title="Soviet Nuclear Threat Reduction Act of 1991" label="Nunn–Lugar cash-for-weapons scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="17176" end="17192" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q36044" start="18552" end="18560" title="Moskvich" label="Moskvich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630" start="18627" end="18634" title="Ivanovo" label="Ivanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q134735" start="18691" end="18705" title="Gus-Khrustalny (town)" label="Gus-Khrustalny"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="18926" end="18937" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="18951" end="18955" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="18968" end="18985" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="19094" end="19101" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="19106" end="19125" title="economic inequality" label="economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="19144" end="19154" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164701" start="20598" end="20632" title="Consumer goods in the Soviet Union" label="Consumer goods in the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431887" start="21227" end="21244" title="Social inequality" label="Social inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q162455" start="21288" end="21304" title="Gini coefficient" label="Gini coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="21412" end="21418" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q192187" start="21916" end="21957" title="Communist Party of the Russian Federation" label="Communist Party of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q844793" start="21980" end="21984" title="Duma" label="Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q18554" start="23339" end="23345" title="krysha" label="krysha"/>
<link wikidata="Q18554" start="23775" end="23792" title="protection racket" label="protection racket"/>
<link wikidata="Q17197559" start="23831" end="23847" title="contract killing" label="contract killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q314116" start="24532" end="24549" title="Aleksandr Rutskoy" label="Aleksandr Rutskoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q844124" start="24751" end="24815" title="White House (Moscow)" label="parliament building, the &amp;quot;White House&amp;quot; as it is called"/>
<link wikidata="Q537251" start="24934" end="24952" title="Ruslan Khasbulatov" label="Ruslan Khasbulatov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155561" start="25714" end="25761" title="Politics of Russia" label="Constitution and government structure of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="25864" end="25872" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q31230" start="25960" end="25968" title="Chechen people" label="Chechens"/>
<link wikidata="Q179846" start="26014" end="26030" title="Dzhokhar Dudayev" label="Dzhokhar Dudayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q193159" start="26360" end="26380" title="Russian Armed Forces" label="Russian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196" start="26534" end="26540" title="Grozny" label="Grozny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="27197" end="27211" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q166073" start="27508" end="27516" title="Komsomol" label="Komsomol"/>
<link wikidata="Q156728" start="28491" end="28503" title="nomenklatura" label="nomenklatura"/>
<link wikidata="Q693464" start="29259" end="29263" title="cash" label="cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q458332" start="29493" end="29514" title="voucher privatization" label="voucher privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="29927" end="29933" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="29935" end="29953" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="29959" end="29972" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q694563" start="29983" end="29993" title="collateral (finance)" label="collateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q177923" start="30312" end="30319" title="auction" label="auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q311019" start="31076" end="31092" title="Boris Berezovsky (businessman)" label="Boris Berezovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="31196" end="31206" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919633" start="31412" end="31429" title="Russian oligarchs" label="Russian oligarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q152503" start="31460" end="31480" title="Mikhail Khodorkovsky" label="Mikhail Khodorkovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q171428" start="31482" end="31498" title="Roman Abramovich" label="Roman Abramovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q739315" start="31500" end="31516" title="Vladimir Potanin" label="Vladimir Potanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089235" start="31518" end="31535" title="Vladimir Bogdanov" label="Vladimir Bogdanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q673818" start="31537" end="31550" title="Rem Viakhirev" label="Rem Viakhirev"/>
<link wikidata="Q451455" start="31552" end="31567" title="Vagit Alekperov" label="Vagit Alekperov"/>
<link wikidata="Q190884" start="31569" end="31588" title="Viktor Chernomyrdin" label="Viktor Chernomyrdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q704450" start="31590" end="31607" title="Viktor Vekselberg" label="Viktor Vekselberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q732142" start="31613" end="31628" title="Mikhail Fridman" label="Mikhail Fridman"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="32016" end="32031" title="planned economy" label="planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192187" start="32548" end="32589" title="Communist Party of the Russian Federation" label="Communist Party of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182452" start="32680" end="32696" title="Gennady Zyuganov" label="Gennady Zyuganov"/>
<link wikidata="Q453170" start="33214" end="33231" title="Tatyana Dyachenko" label="Tatyana Dyachenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q201005" start="33248" end="33263" title="Anatoly Chubais" label="Anatoly Chubais"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="36634" end="36642" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q438603" start="36980" end="36997" title="Grigory Yavlinsky" label="Grigory Yavlinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q295898" start="37762" end="37777" title="Alexander Lebed" label="Aleksandr Lebed"/>
<link wikidata="Q200015" start="37893" end="37913" title="Vladimir Zhirinovsky" label="Vladimir Zhirinovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="37948" end="37965" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="38456" end="38462" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="38467" end="38483" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4239711" start="38793" end="38801" title="Red Belt (Russia)" label="red belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="38975" end="38985" title="neoliberal" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="39502" end="39524" title="Asian financial crisis" label="Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="39753" end="39756" title="Oil" label="Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="39758" end="39769" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="39771" end="39776" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="39783" end="39789" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="40232" end="40243" title="tax evasion" label="tax evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="40805" end="40828" title="Trans-Siberian railroad" label="Trans-Siberian railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q313915" start="41198" end="41214" title="Sergei Kiriyenko" label="Sergei Kiriyenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="42492" end="42504" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q370316" start="42532" end="42544" title="Robert Rubin" label="Robert Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140654" start="42685" end="42713" title="Long-Term Capital Management" label="Long-Term Capital Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q270529" start="44831" end="44847" title="Yevgeny Primakov" label="Yevgeny Primakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q313989" start="47138" end="47154" title="Sergei Stepashin" label="Sergei Stepashin"/>
<link wikidata="Q58792" start="47190" end="47193" title="Federalnaya Sluzhba Bezopasnosti" label="FSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="47223" end="47226" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="47494" end="47508" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q120843" start="48032" end="48050" title="Second Chechen War" label="Second Chechen War"/>
<link wikidata="Q643925" start="48138" end="48162" title="Dagestan War" label="engaged the Russian army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="48166" end="48174" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="48200" end="48208" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q967844" start="48260" end="48287" title="Russian apartment bombings" label="apartment building bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="48526" end="48535" title="terrorism" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957669" start="48680" end="48726" title="Unity (Russian political party)" label="the success of political forces close to Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q910470" start="48743" end="48771" title="1999 Russian legislative election" label="1999 parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348890" start="49034" end="49085" title="2000 Russian presidential election" label="Russian presidential election held on 26 March 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196" start="49195" end="49201" title="Grozny" label="Grozny"/>
<link wikidata="Q217463" start="49350" end="49379" title="Russian submarine K-141 Kursk" label="Russian submarine K-141 Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q45823" start="49460" end="49471" title="Barents Sea" label="Barents Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="49823" end="49830" title="Chechnya" label="Chechen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670" start="49941" end="49970" title="Moscow theater hostage crisis" label="Moscow theater hostage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q120843" start="50532" end="50550" title="Second Chechen War" label="Second Chechen War"/>
<link wikidata="Q297006" start="50932" end="50946" title="Akhmad Kadyrov" label="Akhmad Kadyrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375246" start="51129" end="51135" title="Russian aircraft bombings of August 2004" label="bombed"/>
<link wikidata="Q193733" start="51162" end="51190" title="Beslan school hostage crisis" label="Beslan school hostage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361996" start="51371" end="51388" title="Vladimir Gusinsky" label="Vladimir Gusinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q311019" start="51390" end="51406" title="Boris Berezovsky (businessman)" label="Boris Berezovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q152503" start="51411" end="51431" title="Mikhail Khodorkovsky" label="Mikhail Khodorkovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964068" start="51533" end="51558" title="Privatization in Russia" label="the privatization process"/>
<link wikidata="Q835692" start="51703" end="51708" title="YUKOS" label="YUKOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q574625" start="52158" end="52161" title="NTV Russia" label="NTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386094" start="52194" end="52197" title="TV6 Russia" label="TV6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386107" start="52202" end="52205" title="TVS Russia" label="TVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15788" start="52596" end="52601" title="ruble" label="ruble"/>
<link wikidata="Q297279" start="52668" end="52677" title="oil price" label="oil price"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52964" end="53003" title="Institute for Complex Strategic Studies" label="Institute for Complex Strategic Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505420" start="53138" end="53181" title="2004 Russian presidential election" label="Russian presidential election in March 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="53316" end="53328" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q568458" start="54049" end="54085" title="2004 Ukrainian presidential election" label="2004 Ukrainian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459658" start="54179" end="54196" title="Viktor Yanukovych" label="Viktor Yanukovych"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459699" start="54223" end="54240" title="Viktor Yushchenko" label="Viktor Yushchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866" start="54356" end="54376" title="Alexander Lukashenko" label="Alexander Lukashenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="54839" end="54847" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505420" start="54913" end="54930" title="2004 Russian presidential election" label="Putin was elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q193733" start="54999" end="55027" title="Beslan school hostage crisis" label="Beslan school hostage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670" start="55238" end="55267" title="Moscow theater hostage crisis" label="Moscow theater hostage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q289845" start="55745" end="55757" title="monetization" label="monetization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155561" start="55983" end="56003" title="Putin administration" label="Putin administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="56263" end="56270" title="Kremlin" label="Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="56319" end="56331" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551358" start="56541" end="56558" title="social safety net" label="social safety net"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570292" start="56653" end="56679" title="National Priority Projects" label="National Priority Projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116927" start="56719" end="56730" title="Health care in Russia" label="health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q861612" start="56732" end="56741" title="Education in Russia" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q461731" start="56743" end="56750" title="Real estate in Russia" label="housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574999" start="56755" end="56766" title="Agriculture in Russia" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q835692" start="56851" end="56856" title="Yukos" label="Yukos"/>
<link wikidata="Q152503" start="56877" end="56897" title="Mikhail Khodorkovsky" label="Mikhail Khodorkovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="56913" end="56924" title="tax evasion" label="tax evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141123" start="57366" end="57373" title="Rosneft" label="Rosneft"/>
<link wikidata="Q548235" start="57461" end="57477" title="state capitalism" label="state capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045198" start="57589" end="57616" title="Permanent Court of Arbitration" label="Permanent Arbitration Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="57620" end="57629" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q131240" start="57651" end="57669" title="Anna Politkovskaya" label="Anna Politkovskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031386" start="57714" end="57726" title="Russian Ground Forces" label="Russian army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="57746" end="57754" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902629" start="58090" end="58112" title="Dissenters&amp;#x27; March" label="Dissenters&amp;#x27; March"/>
<link wikidata="Q46243" start="58160" end="58176" title="The Other Russia (coalition)" label="The Other Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28614" start="58207" end="58221" title="Garry Kasparov" label="Garry Kasparov"/>
<link wikidata="Q295537" start="58253" end="58267" title="Eduard Limonov" label="Eduard Limonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q150080" start="58599" end="58614" title="Mikhail Fradkov" label="Mikhail Fradkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q147425" start="58737" end="58750" title="Viktor Zubkov" label="Viktor Zubkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q750232" start="58797" end="58819" title="2007 Russian legislative election" label="December 2007 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q151469" start="58821" end="58834" title="United Russia" label="United Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q715641" start="58883" end="58893" title="State Duma" label="State Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442589" start="59058" end="59073" title="Jonathan Steele (journalist)" label="Jonathan Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q652062" start="59925" end="59947" title="Constitution of Russia" label="Constitution of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23530" start="59977" end="59992" title="Dmitry Medvedev" label="Dmitry Medvedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q20982784" start="60025" end="60064" title="Russian power-switching operation 2008" label="power-switching operation on 8 May 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q842386" start="60139" end="60163" title="Prime Minister of Russia" label="Prime Minister of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q861510" start="60212" end="60253" title="2008 Kosovo declaration of independence" label="Kosovo&amp;#x27;s declaration of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q620735" start="60338" end="60355" title="2008 South Ossetia war" label="South Ossetia war"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="60364" end="60371" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23427" start="60447" end="60460" title="South Ossetia" label="South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="60668" end="60676" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4224" start="60838" end="60886" title="Demographics of Russia" label="stabilizing the size of Russia&amp;#x27;s population"/>
<link wikidata="Q151469" start="60990" end="61003" title="United Russia" label="United Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q488814" start="61110" end="61123" title="2012 Russian presidential election" label="in March 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q58406" start="61486" end="61509" title="2011 Russian legislative election" label="parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q629636" start="61571" end="61579" title="2011 Russian protests" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q819264" start="61787" end="61804" title="colour revolution" label="colour revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q488814" start="61992" end="62026" title="2012 Russian presidential election" label="2012 Russian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q151469" start="62160" end="62173" title="United Russia" label="United Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29576" start="62278" end="62284" title="webcam" label="webcam"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="62397" end="62449" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551" start="62601" end="62611" title="Pussy Riot" label="Pussy Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="62964" end="62968" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="62983" end="62999" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851" start="63001" end="63012" title="Archangelsk" label="Archangelsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q883" start="63017" end="63028" title="Novosibirsk" label="Novosibirsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184937" start="63047" end="63073" title="Russian gay propaganda law" label="Russian gay propaganda law"/>
<link wikidata="Q51401" start="63162" end="63174" title="Rainbow flag (LGBT movement)" label="rainbow flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q715641" start="63252" end="63262" title="State Duma" label="State Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9678" start="63506" end="63526" title="2014 Winter Olympics" label="2014 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733401" start="63803" end="63824" title="Revolution of Dignity" label="Revolution of Dignity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="63943" end="63957" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16034018" start="64131" end="64154" title="Little green men (Russo-Ukrainian War)" label="unmarked Russian troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q756294" start="64246" end="64275" title="Autonomous Republic of Crimea" label="Autonomous Republic of Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459658" start="64426" end="64443" title="Viktor Yanukovych" label="Viktor Yanukovych"/>
<link wikidata="Q15838763" start="64984" end="64994" title="2014 Crimean referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q43263" start="65070" end="65085" title="federal subjects of the Russian Federation" label="federal subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q48955177" start="65120" end="65145" title="1992 Crimean constitution" label="1992 Crimean constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="65184" end="65191" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="65308" end="65318" title="Sevastopol" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920546" start="65357" end="65375" title="Republic of Crimea (country)" label="Republic of Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="65598" end="65629" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q15985324" start="65662" end="65679" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 68/262" label="Resolution 68/262"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="65771" end="65803" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="a full-scale invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111012672" start="65905" end="65931" title="Reactions to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="international condemnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17373979" start="65944" end="65986" title="International sanctions during the Russo-Ukrainian War" label="political, economic and cultural sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q111011730" start="66014" end="66039" title="Protests against the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="protests around the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q111015277" start="66051" end="66064" title="2022 anti-war protests in Russia" label="within Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q114071665" start="66116" end="66136" title="2022 Russian mobilization" label="partial mobilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q17287317" start="66249" end="66268" title="Minister of Defence (Russia)" label="minister of defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q32024" start="66269" end="66282" title="Sergei Shoigu" label="Sergei Shoigu"/>
<link wikidata="Q111480725" start="66424" end="66456" title="Russian emigration following the 2022 invasion of Ukraine" label="massive Russian emigration began"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="66538" end="66548" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="66550" end="66556" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="66558" end="66565" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="66570" end="66577" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q113495737" start="66653" end="66958" title="2022 annexation referendums in Russian-occupied Ukraine" label="referendums on annexation of occupied territories of Ukraine, including the Donetsk People&amp;#x27;s Republic and the Luhansk People&amp;#x27;s Republic in Russian occupied Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts of Ukraine, as well as the Russian-appointed military administrations of Kherson Oblast and Zaporizhzhia Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="67017" end="67021" title="Sham election" label="sham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="67132" end="67146" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q114096220" start="67161" end="67225" title="Russian annexation of Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhia oblasts" label="annexation of Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhia oblasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q457869" start="67273" end="67291" title="Federal Assembly (Russia)" label="Russian parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q36597284" start="67420" end="67432" title="Wagner Group" label="Wagner Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q119860532" start="67505" end="67543" title="Wagner Group rebellion" label="rebellion against the Russian military"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635333" start="67570" end="67581" title="M4 highway (Russia)" label="M-4 Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q908" start="67593" end="67599" title="Rostov-on-Don" label="Rostov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426" start="67604" end="67612" title="Voronezh" label="Vorenhzh"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="68305" end="68315" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="68369" end="68373" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q155723" start="68617" end="68643" title="NATO bombing of Yugoslavia" label="NATO bombing of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="68686" end="68696" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="68854" end="68861" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866" start="68884" end="68904" title="Alexander Lukashenko" label="Alexander Lukashenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="68909" end="68922" title="authoritarian" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q166110" start="69216" end="69243" title="Union of Russia and Belarus" label="Union of Russia and Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="69399" end="69430" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152104" start="69446" end="69500" title="Treaty of Good-Neighborliness and Friendly Cooperation Between the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China and the Russian Federation" label="Treaty of Good-Neighborliness and Friendly Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193010" start="69522" end="69549" title="Trans-Siberian oil pipeline" label="Trans-Siberian oil pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="69649" end="69679" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="69680" end="69694" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205075" start="69772" end="69814" title="Economic history of the Russian Federation" label="Economic history of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q111955977" start="69816" end="69858" title="Military history of the Russian Federation" label="Military history of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155561" start="69860" end="69878" title="Politics of Russia" label="Politics of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q461731" start="69880" end="69931" title="Timeline of largest projects in the Russian economy" label="Timeline of largest projects in the Russian economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q953879" start="69933" end="69955" title="Human rights in Russia" label="Human rights in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6295080" start="70486" end="70506" title="Journal of Democracy" label="Journal of Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044929" start="70788" end="70820" title="Center for the National Interest" label="Center for the National Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="70919" end="70922" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q82695" start="71051" end="71063" title="Yegor Gaidar" label="Yegor Gaidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q438603" start="71065" end="71082" title="Grigory Yavlinsky" label="Grigory Yavlinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q201005" start="71084" end="71099" title="Anatoly Chubais" label="Anatoly Chubais"/>
<link wikidata="Q18430" start="71101" end="71116" title="Joseph Stiglitz" label="Joseph Stiglitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q319189" start="71122" end="71135" title="Jeffrey Sachs" label="Jeffrey Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="71213" end="71225" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="71668" end="71696" title="National Geographic Magazine" label="National Geographic Magazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52631" wikidata="Q907703" url="?curid=52631" title="Tobacco industry">
<text>The tobacco industry comprises those persons and companies who are engaged in the growth, preparation for sale, shipment, advertisement, and distribution of tobacco and tobacco-related products. It is a global industry; tobacco can grow in any warm, moist environment, which means it can be farmed on all continents except Antarctica.

According to the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, the &quot;tobacco industry&quot; encompasses tobacco manufacturers, wholesale distributors and importers of tobacco products. This evidence-based treaty expects its 181 ratified member states to implement public health policies with respect to tobacco control &quot;to protect present and future generations from the devastating health, social, environmental and economic consequences of tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke.&quot;

Tobacco, one of the most widely used addictive substances in the world, is a plant native to the Americas and historically one of the most important crops grown by American farmers. More specifically, tobacco refers to any of various plants of the genus &quot;Nicotiana&quot; (especially &quot;N. tabacum&quot;) native to tropical America and widely cultivated for their leaves, which are dried and processed chiefly for smoking in pipes, cigarettes, and cigars; it is also cut to form chewing tobacco or ground to make snuff or dipping tobacco, as well as other less common preparations. From 1617 to 1793, tobacco was the most valuable cash crop export from British North America and the United States. Until the 1960s, the United States grew, manufactured and exported more tobacco than any other country.

Tobacco is an agricultural commodity product, similar in economic terms to agricultural foodstuffs: the price is in part determined by crop yields, which vary depending on local weather conditions. The price also varies by specific species or cultivar grown, the total quantity on the market ready for sale, the area where it is grown, the health of the plants, and other characteristics individual to product quality.

Since 1964, conclusive medical evidence of the deadly effects of tobacco consumption has led to a sharp decline in official support for producers and manufacturers of tobacco, although it contributes to the agricultural, fiscal, manufacturing, and exporting sectors of the economy. Policy and law restricting tobacco smoking has increased globally, but almost 6 trillion cigarettes are still produced each year, representing an increase of over 12% since the year 2000. Tobacco is often heavily taxed to gain revenues for governments and as an incentive for people not to smoke.

==History==

For a history of how tobacco has been grown and marketed, see tobacco, smoking and articles on similar topics.

==Position of industry ==
The phrase &quot;tobacco industry&quot; generally refers to the companies involved in the manufacture of cigarettes, cigars, snuff, chewing tobacco and pipe tobacco. China National Tobacco Co. has become the largest tobacco company in the world by volume. Following extensive merger and acquisition activity in the 1990s and 2000s as well as the spinoff of Altria&#x27;s international tobacco holdings as Philip Morris International in 2008, five firms dominate international markets – in alphabetical order:

* Altria
* British American Tobacco 
* Imperial Tobacco
* Japan Tobacco
* Philip Morris International

Altria still owns the Philip Morris tobacco business in the United States, but Philip Morris International has been fully independent since 2008. In most countries these companies either have long-established dominance, or have purchased the major domestic producer or producers (often a former state monopoly). Until 2014 the United States had one other substantial independent firm, Lorillard, which Reynolds American, Inc. acquired. India has its own major player, ITC Limited (25.4%-owned by British American Tobacco). A small number of state monopolies survive, as well as some small independent firms.

Tobacco advertising is becoming increasingly restricted by the governments of countries around the world citing health issues as a reason to restrict tobaccos appeal.

==Industry outlook in the United States==

The tobacco industry in the United States has suffered greatly since the mid-1990s, when it was successfully sued by several U.S. states. The suits claimed that tobacco causes cancer, that companies in the industry knew this, and that they deliberately understated the significance of their findings, contributing to the illness and death of many citizens in those states.

The industry was found to have decades of internal memos confirming in detail that tobacco (which contains nicotine) is both addictive and carcinogenic (cancer-causing). The industry had long denied that nicotine is addictive.

The suit resulted in a large cash settlement being paid by a group of tobacco companies to the states that sued. Further, since the suit was settled, other individuals have come forth, in class action lawsuits, claiming individual damages. 
The tobacco industry has historically been largely successful in this litigation process, with the majority of cases being won by the industry. During the first 42 years of tobacco litigation (between 1954 and 1996) the industry maintained a clean record in litigation thanks to tactics described in a R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company internal memo as &quot;the way we won these cases, to paraphrase Gen. Patton, is not by spending all of Reynolds&#x27; money, but by making the other son of a bitch spend all of his.&quot; Between 1995 and 2005 only 59% of cases were won by the tobacco industry either outright or on appeal in the US, but the continued success of the industry&#x27;s efforts to win these cases is questionable. In Florida, the industry has lost 77 of the 116 &quot;Engle progeny&quot; cases that have gone to trial. The U.S. Supreme Court has also denied the industry&#x27;s major grounds for appeal of Engle cases.

In June 2009, U.S. President Barack Obama signed into law the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act which has been called a &quot;sweeping anti-smoking&quot; bill. Among other restrictions, this Act banned the use of any constituent, additive, herb or spice that adds a &quot;characterizing flavor&quot; to the tobacco product or smoke (Section 907)(a)(1)(A). The aim of this ban is to prevent children and teenagers from becoming addicted to cigarettes at a young age with the US Department of Health and Human Services citing that &quot;studies have shown that 17 year old smokers are three times as likely to use flavored cigarettes as are smokers over the age of 25&quot;. This ban however does not apply to menthol cigarettes, which are exempt from the bill.

Lawsuits against the tobacco industry are primarily restricted to the United States due to differences in legal systems in other countries. Many businesses class ongoing lawsuits as a cost of doing business in the US and feel their revenue will be only marginally affected by the activities.

Large tobacco companies have entered the electronic cigarette market by either buying some of the small e-cigarette companies or by starting their own e-cigarette companies. By 2014 all the major multinational tobacco companies had entered the e-cigarette market. They did so either by buying existing e-cigarette companies (including Ruyan, the original Chinese e-cigarette company, which was bought by Imperial Tobacco) or by developing their own products. A 2017 review states, &quot;The tobacco industry dominates the e-cigarette market.&quot; All of the large tobacco companies are selling e-cigarettes. A 2017 review states, &quot;Small companies initially dominated the electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS) market, and these firms had no links to the tobacco industry. Today, however, all transnational tobacco companies sell these products. Increased concentration of the ENDS market in the hands of the transnational tobacco companies is concerning to the public health community, given the industry&#x27;s legacy of obfuscating many fundamental truths about their products and misleading the public with false claims, including that low-tar and so-called &quot;light&quot; cigarettes would reduce the harms associated with smoking. Although industry representatives are claiming interest in ENDS because of their harm-reduction potential, many observers believe that profit remains the dominant motivation.&quot;

Major tobacco companies are dominating the political and policy-making environments just as they have in conventional cigarette policy making. As they have done to influence tobacco control policies for conventional cigarettes, the large companies often try to stay out of sight and work through third parties that can obscure their links to the tobacco industry. The one difference from the historical pattern of industry efforts to shape tobacco policy from behind the scenes is that there are also genuine independent sellers of e-cigarettes and associated users (so-called vape shops) who are not necessarily being directed by the cigarette companies. These smaller operators are, however, losing market share to the big tobacco companies, and the real political power is now being exercised by the cigarette companies. The cigarette companies try to take advantage of the existence of independent players while acting through the industry&#x27;s traditional allies and front groups.

==Tobacco control==
On May 11, 2004, the U.S. became the 108th country to sign the World Health Organization&#x27;s Global Treaty on Tobacco Control. This treaty places broad restrictions on the sale, advertising, shipment, and taxation of tobacco products. The U.S. has not yet ratified this treaty in its Senate and does not yet have a schedule for doing so.

Most recently, there has been discussion within the tobacco control community of transforming the tobacco industry through the replacement of tobacco corporations by other types of business organizations that can be established to provide tobacco to the market while not attempting to increase market demand.

On February 20, 2007, the US Supreme Court ruled that the Altria Group (formerly Philip Morris) did not have to pay $79.5 million in punitive damages awarded to Mayola Williams in a 1999 Oregon court ruling, when she sued Phillip Morris for responsibility in the cancer death of her husband, Jesse Williams. The Supreme Court&#x27;s decision overturns a ruling made by the Oregon Supreme Court that upheld the award.

On April 3, 2008, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit threw out an $800 billion class-action lawsuit filed on behalf of a group or class of people who smoked light cigarettes. The plaintiffs&#x27; lawyers were confident that they would be able to win this suit due to the success of &quot;Schwab v. Philip Morris&quot; wherein tobacco companies were found guilty of fraud-like charges because they were selling the idea that light cigarettes were safer than regular cigarettes. The ruling by the three-judge panel will not allow the suit to be pursued as a class, but instead need proof for why individual smokers chose light cigarettes over regular cigarettes.

==Production by country or region==

The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization estimates the following production of unmanufactured tobacco by country/region in 2022. (Figures are in thousands of tonnes.)(FAO)

== Cigarette production by factory ==
Much of global tobacco production is used in the manufacturing of cigarettes. The following is a chart compiled by Dr. Robert Proctor detailing the largest cigarette factories, accompanied by their estimated annual death toll due to the harms of cigarettes to health.
==In popular culture==

The tobacco industry has had a long relationship with the entertainment industry. In silent era movies, back-lit smoke was often used by filmmakers to create sense of mystery and sensuality in a scene. Later, cigarettes were deliberately placed in the hands of Hollywood stars as an early phase of product placement, until health regulating bodies tightened rules on tobacco advertisement and anti-smoking groups pressured actors and studio executives against such tactics. Big Tobacco has since been the subject focus of films such as the docudrama &quot;The Insider&quot; (1999) and &quot;Thank You For Smoking&quot; (2005).

These issues have also constituted a recurring storyline in the AMC series &quot;Mad Men&quot;, from season 1 beginning with the pilot episode (&quot;Smoke Gets In Your Eyes&quot;) through season 7&#x27;s midseason finale, &quot;Waterloo&quot;.

==See also==

==References==
== Further reading ==
* Brandt, Allan. &quot;The Cigarette Century: The Rise, Fall, and Deadly Persistence of the Product That Defined America&quot; (2007). online

* Enstad, Nan. &quot;Cigarettes, Inc.: An Intimate History of Corporate Imperialism&quot; (U of Chicago, 2018) excerpt
* Goodman, Jordan, ed. &quot;Tobacco in History and Culture. An Encyclopedia&quot; (2 vol, Gage Cengage, 2005) online
* Hahn, Barbara. &quot;Making Tobacco Bright: Creating an American Commodity, 1617–1937&quot; (Johns Hopkins University Press, 2011). examines how marketing, technology, and demand caused the dominance of Bright Flue-Cured Tobacco.
* Hannah, Leslie. &quot;The Whig Fable of American Tobacco, 1895–1913,&quot; &quot;Journal of Economic History&quot; 66#1 (2006), pp. 42–73 online, argues most historians misinterpret the company.
* Hirschfelder, Arlene B. &quot;Encyclopedia of smoking and tobacco&quot; (1999) online
* 
* Oreskes, Naomi, and Erik M. Conway. &quot;Merchants of doubt: How a handful of scientists obscured the truth on issues from tobacco smoke to global warming&quot; (Bloomsbury Publishing USA, 2011).

* Parker-Pope, Tara. &quot;Cigarettes: Anatomy of an Industry from Seed to Smoke&quot; (2002) online
* Tennant, Richard B. &quot;American Cigarette Industry: A Study in Economic Analysis and Public Policy&quot; (Yale UP, 1950) online
* Tennant, Richard B. &quot;The Cigarette Industry&quot; in &quot;The Structure of American Industry,&quot; edited by Walter Adams (1961) pp 357–392. online
* Tilley, Nannie M. &quot;The R.J. Reynolds tobacco company&quot; (UNC Press Books, 1985) online
* Wagner, Susan. &quot;Cigarette Country: Tobacco in American History and Politics&quot; (Praeger, 1971). online

==External links==
* UCSF Tobacco Industry Videos Collection
* UCSF Tobacco Industry Audio Recordings Collection
* University of South Florida Libraries: &quot;The Tobacco Leaf Journal&quot; which was published by C. Pfirshing of New York beginning in 1865. He called the journal the &quot;organ of the tobacco trade in the United States.&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q907703" start="4" end="20" title="Tobacco industry" label="tobacco industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="157" end="164" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="323" end="333" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520145" start="353" end="396" title="WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control" label="WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418327" start="529" end="543" title="Evidence-based policy" label="evidence-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q193170" start="567" end="575" title="Ratification" label="ratified"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646605" start="576" end="588" title="member state" label="member state"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005010" start="642" end="657" title="tobacco control" label="tobacco control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386268" start="822" end="835" title="tobacco smoke" label="tobacco smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029" start="881" end="890" title="Addiction" label="addictive"/>
<link wikidata="Q851829" start="1104" end="1113" title="Nicotiana" label="Nicotiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q181095" start="1138" end="1148" title="Nicotiana tabacum" label="N. tabacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="1166" end="1174" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q662860" start="1265" end="1272" title="smoking" label="smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q104526" start="1276" end="1280" title="Tobacco pipe" label="pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578" start="1283" end="1292" title="cigarette" label="cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576" start="1299" end="1304" title="cigar" label="cigar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345873" start="1330" end="1345" title="chewing tobacco" label="chewing tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q212894" start="1364" end="1369" title="Snuff (tobacco)" label="snuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114994" start="1373" end="1388" title="dipping tobacco" label="dipping tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q932139" start="1482" end="1491" title="cash crop" label="cash crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="1504" end="1525" title="British North America" label="British North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q317088" start="1681" end="1690" title="commodity" label="commodity"/>
<link wikidata="Q396340" start="1700" end="1725" title="Agricultural economics" label="similar in economic terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="1742" end="1746" title="food" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="1886" end="1893" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="1897" end="1905" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="2383" end="2398" title="tobacco smoking" label="tobacco smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="2729" end="2736" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="2738" end="2745" title="tobacco smoking" label="smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q783794" start="2869" end="2878" title="company" label="companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578" start="2910" end="2919" title="cigarette" label="cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576" start="2922" end="2927" title="cigar" label="cigar"/>
<link wikidata="Q212894" start="2930" end="2935" title="Snuff (tobacco)" label="snuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345873" start="2937" end="2952" title="chewing tobacco" label="chewing tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q104526" start="2957" end="2961" title="smoking pipe (tobacco)" label="pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003789" start="2971" end="2997" title="China National Tobacco Co." label="China National Tobacco Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q445007" start="3162" end="3168" title="Altria" label="Altria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852556" start="3210" end="3237" title="Philip Morris International" label="Philip Morris International"/>
<link wikidata="Q445007" start="3317" end="3323" title="Altria" label="Altria"/>
<link wikidata="Q856411" start="3326" end="3350" title="British American Tobacco" label="British American Tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471161" start="3354" end="3370" title="Imperial Tobacco" label="Imperial Tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q898568" start="3373" end="3386" title="Japan Tobacco" label="Japan Tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852556" start="3389" end="3416" title="Philip Morris International" label="Philip Morris International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634516" start="3713" end="3727" title="state monopoly" label="state monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259566" start="3803" end="3812" title="Lorillard" label="Lorillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655008" start="3886" end="3897" title="ITC Limited" label="ITC Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267310" start="4027" end="4046" title="Tobacco advertising" label="Tobacco advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745969" start="4654" end="4668" title="Legacy Tobacco Documents Library" label="internal memos"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="4719" end="4727" title="nicotine" label="nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="4737" end="4746" title="Substance use disorder" label="addictive"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="4751" end="4761" title="carcinogen" label="carcinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="4816" end="4837" title="nicotine addiction" label="nicotine is addictive"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112596" start="4863" end="4884" title="Master Settlement Agreement" label="large cash settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783852" start="5028" end="5040" title="class action" label="class action"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="5041" end="5048" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759032" start="5383" end="5412" title="R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company" label="R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q186492" start="5478" end="5489" title="George S. Patton" label="Gen. Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="6043" end="6055" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q16837989" start="6076" end="6125" title="Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act" label="Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="6504" end="6546" title="US Department of Health and Human Services" label="US Department of Health and Human Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817560" start="6738" end="6755" title="menthol cigarette" label="menthol cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906580" start="7084" end="7107" title="Big Tobacco" label="Large tobacco companies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7125" end="7145" title="electronic cigarette#History" label="electronic cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177983" start="7419" end="7424" title="Dragonite International Limited" label="Ruyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471161" start="7488" end="7504" title="Imperial Brands" label="Imperial Tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="9587" end="9612" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520145" start="9620" end="9652" title="WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control" label="Global Treaty on Tobacco Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="9811" end="9817" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q167037" start="10016" end="10027" title="corporation" label="corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="10202" end="10218" title="US Supreme Court" label="US Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q445007" start="10234" end="10246" title="Altria Group" label="Altria Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064922" start="10549" end="10569" title="Oregon Supreme Court" label="Oregon Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="11311" end="11325" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="11326" end="11359" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247037" start="11477" end="11480" title="ton" label="ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="11485" end="11490" title="UN Food and Agriculture Organization" label="(FAO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q749457" start="12120" end="12137" title="product placement" label="product placement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906580" start="12296" end="12307" title="Big Tobacco" label="Big Tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q622370" start="12362" end="12371" title="docudrama" label="docudrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q463832" start="12378" end="12389" title="The Insider (film)" label="The Insider"/>
<link wikidata="Q840872" start="12413" end="12434" title="Thank You for Smoking (film)" label="Thank You For Smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q294660" start="12514" end="12517" title="AMC (TV channel)" label="AMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q223977" start="12531" end="12538" title="Mad Men" label="Mad Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q3465736" start="12551" end="12559" title="Mad Men (season 1)" label="season 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545845" start="12594" end="12629" title="Smoke Gets in Your Eyes (Mad Men)" label="&amp;quot;Smoke Gets In Your Eyes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16675297" start="12673" end="12693" title="Mad Men (season 7)" label="&amp;quot;Waterloo&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52634" wikidata="Q720398" url="?curid=52634" title="Baking">
<text>Baking is a method of preparing food that uses dry heat, typically in an oven, but can also be done in hot ashes, or on hot stones. The most common baked item is bread, but many other types of foods can be baked. Heat is gradually transferred from the surface of cakes, cookies, and pieces of bread to their center, typically conducted at elevated temperatures surpassing 300°F. Dry heat cooking imparts a distinctive richness to foods through the processes of caramelization and surface browning. As heat travels through, it transforms batters and doughs into baked goods and more with a firm dry crust and a softer center. Baking can be combined with grilling to produce a hybrid barbecue variant by using both methods simultaneously, or one after the other. Baking is related to barbecuing because the concept of the masonry oven is similar to that of a smoke pit.

Baking has traditionally been performed at home for day-to-day meals and in bakeries and restaurants for local consumption. When production was industrialized, baking was automated by machines in large factories. The art of baking remains a fundamental skill and is important for nutrition, as baked goods, especially bread, are a common and important food, both from an economic and cultural point of view. A person who prepares baked goods as a profession is called a baker.

==Foods and techniques==

All types of food can be baked, but some require special care and protection from direct heat. Various techniques have been developed to provide this protection.

In addition to bread, baking is used to prepare cakes, pastries, pies, tarts, quiches, cookies, scones, crackers, pretzels, and more. These popular items are known collectively as &quot;baked goods,&quot; and are often sold at a bakery, which is a store that carries only baked goods, or at markets, grocery stores, farmers markets or through other venues.

Meat, including cured meats, such as ham can also be baked, but baking is usually reserved for meatloaf, smaller cuts of whole meats, or whole meats that contain stuffing or coating such as bread crumbs or buttermilk batter. Some foods are surrounded with moisture during baking by placing a small amount of liquid (such as water or broth) in the bottom of a closed pan, and letting it steam up around the food. Roasting is a term synonymous with baking, but traditionally denotes the cooking of whole animals or major cuts through exposure to dry heat; for instance, one bakes chicken parts but roasts the whole bird. One can bake pork or lamb chops but roasts the whole loin or leg. There are many exceptions to this rule of the two terms. Baking and roasting otherwise involve the same range of cooking times and temperatures. Another form of baking is the method known as &quot;en croûte&quot; (French for &quot;in crust&quot;, referring to a pastry crust), which protects the food from direct heat and seals the natural juices inside. Meat, poultry, game, fish or vegetables can be prepared by baking &quot;en croûte&quot;. Well-known examples include Beef Wellington, where the beef is encased in pastry before baking; pâté en croûte, where the terrine is encased in pastry before baking; and the Vietnamese variant, a meat-filled pastry called pâté chaud. The &quot;en croûte&quot; method also allows meat to be baked by burying it in the embers of a fire—a favorite method of cooking venison. Salt can also be used to make a protective crust that is not eaten. Another method of protecting food from the heat while it is baking is to cook it &quot;en papillote&quot; (French for &quot;in parchment&quot;). In this method, the food is covered by baking paper (or aluminum foil) to protect it while it is being baked. The cooked parcel of food is sometimes served unopened, allowing diners to discover the contents for themselves.

Eggs can also be used in baking to produce savory or sweet dishes. In combination with dairy products especially cheese, they are often prepared as a dessert. For example, although a baked custard can be made using starch (in the form of flour, cornflour, arrowroot, or potato flour), the flavor of the dish is much more delicate if eggs are used as the thickening agent. Baked custards, such as crème caramel, are among the items that need protection from an oven&#x27;s direct heat, and the &quot;bain-marie&quot; method serves this purpose. The cooking container is half-submerged in water in another, larger one so that the heat in the oven is more gently applied during the baking process. Baking a successful soufflé requires that the baking process be carefully controlled. The oven temperature must be absolutely even and the oven space must not be shared with another dish. These factors, along with the theatrical effect of an air-filled dessert, have given this baked food a reputation for being a culinary achievement. Similarly, a good baking technique (and a good oven) are also needed to create a baked Alaska because of the difficulty of baking hot meringue and cold ice cream at the same time.
Baking can also be used to prepare other foods such as pizzas, baked potatoes, baked apples, baked beans, some casseroles and pasta dishes such as lasagne.

Baking can also be used to prepare other foods such as pizzas, baked potatoes, baked apples, baked beans, some casseroles and pasta dishes such as lasagne. Baking goods are not limited to being served warm or right after baking, however, as some recipes, such as cheesecake, are served differently. Specifically, cheesecake requires cooling after being removed from the oven, before then being set to freeze inside of a refrigerator for several hours, and finally served cold.

==Baking in ancient times==
The earliest known form of baking occurred when humans took wild grass grains, soaked them in water, and mashed the mixture into a kind of broth-like paste. The paste was cooked by pouring it onto a flat, hot rock, resulting in a bread-like substance. Later, as humans mastered fire, they roasted the paste on hot embers, making bread-making more convenient as it could be done whenever fire was created. According to Britannica, the Ancient Egyptians invented the first ovens. They also baked bread using yeast, which they had previously been using to brew beer. By 2600 BCE, they were making bread in ways similar in principle to those of today. The book &quot;Bread for the Wilderness&quot; states that &quot;Ovens and worktables have been discovered in archaeological digs from Turkey (Hacilar) to Palestine (Jericho (Tell es-Sultan)) and date back to 5600 BC.&quot;

Baking flourished during the Roman Empire. Beginning around 300 BC, the pastry cook became an occupation for Romans (known as the pastillarium) and became a respected profession because pastries were considered decadent, and Romans loved festivity and celebration. Thus, pastries were often cooked especially for large banquets, and any pastry cook who could invent new types of tasty treats was highly prized. Around 1 AD, there were more than three hundred pastry chefs in Rome, and Cato wrote about how they created all sorts of diverse foods and flourished professionally and socially because of their creations. Cato speaks of an enormous number of breads including; libum (cakes made with flour and honey, often sacrificed to gods), placenta (groats and cress), spira (modern day flour pretzels), scibilata (tortes), savillum (sweet cake), and globus apherica (fritters). A great selection of these, with many different variations, different ingredients, and varied patterns, were often found at banquets and dining halls. The Romans baked bread in an oven with its own chimney, and had mills to grind grain into flour. A bakers&#x27; guild was established in 168 BC in Rome.

==Commercial baking==
Eventually, the Roman art of baking became known throughout Europe and eventually spread to eastern parts of Asia. By the 13th century in London, commercial trading, including baking, had many regulations attached. In the case of food, they were designed to create a system &quot;so there was little possibility of false measures, adulterated food or shoddy manufactures&quot;. There were by that time twenty regulations applying to bakers alone, including that every baker had to have &quot;the impression of his seal&quot; upon bread.

Beginning in the 19th century, alternative leavening agents became more common, such as baking soda. Bakers often baked goods at home and then sold them in the streets. This scene was so common that Rembrandt, among others, painted a pastry chef selling pancakes in the streets of Germany, with children clamoring for a sample. In London, pastry chefs sold their goods from handcarts. This developed into a delivery system of baked goods to households and greatly increased demand as a result. In Paris, the first open-air café of baked goods was developed, and baking became an established art throughout the entire world.


Baking eventually developed into a commercial industry using automated machinery which enabled more goods to be produced for widespread distribution. In the United States, the baking industry &quot;was built on marketing methods used during feudal times and production techniques developed by the Romans.&quot; Some makers of snacks such as potato chips or crisps have produced baked versions of their snack products as an alternative to the usual cooking method of deep frying in an attempt to reduce their calorie or fat content. Baking has opened up doors to businesses such as cake shops and factories where the baking process is done with larger amounts in large, open furnaces.

The aroma and texture of baked goods as they come out of the oven are strongly appealing but is a quality that is quickly lost. Since the flavour and appeal largely depend on freshness, commercial producers have to compensate by using food additives as well as imaginative labeling. As more and more baked goods are purchased from commercial suppliers, producers try to capture that original appeal by adding the label &quot;home-baked.&quot; Such attempts seek to make an emotional link to the remembered freshness of baked goods as well as to attach positive associations the purchaser has with the idea of &quot;home&quot; to the bought product. Freshness is such an important quality that restaurants, although they are commercial (and not domestic) preparers of food, bake their own products. For example, scones at The Ritz London Hotel &quot;are not baked until early afternoon on the day they are to be served, to make sure they are as fresh as possible.&quot;

==Equipment==

Baking needs an enclosed space for heatingtypically in an oven. Formerly, primitive clay ovens were in use. The fuel can be supplied by wood, coal, gas, or electricity. Adding and removing items from an oven may be done by hand with an oven mitt or by a peel, a long handled tool specifically used for that purpose.

Many commercial ovens are equipped with two heating elements: one for baking, using convection and thermal conduction to heat the food, and one for broiling or grilling, heating mainly by radiation. Another piece of equipment still used for baking is the Dutch oven. &quot;Also called a bake kettle, bastable, bread oven, fire pan, bake oven kail pot, tin kitchen, roasting kitchen, &quot;doufeu&quot; (French: &quot;gentle fire&quot;) or &quot;feu de compagne&quot; (French: &quot;country oven&quot;) [it] originally replaced the cooking jack as the latest fireside cooking technology,&quot; combining &quot;the convenience of pot-oven and hangover oven.&quot;

Asian cultures have adopted steam baskets to produce the effect of baking while reducing the amount of fat needed.

Other equipment/tools needed for baking precision include a method for measuring ingredients. Ideally, a scale accurate to the gram is used, as exact measurements provide the best results, but some bakers rely on measuring cups and measuring spoons.

Digital kitchen scales are also popular in baking where precise measurements are a must for dry ingredients. The tare function simplifies the process by allowing multiple ingredients to be measured in the same mixing bowl, resetting the scale to zero between each addition and eliminating the need for extra measuring tools.

==Process==

Eleven events occur concurrently during baking, some of which (such as starch gelatinization) would not occur at room temperature.

# Fats melt
# Gases form and expand
# Microorganisms die
# Sugar dissolves
# Egg, milk, and gluten proteins coagulate
# Starches gelatinize or solidify
# Liquids evaporate
# Caramelization and Maillard browning occur on crust
# Enzymes are denatured
# Changes occur to nutrients
# Pectin breaks down

The dry heat of baking changes the form of starches in the food and causes its outer surfaces to brown, giving it an attractive appearance and taste. The browning is caused by the caramelization of sugars and the Maillard reaction. Maillard browning occurs when &quot;sugars break down in the presence of proteins. Because foods contain many different types of sugars and proteins, Maillard browning contributes to the flavour of a wide range of foods, including nuts, roast beef, and baked bread.&quot; The moisture is never entirely &quot;sealed in&quot;; over time, an item being baked will become dry. This is often an advantage, especially in situations where drying is the desired outcome, like drying herbs or roasting certain types of vegetables.

The baking process does not require any fat to be used to cook in an oven. When baking, consideration must be given to the amount of fat that is contained in the food item. Higher levels of fat such as margarine, butter, lard, or vegetable shortening will cause an item to spread out during the baking process.

With the passage of time, breads harden and become stale. This is not primarily due to moisture being lost from the baked products, but more a reorganization of the way in which the water and starch are associated over time. This process is similar to recrystallization and is promoted by storage at cool temperatures, such as in a domestic refrigerator or freezer.

==Cultural and religious significance==

Baking, especially of bread, holds special significance for many cultures. It is such a fundamental part of everyday food consumption that the children&#x27;s nursery rhyme &quot;Pat-a-cake, pat-a-cake, baker&#x27;s man&quot; takes baking as its subject. Baked goods are normally served at all kinds of parties and special attention is given to their quality at formal events. They are also one of the main components of a tea party, including at nursery teas and high teas, a tradition which started in Victorian Britain, reportedly when Anna Russell, Duchess of Bedford &quot;grew tired of the sinking feeling which afflicted her every afternoon round 4 o&#x27;clock ... In 1840, she plucked up courage and asked for a tray of tea, bread and butter, and cake to be brought to her room. Once she had formed the habit she found she could not break it, so spread it among her friends instead. As the century progressed, afternoon tea became increasingly elaborate.&quot;

The Benedictine Sisters of the Benedictine Monastery of Caltanissetta baked a pastry called Crocetta of Caltanissetta (Cross of Caltanissetta). They used to be prepared for the Holy Crucifix festivity. The monastery was situated next to the Church of the Holy Cross, from which these sweet pastries take the name.

For Jews, matzo is a baked product of considerable religious and ritual significance. Baked matzah bread can be ground up and used in other dishes, such as gefilte fish, and baked again. For Christians, bread has to be baked to be used as an essential component of the sacrament of the Eucharist. In the Eastern Christian tradition, baked bread in the form of birds is given to children to carry to the fields in a spring ceremony that celebrates the Forty Martyrs of Sebaste.

Jesus defines himself as the “bread of life” (John 6:35). Divine “Grace” is called “bread of the strong” and preaching, religious teaching, the “bread of the word of God”. In Roman Catholicism, the piece of blessed wax encased in a reliquary is the “sacred bread”. In Hebrew, Bethlehem means &quot;the house of bread&quot;, and Christians see in the fact that Jesus was born (before moving to Nazareth) in a city of that name, the significance of his sacrifice via the Eucharist. The Eucharist is often interpreted as a connection to the Holy Spirit, a symbol of God’s love, and an invitation to reflect that love in service to others, providing strength for living out one’s faith.

==See also==

* Baking pan
* Baking chocolate
* Baking mix
* List of baked goods
* List of bakers
* List of ovens
* Pandemic baking
* Sheet pan

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Burnett, John. &quot;The baking industry in the nineteenth century.&quot; &quot;Business History&quot; 5.2 (1963): 98-108. in Britain.
* —a textbook on baking and setting up a bakery
* Laudan, Rachel. &quot;Cuisine and empire: Cooking in world history&quot; (Univ of California Press, 2013) online.
* Pasqualone, Antonella. &quot;Traditional flat breads spread from the Fertile Crescent: Production process and history of baking systems.&quot; &quot;Journal of Ethnic Foods&quot; 5.1 (2018): 10-19. online
* Sharpless, Rebecca. &quot;Grain and Fire: A History of Baking in the American South&quot; (University of North Carolina Press, 2022) online scholarly review
* Ysewijn, R. (2020). Oats in the North, Wheat from the South: The History of British Baking: Savoury and Sweet. Australia: Murdoch Books Pty Limited.
* Zanoni, Bruno, C. Peri, and Sauro Pierucci. &quot;A study of the bread-baking process. I: A phenomenological model.&quot; &quot;Journal of food engineering&quot; 19.4 (1993): 389-398.

== External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q720398" start="0" end="6" title="Baking" label="Baking"/>
<link wikidata="Q36539" start="73" end="77" title="oven" label="oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q152079" start="107" end="110" title="ash" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198722" start="124" end="130" title="Baking stone" label="stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="162" end="167" title="bread" label="bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q264619" start="653" end="661" title="grilling" label="grilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q461696" start="682" end="690" title="barbecue" label="barbecue"/>
<link wikidata="Q908601" start="820" end="832" title="masonry oven" label="masonry oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q193713" start="857" end="866" title="smoking (cooking)" label="smoke pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q205961" start="1086" end="1089" title="Art (skill)" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q160131" start="1339" end="1344" title="baker" label="baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q13276" start="1584" end="1588" title="cake" label="cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q477248" start="1591" end="1599" title="pastry" label="pastries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360264" start="1601" end="1604" title="pie" label="pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142483" start="1607" end="1611" title="tart" label="tart"/>
<link wikidata="Q722595" start="1614" end="1620" title="quiche" label="quiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q13266" start="1623" end="1629" title="cookie" label="cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q869660" start="1632" end="1637" title="scone" label="scone"/>
<link wikidata="Q856330" start="1640" end="1648" title="Cracker (food)" label="crackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q160525" start="1650" end="1657" title="pretzel" label="pretzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q274393" start="1765" end="1771" title="bakery" label="bakery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503716" start="1910" end="1915" title="Curing (food preservation)" label="cured"/>
<link wikidata="Q170486" start="1931" end="1934" title="ham" label="ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807565" start="1989" end="1997" title="meatloaf" label="meatloaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q745361" start="2056" end="2064" title="stuffing" label="stuffing"/>
<link wikidata="Q658413" start="2084" end="2096" title="bread crumbs" label="bread crumbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q106612" start="2100" end="2110" title="buttermilk" label="buttermilk"/>
<link wikidata="Q29493" start="2111" end="2117" title="batter (cooking)" label="batter"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="2218" end="2223" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q275068" start="2227" end="2232" title="broth" label="broth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865573" start="2306" end="2314" title="Roasting" label="Roasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309592" start="2438" end="2446" title="Dry heat sterilization" label="dry heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865573" start="2647" end="2655" title="roasting" label="roasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q178559" start="2940" end="2947" title="poultry" label="poultry"/>
<link wikidata="Q223930" start="2949" end="2953" title="Game (food)" label="game"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="2963" end="2972" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412680" start="3051" end="3066" title="Beef Wellington" label="Beef Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q477248" start="3097" end="3103" title="pastry" label="pastry"/>
<link wikidata="Q816704" start="3119" end="3133" title="pâté" label="pâté en croûte"/>
<link wikidata="Q11175039" start="3145" end="3152" title="Terrine (food)" label="terrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264577" start="3245" end="3255" title="pâté chaud" label="pâté chaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296872" start="3386" end="3393" title="venison" label="venison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11697651" start="3550" end="3562" title="en papillote" label="en papillote"/>
<link wikidata="Q798500" start="3647" end="3659" title="Parchment paper (baking)" label="baking paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q447349" start="3664" end="3677" title="aluminum foil" label="aluminum foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="3832" end="3836" title="Egg (food)" label="Eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q185217" start="3919" end="3933" title="dairy products" label="dairy products"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="3945" end="3951" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q182940" start="3982" end="3989" title="dessert" label="dessert"/>
<link wikidata="Q625825" start="4021" end="4028" title="custard" label="custard"/>
<link wikidata="Q36465" start="4070" end="4075" title="flour" label="flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393961" start="4077" end="4086" title="Corn starch" label="cornflour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069888" start="4088" end="4097" title="arrowroot" label="arrowroot"/>
<link wikidata="Q36465" start="4102" end="4114" title="potato flour" label="potato flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q374381" start="4228" end="4241" title="crème caramel" label="crème caramel"/>
<link wikidata="Q803889" start="4331" end="4341" title="bain-marie" label="bain-marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q846376" start="4547" end="4554" title="soufflé" label="soufflé"/>
<link wikidata="Q540289" start="4944" end="4956" title="baked Alaska" label="baked Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q276276" start="4997" end="5005" title="meringue" label="meringue"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="5015" end="5024" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q177" start="5098" end="5104" title="pizzas" label="pizzas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193251" start="5106" end="5118" title="baked potato" label="baked potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q804297" start="5136" end="5147" title="baked beans" label="baked beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501890" start="5154" end="5163" title="casserole" label="casserole"/>
<link wikidata="Q178" start="5169" end="5174" title="pasta" label="pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q20034" start="5190" end="5197" title="lasagne" label="lasagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q177" start="5255" end="5261" title="pizzas" label="pizzas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193251" start="5263" end="5275" title="baked potato" label="baked potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q804297" start="5293" end="5304" title="baked beans" label="baked beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501890" start="5311" end="5320" title="casserole" label="casserole"/>
<link wikidata="Q178" start="5326" end="5331" title="pasta" label="pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q20034" start="5347" end="5354" title="lasagne" label="lasagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="6124" end="6134" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="6140" end="6157" title="Ancient Egyptians" label="Ancient Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="6200" end="6205" title="bread" label="bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q908860" start="6496" end="6503" title="Hacilar" label="Hacilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402267" start="6519" end="6543" title="Tell es-Sultan" label="Jericho (Tell es-Sultan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="6607" end="6619" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q130186" start="7392" end="7397" title="torte" label="torte"/>
<link wikidata="Q690292" start="7445" end="7452" title="fritter" label="fritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q626066" start="7580" end="7587" title="banquet" label="banquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="7719" end="7724" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="7754" end="7758" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q179731" start="8409" end="8420" title="baking soda" label="baking soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="8520" end="8529" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q749316" start="9273" end="9279" title="snacks" label="snacks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9288" end="9300" title="potato chips#Similar foods" label="potato chips"/>
<link wikidata="Q854618" start="9413" end="9424" title="deep frying" label="deep frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q189567" start="9867" end="9880" title="food additive" label="food additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481002" start="10453" end="10474" title="The Ritz London Hotel" label="The Ritz London Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q36539" start="10675" end="10679" title="oven" label="oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q115915612" start="10691" end="10710" title="primitive clay oven" label="primitive clay oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247051" start="10871" end="10875" title="Peel (tool)" label="peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q951722" start="11018" end="11028" title="convection oven" label="convection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7465774" start="11033" end="11051" title="thermal conduction" label="thermal conduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q262515" start="11189" end="11199" title="Dutch oven" label="Dutch oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q41803" start="11840" end="11844" title="gram" label="gram"/>
<link wikidata="Q907099" start="11926" end="11940" title="Measuring cup" label="measuring cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426230" start="11945" end="11961" title="Measuring spoon" label="measuring spoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="12374" end="12380" title="starch" label="starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="12437" end="12440" title="Fat" label="Fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="12449" end="12452" title="Gas" label="Gas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12464" end="12470" title="Thermal expansion#Isobaric expansion in ideal gases" label="expand"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="12473" end="12486" title="Microorganism" label="Microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="12494" end="12499" title="Sugar" label="Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q739398" start="12500" end="12509" title="Dissolution (chemistry)" label="dissolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="12512" end="12515" title="Egg" label="Egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="12517" end="12521" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188251" start="12527" end="12533" title="gluten" label="gluten"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="12534" end="12541" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601513" start="12555" end="12574" title="Starch gelatinization" label="Starches gelatinize"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="12597" end="12606" title="Evaporation" label="evaporate"/>
<link wikidata="Q73185" start="12609" end="12623" title="Caramelization" label="Caramelization"/>
<link wikidata="Q647574" start="12628" end="12645" title="Maillard reaction" label="Maillard browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="12663" end="12669" title="Enzyme" label="Enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12675" end="12684" title="Denaturation (biochemistry)#Cooking" label="denatured"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="12704" end="12712" title="nutrient" label="nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q188154" start="12716" end="12722" title="Pectin" label="Pectin"/>
<link wikidata="Q647574" start="12949" end="12966" title="Maillard reaction" label="Maillard reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="13444" end="13448" title="herb" label="herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4287" start="13694" end="13703" title="margarine" label="margarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34172" start="13705" end="13711" title="butter" label="butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194601" start="13732" end="13742" title="shortening" label="shortening"/>
<link wikidata="Q434945" start="13855" end="13860" title="staling" label="stale"/>
<link wikidata="Q217651" start="13891" end="13899" title="moisture" label="moisture"/>
<link wikidata="Q61847" start="14056" end="14073" title="Recrystallization (chemistry)" label="recrystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123037" start="14371" end="14384" title="nursery rhyme" label="nursery rhyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143180" start="14391" end="14431" title="Pat-a-cake, pat-a-cake, baker&amp;#x27;s man" label="Pat-a-cake, pat-a-cake, baker&amp;#x27;s man"/>
<link wikidata="Q200538" start="14515" end="14522" title="party" label="parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q277222" start="14635" end="14644" title="tea party" label="tea party"/>
<link wikidata="Q276118" start="14751" end="14783" title="Anna Russell, Duchess of Bedford" label="Anna Russell, Duchess of Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q13680" start="15239" end="15252" title="Caltanissetta" label="Caltanissetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150258" start="15275" end="15300" title="Crocetta of Caltanissetta" label="Crocetta of Caltanissetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q815520" start="15360" end="15383" title="Feast of the Cross" label="Holy Crucifix festivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q211361" start="15508" end="15513" title="Matzah" label="matzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146771" start="15654" end="15666" title="gefilte fish" label="gefilte fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="15784" end="15793" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="15802" end="15819" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Eastern Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q931446" start="15949" end="15973" title="Forty Martyrs of Sebaste" label="Forty Martyrs of Sebaste"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="15976" end="15981" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="16151" end="16168" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="16252" end="16261" title="Bethlehem" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q430776" start="16369" end="16377" title="Nazareth" label="Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q502335" start="16676" end="16686" title="Baking pan" label="Baking pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884785" start="16689" end="16705" title="Baking chocolate" label="Baking chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q798465" start="16708" end="16718" title="Baking mix" label="Baking mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037260" start="16721" end="16740" title="List of baked goods" label="List of baked goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607057" start="16743" end="16757" title="List of bakers" label="List of bakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349221" start="16760" end="16773" title="List of ovens" label="List of ovens"/>
<link wikidata="Q124615967" start="16776" end="16791" title="Pandemic baking" label="Pandemic baking"/>
<link wikidata="Q502335" start="16794" end="16803" title="Sheet pan" label="Sheet pan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52636" wikidata="Q41716" url="?curid=52636" title="Boiling">
<text>Boiling or ebullition is the rapid phase transition from liquid to gas or vapour; the reverse of boiling is condensation. Boiling occurs when a liquid is heated to its boiling point, so that the vapour pressure of the liquid is equal to the pressure exerted on the liquid by the surrounding atmosphere. Boiling and evaporation are the two main forms of liquid vapourization.

There are two main types of boiling: nucleate boiling where small bubbles of vapour form at discrete points, and critical heat flux boiling where the boiling surface is heated above a certain critical temperature and a film of vapour forms on the surface. Transition boiling is an intermediate, unstable form of boiling with elements of both types. The boiling point of water is 100 °C or 212 °F but is lower with the decreased atmospheric pressure found at higher altitudes.

Boiling water is used as a method of making it potable by killing microbes and viruses that may be present. The sensitivity of different micro-organisms to heat varies, but if water is held at for one minute, most micro-organisms and viruses are inactivated. Ten minutes at a temperature of 70 °C (158 °F) is also sufficient to inactivate most bacteria.

Boiling water is also used in several cooking methods including boiling, steaming, and poaching.

== Types ==

=== Free convection ===

The lowest heat flux seen in boiling is only sufficient to cause [natural convection], where the warmer fluid rises due to its slightly lower density. This condition occurs only when the superheat is very low, meaning that the hot surface near the fluid is nearly the same temperature as the boiling point.

=== Nucleate ===

Nucleate boiling is characterised by the growth of bubbles or pops on a heated surface (heterogeneous nucleation), which rises from discrete points on a surface, whose temperature is only slightly above the temperature of the liquid. In general, the number of nucleation sites is increased by an increasing surface temperature.

An irregular surface of the boiling vessel (i.e., increased surface roughness) or additives to the fluid (i.e., surfactants and/or nanoparticles) facilitate nucleate boiling over a broader temperature range, while an exceptionally smooth surface, such as plastic, lends itself to superheating. Under these conditions, a heated liquid may show boiling delay and the temperature may go somewhat above the boiling point without boiling.

Homogeneous nucleation, where the bubbles form from the surrounding liquid instead of on a surface, can occur if the liquid is warmer in its center, and cooler at the surfaces of the container. This can be done, for instance, in a microwave oven, which heats the water and not the container.

===Critical heat flux===
Critical heat flux (CHF) describes the thermal limit of a phenomenon where a phase change occurs during heating (such as bubbles forming on a metal surface used to heat water), which suddenly decreases the efficiency of heat transfer, thus causing localised overheating of the heating surface. As the boiling surface is heated above a critical temperature, a film of vapour forms on the surface. Since this vapour film is much less capable of carrying heat away from the surface, the temperature rises very rapidly beyond this point into the transition boiling regime. The point at which this occurs is dependent on the characteristics of boiling fluid and the heating surface in question.

===Transition===
Transition boiling may be defined as the unstable boiling, which occurs at surface temperatures between the maximum attainable in nucleate and the minimum attainable in film boiling.

The formation of bubbles in a heated liquid is a complex physical process which often involves cavitation and acoustic effects, such as the broad-spectrum hiss one hears in a kettle not yet heated to the point where bubbles boil to the surface.

===Film===
If a surface heating the liquid is significantly hotter than the liquid then film boiling will occur, where a thin layer of vapour, which has low thermal conductivity, insulates the surface. This condition of a vapour film insulating the surface from the liquid characterises &quot;film boiling&quot;.

== Influence of geometry ==

=== Pool boiling ===

&quot;Pool boiling&quot; refers to boiling where there is no forced convective flow. Instead, the flow occurs due to density gradients. It can experience any of the regimes mentioned above.

=== Flow boiling ===

&quot;Flow boiling&quot; occurs when the boiling fluid circulates, typically through pipes. Its movement can be powered by pumps, such as in power plants, or by density gradients, such as in a thermosiphon or a heat pipe. Flows in flow boiling are often characterised by a void fraction parameter, which indicates the fraction of the volume in the system that is vapor. One can use this fraction and the densities to calculate the vapor quality, which refers to the mass fraction that is in the gas phase. Flow boiling can be very complex, with heavy influences of density, flow rates, and heat flux, as well as surface tension. The same system may have regions that are liquid, gas, and two-phase flow. Such two phase regimes can lead to some of the best heat transfer coefficients of any system.

=== Confined boiling ===

Confined boiling refers to boiling in confined geometries, typically characterized by a Bond number that compares the gap spacing to the capillary length. Confined boiling regimes begin to play a major role when Bo &lt; 0.5. This boiling regime is dominated by &quot;vapour stem bubbles&quot; left behind after vapour departs. These bubbles act as seeds for vapor growth. Confined boiling typically has higher heat transfer coefficient but a lower CHF than pool boiling. CHF occurs when the vapor momentum force at the two-phase interface balances the combined surface tension and hydrostatic forces, leading to irreversible growth of the dry spot. Confined boiling is particularly promising for electronics cooling.

==Physics==
The boiling point of an element at a given pressure is a characteristic attribute of the element. This is also true for many simple compounds including water and simple alcohols. Once boiling has started and provided that boiling remains stable and the pressure is constant, the temperature of the boiling liquid remains constant. This attribute led to the adoption of boiling points as the definition of 100 °C.

===Distillation===
Mixtures of volatile liquids have a boiling point specific to that mixture producing vapour with a constant mix of components - the constant boiling mixture. This attribute allows mixtures of liquids to be separated or partly separated by boiling and is best known as a means of separating ethanol from water.

==Uses==

===Refrigeration and air conditioning===
Most types of refrigeration and some type of air-conditioning work by compressing a gas so that it becomes liquid and then allowing it to boil. This adsorbs heat from the surroundings cooling the fridge or freezer or cooling the air entering a building. Typical liquids include propane, ammonia, carbon dioxide or nitrogen.

=== For making water potable ===

As a method of disinfecting water, bringing it to its boiling point at , is the oldest and most effective way since it does not affect the taste, it is effective despite contaminants or particles present in it, and is a single step process which eliminates most microbes responsible for causing intestine related diseases. The boiling point of water is at sea level and at normal barometric pressure. In places having a proper water purification system, it is recommended only as an emergency treatment method or for obtaining potable water in the wilderness or in rural areas, as it cannot remove chemical toxins or impurities.

The elimination of micro-organisms by boiling follows first-order kinetics—at high temperatures, it is achieved in less time and at lower temperatures, in more time. The heat sensitivity of micro-organisms varies, at , &quot;Giardia&quot; species (which cause giardiasis) can take ten minutes for complete inactivation, most intestine affecting microbes and &quot;E. coli&quot; (gastroenteritis) take less than a minute; at boiling point, &quot;Vibrio cholerae&quot; (cholera) takes ten seconds and hepatitis A virus (causes the symptom of jaundice), one minute. Boiling does not ensure the elimination of all micro-organisms; the bacterial spores &quot;Clostridium&quot; can survive at but are not water-borne or intestine affecting. Thus for human health, complete sterilization of water is not required.

The traditional advice of boiling water for ten minutes is mainly for additional safety, since microbes start getting eliminated at temperatures greater than and bringing it to its boiling point is also a useful indication that can be seen without the help of a thermometer, and by this time, the water is disinfected. Though the boiling point decreases with increasing altitude, it is not enough to affect the disinfecting process.

===In cooking===
&quot;Boiling&quot; is the method of cooking food in boiling water or other water-based liquids such as stock or milk. Simmering is gentle boiling, while in poaching the cooking liquid moves but scarcely bubbles.

The boiling point of water is typically considered to be , especially at sea level. Pressure and a change in the composition of the liquid may alter the boiling point of the liquid. High elevation cooking generally takes longer since boiling point is a function of atmospheric pressure. At an elevation of about , water boils at approximately . Depending on the type of food and the elevation, the boiling water may not be hot enough to cook the food properly. Similarly, increasing the pressure as in a pressure cooker raises the temperature of the contents above the open air boiling point.

===Boil-in-the-bag===
Also known as &quot;boil-in-bag&quot;, this involves heating or cooking ready-made foods sealed in a thick plastic bag. The bag containing the food, often frozen, is submerged in boiling water for a prescribed time. The resulting dishes can be prepared with greater convenience as no pots or pans are dirtied in the process. Such meals are available for camping as well as home dining.

==Contrast with evaporation==

At any given temperature, the molecules in a liquid have varying kinetic energies. Some high energy particles on the liquid surface may have enough energy to escape the intermolecular forces of attraction of the liquid and become a gas. This is called evaporation.

Evaporation only happens on the surface while boiling happens throughout the liquid.
When a liquid reaches its boiling point bubbles of gas form in it which rise into the surface and burst into the air. This process is called boiling. If the boiling liquid is heated more strongly the temperature does not rise but the liquid boils more quickly.

This distinction is exclusive to the liquid-to-gas transition; any transition directly from solid to gas is always referred to as sublimation regardless of whether it is at its boiling point or not.

== See also ==
* Phase transition
* Phase diagram
* Enthalpy of vaporization
* Explosive boiling
* Recovery time (culinary)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41716" start="0" end="7" title="Boiling" label="Boiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q41716" start="11" end="21" title="Boiling" label="ebullition"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="35" end="51" title="phase transition" label="phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="57" end="63" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="67" end="70" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q255722" start="74" end="80" title="vapor" label="vapour"/>
<link wikidata="Q166583" start="108" end="120" title="condensation" label="condensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003183" start="168" end="181" title="boiling point" label="boiling point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661322" start="195" end="210" title="vapour pressure" label="vapour pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="315" end="326" title="evaporation" label="evaporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452502" start="360" end="373" title="vapourization" label="vapourization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068214" start="413" end="429" title="nucleate boiling" label="nucleate boiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186725" start="489" end="507" title="critical heat flux" label="critical heat flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068214" start="632" end="650" title="Transition boiling" label="Transition boiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="919" end="927" title="Microorganism" label="microbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q38695" start="1246" end="1253" title="cooking" label="cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415859" start="1281" end="1289" title="steaming" label="steaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q263588" start="1295" end="1303" title="Poaching (cooking)" label="poaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068214" start="1670" end="1686" title="Nucleate boiling" label="Nucleate boiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q909022" start="1930" end="1940" title="nucleation" label="nucleation"/>
<link wikidata="Q61231" start="2130" end="2142" title="nanoparticle" label="nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q644139" start="2279" end="2291" title="superheating" label="superheating"/>
<link wikidata="Q644139" start="2342" end="2355" title="boiling delay" label="boiling delay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186725" start="2752" end="2770" title="Critical heat flux" label="Critical heat flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="2921" end="2926" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q179635" start="2972" end="2985" title="heat transfer" label="heat transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068214" start="3294" end="3312" title="transition boiling" label="transition boiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068214" start="3460" end="3478" title="Transition boiling" label="Transition boiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q75794" start="3661" end="3668" title="Liquid bubble" label="bubbles"/>
<link wikidata="Q201666" start="3739" end="3749" title="cavitation" label="cavitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="4047" end="4067" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041738" start="4661" end="4673" title="thermosiphon" label="thermosiphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q783618" start="4899" end="4912" title="vapor quality" label="vapor quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167245" start="5381" end="5392" title="Bond number" label="Bond number"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="6047" end="6054" title="Chemical element" label="element"/>
<link wikidata="Q156" start="6192" end="6199" title="Alcohol (chemistry)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q325401" start="6588" end="6612" title="constant boiling mixture" label="constant boiling mixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="6746" end="6753" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q747713" start="6832" end="6845" title="refrigeration" label="refrigeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="6863" end="6879" title="air-conditioning" label="air-conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q131189" start="7096" end="7103" title="propane" label="propane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="7105" end="7112" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="7114" end="7128" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="7132" end="7140" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="7439" end="7447" title="microbes" label="microbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="7472" end="7481" title="intestine" label="intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463025" start="7604" end="7622" title="water purification" label="water purification"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938321" start="7660" end="7686" title="Boil-water advisory" label="emergency treatment method"/>
<link wikidata="Q184651" start="7775" end="7790" title="toxins" label="chemical toxins"/>
<link wikidata="Q904041" start="7861" end="7881" title="first-order kinetics" label="first-order kinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469628" start="8032" end="8039" title="Giardia" label="Giardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q326071" start="8067" end="8077" title="giardiasis" label="giardiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="8171" end="8178" title="Escherichia coli" label="E. coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q156103" start="8186" end="8201" title="gastroenteritis" label="gastroenteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q160821" start="8252" end="8267" title="Vibrio cholerae" label="Vibrio cholerae"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="8275" end="8282" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q157661" start="8306" end="8323" title="hepatitis A virus" label="hepatitis A virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="8347" end="8355" title="jaundice" label="jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q327663" start="8461" end="8472" title="Clostridium" label="Clostridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q191618" start="8574" end="8587" title="sterilization (microbiology)" label="sterilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q646" start="8877" end="8888" title="thermometer" label="thermometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003183" start="8945" end="8968" title="Atmospheric pressure boiling point" label="boiling point decreases"/>
<link wikidata="Q38695" start="9103" end="9110" title="cooking" label="cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="9127" end="9132" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075310" start="9170" end="9175" title="Stock (food)" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="9179" end="9183" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q240164" start="9185" end="9194" title="Simmering" label="Simmering"/>
<link wikidata="Q263588" start="9223" end="9231" title="poaching (cooking)" label="poaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633778" start="9467" end="9476" title="elevation" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="9545" end="9565" title="atmospheric pressure" label="atmospheric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q271997" start="9784" end="9799" title="pressure cooker" label="pressure cooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q131800" start="11057" end="11068" title="Sublimation (phase transition)" label="sublimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="11144" end="11160" title="Phase transition" label="Phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q186693" start="11163" end="11176" title="Phase diagram" label="Phase diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q483538" start="11179" end="11203" title="Enthalpy of vaporization" label="Enthalpy of vaporization"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053096" start="11206" end="11223" title="Explosive boiling" label="Explosive boiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303022" start="11226" end="11250" title="Recovery time (culinary)" label="Recovery time (culinary)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52638" wikidata="Q445007" url="?curid=52638" title="Altria">
<text>Altria Group, Inc. (previously known as Philip Morris Companies, Inc. until 2003) is an American corporation and one of the world&#x27;s largest producers and marketers of tobacco, cigarettes, and medical products in the treatment of illnesses caused by tobacco. It operates worldwide and is headquartered in Henrico County, Virginia, just outside the city of Richmond.

Altria is the parent company of Philip Morris USA, John Middleton, Inc., U.S. Smokeless Tobacco Company, Inc., Philip Morris Capital Corporation, and NJOY Holdings, Inc. Altria also maintains large minority stakes in Belgium-based brewer AB InBev and the Canadian cannabis company Cronos Group. It is a component of the S&amp;P 500 and was a component of the Dow Jones Industrial Average from 1985 to 2008, dropping due to spin-offs of Kraft Foods Inc. in 2007 and Philip Morris International in 2008.

==History==


Altria emerged from Philip Morris USA. The onset of &quot;rebranding&quot; of Philip Morris Companies to Altria took place in 2003 (Philip Morris would later split, with Philip Morris USA remaining Altria&#x27;s primary and only consistently held asset). According to Altria, it was created because Philip Morris wished to emphasize that its business portfolio had come to consist of more than Philip Morris USA and Philip Morris International; at the time, it owned an 84% stake in Kraft Foods, although that business has since been spun off. The name &quot;Altria&quot; is claimed to come from the Latin word for &quot;high&quot; and was part of a trend of companies rebranding to names that previously did not exist, Accenture (previously Andersen Consulting) and Verizon being notable examples, though linguist Steven Pinker suggests that in fact the name is an &quot;egregious example&quot; of phonesthesia—with the company attempting to &quot;switch its image from bad people who sell addictive carcinogens to a place or state marked by altruism and other lofty values&quot;.

The company&#x27;s branding consultants, the Wirthlin Group, said: &quot;The name change alternative offers the possibility of masking the negatives associated with the tobacco business&quot;, thus enabling the company to improve its image and raise its profile without sacrificing tobacco profits. Philip Morris executives thought a name change would insulate the larger corporation and its other operating companies from the political pressures on tobacco.

The rebranding took place amidst social, legal, and financially troubled circumstances. In 2003 Altria was ranked &quot;Fortune&quot; number 11, and has steadily declined since. In 2010 Altria Group (MO) ranked at &quot;Fortune&quot; number 137, whereas its former asset, Philip Morris International, was ranked 94th.

In 2006, a United States court found that Philip Morris &quot;publicly ... disputed scientific findings linking smoking and disease knowing their assertions were false.&quot; In a 2006 ruling, a federal court found that Altria, along with R. J. Reynolds, Lorillard and Philip Morris were found guilty of misleading the public about the dangers of smoking. Within this ruling, it was noted that &quot;defendants altered the chemical form of nicotine delivered in mainstream cigarette smoke for the purpose of improving nicotine transfer efficiency and increasing the speed with which nicotine is absorbed by smokers.&quot; This was done by manipulating smoke pH with ammonia. Adding ammonia increases the smoke pH, in a process called &quot;freebasing&quot; which causes smokers to be &quot;exposed to higher internal nicotine doses and become more addicted to the product.&quot;

On March 30, 2007, Altria&#x27;s 88.1% stake in Kraft Foods was spun off, through a distribution of the remaining stake of shares (88.1%) to Altria shareholders. That same year, Altria began selling all its shares of Philip Morris International to Altria stockholders, a spin-off that was completed on March 28, 2008. Again in 2007 the company began the acquisition of cigar manufacturer John Middleton Co. from Bradford Holdings, which was complete in 2008. After Philip Morris International spun off, the former international subsidiaries halted the purchase of tobacco from America, which was a major factor in the closing of a newly renovated plant in North Carolina, an approximately 50% reduction in manufacturing, large-scale layoffs, and induced early retirements.

In 2008, Altria officially moved its headquarters from New York City to Richmond, Virginia, after Philip Morris sold its downtown offices in New York City a decade earlier. With a few exceptions, all manufacturing, commercial, and executive employees had long been based in and around Richmond. The company is now headquartered in an unincorporated area within Henrico County, less than west of the city limits of Richmond and less than from its downtown Richmond campus.

Aside from the Philip Morris/Altria headquarters, some of their other buildings included the Altria Center for Research and Technology in downtown Richmond, their manufacturing center in South Richmond, and the adjacent operations center which began shutting down in 2007–2008, as a result of the loss of demand from Philip Morris International member companies. The layoffs beginning in 2007 affected thousands of Altria, Altria Client Services, Philip Morris USA, and contracted employees in Richmond and North Carolina.

In 2009, Altria finalized its purchase of UST Inc., whose products included smokeless tobacco (made by U.S. Smokeless Tobacco Company) and wine (made by Chateau Ste. Michelle). This ended a short era of competition between the new Marlboro smokeless tobacco products such as snus, and those produced by UST Inc.

On December 8, 2018, Altria announced its intent to acquire a 45% stake in Cronos Group for $1.8 billion.

On December 20, 2018, Altria finalized the acquisition of a 35% stake in JUUL Labs, an e-cigarette company based out of San Francisco, California, for $12.8 billion. On November 3, 2019, it was reported that Altria was taking a $4.5 billion writedown on its stake in Juul, 35% of its original value. On July 28, 2022, it was reported that Altria&#x27;s investment in Juul is now worth only 5% of the original amount of $12.8 billion. Despite the losses, Altria has announced that it will continue to support Juul and avoid investing in competing products.

Altria is taking a stake in the global business of Swiss tobacco company Burger Söhne (Helix Innovations with the On! brand) for $372 million in June 2019.

Altria and Japan Tobacco announced a joint venture called Horizon Innovations LLC on October 27, 2022. Horizon, owned 75 percent by Altria and 25 percent by Japan Tobacco, intends to sell Ploom heated tobacco sticks in the United States. FDA approval was expected to take until 2025, with customers able to buy Ploom by 2027.

Altria completed the acquisition of NJOY Holdings, Inc. on June 1, 2023.

== Finances ==
For the fiscal year 2020, Altria reported earnings of US$4.45 billion, with an annual revenue of US$26.15 billion. Altria&#x27;s shares traded at over $66 per share, and its market capitalization was valued at over US$118.5 billion in October 2018. As of 2018, the company ranked 154th on the Fortune 500 list of the largest United States corporations by revenue.
==Corporate governance==

===Board of directors===
Members of the board of directors of Altria Group as of February 2013 were:
* Elizabeth E. Bailey, professor emerita, the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
* Gerald L. Baliles (2008–2019), director, Miller Center of Public Affairs at University of Virginia; former Virginia governor
* Martin Barrington, chairman and chief executive officer, Altria Group, Inc.
* John T. Casteen III (2010– ), president emeritus, University of Virginia
* Dinyar S. Devitre (2008– ), special advisor, General Atlantic Partners, New York, NY; former SVP and CFO of Altria
* Thomas F. Farrell II (2008–2021), chairman, president and CEO, Dominion Resources, Richmond, VA
* Thomas W. Jones (2002– ), senior partner, TWJ Capital LLC, Stamford, CT; formerly with Citigroup, Travelers and TIAA-CREF
* Debra J. Kelly-Ennis (2013– ), former president and CEO of Diageo Canada, Inc.; also formerly with RJR Nabisco, Inc., Coca-Cola, General Motors and Grand Metropolitan
* W. Leo Kiely III (2011– ), retired CEO, MillerCoors LLC, Golden, CO; formerly with Frito-Lay
* Kathryn B. McQuade (2012– ), retired EVP and CFO, Canadian Pacific Railway Limited; formerly with Norfolk Southern Corporation
* George Muñoz (2004– ), principal, Muñoz Investment Banking Group, LLC, Washington, DC; Partner, Tobin &amp; Muñoz, Chicago, IL; formerly Overseas Private Investment Corporation and assistant secretary of the United States Treasury Department
* Nabil Y. Sakkab (2008– ), retired Senior Vice President, corporate research and development, Procter &amp; Gamble, Cincinnati, OH

===Headquarters===

Prior to being based in Virginia, Philip Morris had its headquarters in Midtown Manhattan, New York City. In 2003, Philip Morris announced that it would move its headquarters to Virginia. The company said that it planned to keep around 750 employees in its former headquarters. Brendan McCormick, a spokesperson for Philip Morris, said that the company estimated that the move would save the company over $60 million each year. The company now has its head offices in an unincorporated area of Henrico County, Virginia, near Richmond. In addition, the company has a 450,000-square-foot, $350 million Center for Research and Technology located in downtown Richmond at the Virginia BioTechnology Research Park that employs approximately 600 scientists, engineers and support staff.

==Diversification==
Altria, like other tobacco companies, has invested in science and medical companies, which develop and produce medical products for conditions caused or aggravated by smoking. As of 2024, Altria&#x27;s three medical subsidiaries included the following: Cronos group (maker of recreational cannabis), Lexaria Bioscience (Developer of proprietary drug delivery technology, DehydraTECH, to improve active pharmaceutical ingredients entrance into the bloodstream) and Micreos (biotech company focused on discovering and developing recombinant proteins for chronic dermatology and oncology conditions).

It has also designed and marketed electronic cigarette. Altria launched the MarkTen and Green Smoke brands. Both of these were discontinued in December 2018. The company returned to this market through the acquisition of NJOY.

==Political influence==
According to the Center for Public Integrity, Altria spent around $101 million on lobbying the United States government between 1998 and 2004, the second-highest such figure for any organization in the nation.

Altria also funded The Advancement of Sound Science Coalition which lobbied against the scientific consensus on anthropogenic climate change.

Daniel Smith, representing Altria, sits on the Private Enterprise Board of the American Legislative Exchange Council.

==Controversies==
In August 2006, the Altria group was found guilty of civil fraud and racketeering. The lawsuit claimed that Altria&#x27;s marketing of &quot;light&quot; and &quot;low tar&quot; cigarettes constituted fraudulent misrepresentations under the Maine Unfair Trade Practices Act (MUTPA) because it deceived smokers into thinking the products are safer than regular cigarettes.

==See also==
* Tobacco industry
* Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Altria Group U.S. political contributions from &quot;Influence Explorer&quot; at the Sunlight Foundation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q445007" start="0" end="18" title="Altria" label="Altria Group, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q445007" start="40" end="69" title="Altria" label="Philip Morris Companies, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="172" end="179" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578" start="181" end="191" title="cigarettes" label="cigarettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q341639" start="309" end="333" title="Henrico County, Virginia" label="Henrico County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="360" end="368" title="Richmond, VA" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726300" start="403" end="420" title="Philip Morris USA" label="Philip Morris USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988206" start="422" end="442" title="John Middleton Co." label="John Middleton, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q268337" start="444" end="474" title="U.S. Smokeless Tobacco Company" label="U.S. Smokeless Tobacco Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208953" start="521" end="540" title="NJOY" label="NJOY Holdings, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q128738" start="609" end="617" title="AB InBev" label="AB InBev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="635" end="643" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q242345" start="691" end="702" title="S&amp;amp;P 500" label="S&amp;amp;P 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q180816" start="730" end="758" title="Dow Jones Industrial Average" label="Dow Jones Industrial Average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186164" start="794" end="803" title="Corporate spin-off" label="spin-offs"/>
<link wikidata="Q22121875" start="807" end="823" title="Kraft Foods Inc." label="Kraft Foods Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1852556" start="836" end="863" title="Philip Morris International" label="Philip Morris International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726300" start="908" end="925" title="Philip Morris USA" label="Philip Morris USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q776167" start="946" end="956" title="rebranding" label="rebranding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852556" start="1304" end="1331" title="Philip Morris International" label="Philip Morris International"/>
<link wikidata="Q22121875" start="1371" end="1382" title="Kraft Foods Inc." label="Kraft Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186164" start="1422" end="1430" title="Corporate spin-off" label="spun off"/>
<link wikidata="Q338825" start="1608" end="1617" title="Accenture" label="Accenture"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="1655" end="1662" title="Verizon" label="Verizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212730" start="1703" end="1716" title="Steven Pinker" label="Steven Pinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475268" start="1787" end="1799" title="phonesthesia" label="phonesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167323" start="1931" end="1939" title="altruism" label="altruism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027024" start="2016" end="2030" title="Wirthlin Group" label="Wirthlin Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="2551" end="2558" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759032" start="2989" end="3003" title="R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company" label="R. J. Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259566" start="3005" end="3014" title="Lorillard Tobacco Company" label="Lorillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="3408" end="3410" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988206" start="4018" end="4036" title="John Middleton Co." label="John Middleton Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="4286" end="4300" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4459" end="4472" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="4476" end="4494" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="4738" end="4757" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated area"/>
<link wikidata="Q341639" start="4765" end="4779" title="Henrico County, Virginia" label="Henrico County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875793" start="5443" end="5451" title="UST Inc." label="UST Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q3512694" start="5477" end="5494" title="smokeless tobacco" label="smokeless tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q268337" start="5504" end="5534" title="U.S. Smokeless Tobacco Company" label="U.S. Smokeless Tobacco Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087545" start="5554" end="5575" title="Chateau Ste. Michelle" label="Chateau Ste. Michelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15075" start="5632" end="5640" title="Marlboro (cigarette)" label="Marlboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q842813" start="5676" end="5680" title="snus" label="snus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21017093" start="5894" end="5903" title="Juul" label="JUUL Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q189511" start="5908" end="5919" title="electronic cigarette" label="e-cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q898568" start="6546" end="6559" title="Japan Tobacco" label="Japan Tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="6572" end="6585" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q125416818" start="6723" end="6728" title="Ploom" label="Ploom"/>
<link wikidata="Q28657989" start="6729" end="6750" title="Heated tobacco product" label="heated tobacco sticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="6773" end="6776" title="FDA" label="FDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208953" start="6898" end="6902" title="NJOY" label="NJOY"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="7244" end="7255" title="Fortune 500" label="Fortune 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="7381" end="7399" title="board of directors" label="board of directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4101384" start="7444" end="7463" title="Elizabeth Bailey" label="Elizabeth E. Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329269" start="7488" end="7502" title="Wharton School" label="Wharton School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="7504" end="7530" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q880701" start="7533" end="7550" title="Gerald L. Baliles" label="Gerald L. Baliles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="7609" end="7631" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732043" start="7660" end="7677" title="Martin Barrington" label="Martin Barrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259942" start="7738" end="7757" title="John T. Casteen III" label="John T. Casteen III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531717" start="7858" end="7874" title="General Atlantic" label="General Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q677464" start="7993" end="8011" title="Dominion Resources" label="Dominion Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q219508" start="8115" end="8124" title="Citigroup" label="Citigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q942471" start="8126" end="8135" title="The Travelers Companies" label="Travelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q740999" start="8140" end="8149" title="TIAA-CREF" label="TIAA-CREF"/>
<link wikidata="Q161140" start="8211" end="8217" title="Diageo" label="Diageo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294930" start="8251" end="8262" title="RJR Nabisco" label="RJR Nabisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295867" start="8270" end="8279" title="The Coca-Cola Company" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="8281" end="8295" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113660" start="8300" end="8318" title="Grand Metropolitan" label="Grand Metropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859054" start="8361" end="8372" title="MillerCoors" label="MillerCoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221751" start="8404" end="8413" title="Frito-Lay" label="Frito-Lay"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="8466" end="8490" title="Canadian Pacific Railway" label="Canadian Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="8514" end="8542" title="Norfolk Southern Corporation" label="Norfolk Southern Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542738" start="8545" end="8557" title="George Muñoz" label="George Muñoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q900525" start="8682" end="8721" title="Overseas Private Investment Corporation" label="Overseas Private Investment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="8753" end="8786" title="United States Treasury Department" label="United States Treasury Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q212405" start="8882" end="8902" title="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble" label="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249" start="9012" end="9029" title="Midtown Manhattan" label="Midtown Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="9411" end="9430" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated area"/>
<link wikidata="Q341639" start="9434" end="9458" title="Henrico County, Virginia" label="Henrico County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934148" start="9611" end="9647" title="Virginia BioTechnology Research Park" label="Virginia BioTechnology Research Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q912807" start="10136" end="10168" title="active pharmaceutical ingredient" label="active pharmaceutical ingredient"/>
<link wikidata="Q189511" start="10374" end="10394" title="electronic cigarette" label="electronic cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208953" start="10561" end="10565" title="NJOY" label="NJOY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1830038" start="10609" end="10636" title="Center for Public Integrity" label="Center for Public Integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663608" start="10674" end="10711" title="Lobbying in the United States" label="lobbying the United States government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686374" start="10822" end="10864" title="The Advancement of Sound Science Coalition" label="The Advancement of Sound Science Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q316748" start="10891" end="10911" title="scientific consensus" label="scientific consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115646" start="10915" end="10943" title="scientific opinion on climate change" label="anthropogenic climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614083" start="11025" end="11062" title="American Legislative Exchange Council" label="American Legislative Exchange Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283181" start="11152" end="11164" title="racketeering" label="racketeering"/>
<link wikidata="Q907703" start="11470" end="11486" title="Tobacco industry" label="Tobacco industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112596" start="11489" end="11524" title="Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement" label="Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640493" start="11650" end="11669" title="Sunlight Foundation" label="Sunlight Foundation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52641" wikidata="Q356261" url="?curid=52641" title="William McMahon">
<text>Sir William McMahon (23 February 190831 March 1988), also known as Billy McMahon, was an Australian politician who served as the 20th prime minister of Australia from 1971 to 1972. He held office as the leader of the Liberal Party of Australia, and previously held various ministerial positions from 1951 to 1971, the longest continuous service in Australian history.

McMahon was born and raised in Sydney, and worked as a commercial lawyer before entering politics. He served in the Australian Army during World War II, reaching the rank of major. After the war&#x27;s end he returned to university to complete an economics degree. McMahon was elected to the House of Representatives at the 1949 federal election. Robert Menzies promoted him to the ministry in 1951 and added him to cabinet in 1956. He held several different portfolios in the Menzies government, most notably as Minister for Labour and National Service from 1958 to 1966. In that capacity, he oversaw the reintroduction of conscription in 1964.

In 1966, Menzies retired and was replaced as prime minister by Harold Holt. McMahon then succeeded Holt as deputy leader of the Liberal Party. He was appointed Treasurer in the Holt government, and over the following three years oversaw a large reduction in the national deficit. After Holt&#x27;s death in 1967, McMahon wished to contest the Liberal leadership but had his candidacy vetoed by John McEwen, the leader of the Country Party. The new prime minister was John Gorton. McMahon initially continued on as Treasurer in the Gorton government, but in 1969 was demoted to Minister for External Affairs after an unsuccessful challenge for the leadership. He eventually replaced Gorton in March 1971 following Gorton’s resignation, winning a vote against Billy Snedden.

McMahon became prime minister at the age of 63, and remains the oldest non-interim prime minister to take office. His government has been described by the &quot;Australian Dictionary of Biography&quot; as &quot;a blend of cautious innovation and fundamental orthodoxy&quot;. It continued many of the policies of its immediate predecessors, such as the phased withdrawal of Australian troops from Vietnam. In its final year it faced high inflation and unemployment. Gough Whitlam&#x27;s Labor Party defeated McMahon at the 1972 federal election, ending 23 consecutive years of Coalition rule. No other Australian prime minister has served for longer without winning a general election. He resigned the Liberal leadership, but remained in parliament until 1982 as a backbencher.

McMahon has been described as one of Australia&#x27;s worst prime ministers by Australian political scientists and historians, and after leaving office several of his former colleagues openly criticised his leadership style and personal character. Whitlam, his successor, acknowledged him as &quot;an extraordinarily skilful, resourceful and tenacious politician&quot;, and credited him with having prevented a larger margin of defeat in 1972.

==Early life==
===Birth and family background===
McMahon was born in Redfern, Sydney, New South Wales, on 23 February 1908. He was the third of five children born to solicitor William Daniel McMahon and Mary (née Walder), daughter of a sailmaker; an older brother predeceased him. His father, a Catholic, had a reputation as a heavy drinker and habitual gambler; his mother, an Anglican, was of English and Irish descent.

McMahon&#x27;s paternal grandfather, James &quot;Butty&quot; McMahon, was born in County Clare, Munster, Ireland, and married Mary Coyle of County Fermanagh, Ulster, Ireland. He arrived in Australia as a child, and eventually founded his own freight company, which became one of the largest in Sydney. Upon his death in 1914, his estate was valued at almost £240,000, an immense sum at the time.

===Childhood and education===
McMahon spent his early life in Redfern. His mother died in 1917, when he was nine years old, and he was subsequently raised by her relatives. He moved home frequently as he was shifted between family members, living for periods in Kensington, Beecroft, Gordon, and Centennial Park. McMahon saw little of his father or his siblings, who were raised separately; his older brother James died of Spanish flu in 1919. His uncle Samuel Walder – a businessman who was Lord Mayor of Sydney in 1932 – acted as a sort of surrogate father.

McMahon began his education at Abbotsholme College, a short-lived private school in Killara. One of his schoolmates there was Harold Holt, another future prime minister. He was later sent to Sydney Grammar School, where he was an above-average student without excelling academically.

McMahon&#x27;s father died when he was 18, leaving him a substantial inheritance. He had failed the leaving certificate at Sydney Grammar. However, by his passing a matriculation exam, McMahon was able to enter the University of Sydney in 1927. At the insistence of his uncle, he chose to study law, graduating with a Bachelor of Laws in 1930. McMahon, who lived at St Paul&#x27;s College, was more interested in the social scene than his degree. He spent his inheritance freely, owning several racehorses, and was known for betting significant amounts on the races. According to Alan Reid, &quot;his reputation was that he completed his university career on less actual work than anyone in the college&quot;.

Despite his diminutive physique – he stood as an adult – McMahon did achieve some success as an athlete. He won his university&#x27;s lightweight boxing title, and in his final year at Sydney Grammar rowed in the Head of the River race.

===Legal career and military service===
According to Don Whitington, McMahon&#x27;s life before entering politics was &quot;the aimless, indolent existence of a wealthy young man with a position in a big city&#x27;s smart set, no positive ambition or even interests, except in enjoying himself, and no family ties to give him a feeling of responsibility or even consideration for others&quot;. After graduating from university, he secured a position as a solicitor with Allen, Allen &amp; Hemsley, a major Sydney law firm; he was made a junior partner in 1939. He was assigned to the Commonwealth Bank and the Bank of New South Wales for periods, which helped spark his interest in economics. McMahon had hoped to practise as a barrister, but his partial deafness made this impractical. His hearing remained an issue throughout his life, making parliamentary debates hard to follow, but did improve somewhat through surgery and the use of hearing aids.

In April 1940, McMahon was commissioned as a lieutenant in the Citizens Military Force. He transferred to the Australian Imperial Force (the regular army) in October 1940, and was promoted to captain in 1942 and to major in 1943. McMahon was turned down for overseas service due to his hearing loss and a knee injury. In the early part of the war he was attached to coastal defence units in Sydney. He later served on the headquarters staff of the II Corps (1942–1943) and the Second Army (1943–1945). He was formally discharged in October 1945.

After leaving the military, McMahon travelled overseas for 18 months, visiting Europe and North America. His experience of post-war Europe was said to have been one of the primary influences on his subsequent decision to enter politics. In 1947, McMahon returned to the University of Sydney to study economics and public administration. He graduated with a Bachelor of Economics degree in 1948, completing the course two years early due to his previous studies. He topped his economics class and won two prizes for proficiency in his final year.

==Politics==
===Under Menzies===
McMahon was elected to the House of Representatives at the 1949 federal election, winning the newly created Division of Lowe for the Liberal Party. His candidacy was endorsed by Billy Hughes, who had known his grandfather. McMahon soon developed a reputation as &quot;a deadly earnest, dogged, enormously hardworking and dedicated member&quot;. In 1950, he successfully proposed an amendment to the Menzies government&#x27;s Communist Party Dissolution Bill, reversing the effect of a clause so that the burden of proof was on the government rather than an accused person. However, the bill was subsequently struck down by the High Court. In July 1951, McMahon replaced Philip McBride as Minister for the Navy and Minister for Air. He subsequently approved and oversaw Donald Hardman&#x27;s proposal to reorganise the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) along functional command lines (rather than the previous area command system).

After the 1954 election, McMahon was appointed Minister for Social Services in place of Athol Townley. In January 1956, he was instead made Minister for Primary Industry, an appointment that was seen as a surprise given his lack of experience in agriculture. He effectively became the junior minister to John McEwen, the deputy leader of the Country Party and Minister for Trade. It was hoped by the Country Party (and tacitly accepted by Menzies) that McMahon would simply be a proxy for McEwen on policy matters. However, he managed to preserve the influence and independence of his department, and in fact made a number of cabinet submissions that were contrary to McEwen&#x27;s wishes. This impressed his colleagues in the Liberal Party, but laid the foundations for the poor relations with the Country Party that would prove challenging later in his career.

McMahon was promoted to Minister for Labour and National Service after the 1958 election, in place of Harold Holt. This brought him firmly into the inner ranks of the Liberal Party, and in terms of cabinet rank placed him among the party&#x27;s most senior figures in New South Wales. McMahon oversaw the creation and administration of what became the &quot;National Service Act 1964&quot;, which re-introduced compulsory conscription for 20-year-old males in anticipation of further Australian involvement in South-East Asia. On the labour side of his portfolio, he frequently came into conflict with the leadership of the Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU), though there was no major industrial action during his tenure. He attempted to reduce the influence of trade unions known to be controlled by the Communist Party, particularly the Waterside Workers&#x27; Federation. In 1964, McMahon was made Vice-President of the Executive Council, further confirming his status within the government.

===Under Holt===

In 1966, McMahon was elected the Liberal Party of Australia&#x27;s deputy leader under Harold Holt. During his tenure, he became the Treasurer of Australia and held executive roles with the International Monetary Fund and Asian Development Bank.

===Under Gorton===

When Holt disappeared in December 1967, McMahon was assumed to be his probable successor. However, John McEwen, interim Prime Minister and leader of the Country Party, announced that he and his party would not serve in a government led by McMahon. McEwen did not state his reasons publicly, but privately he told McMahon he did not trust him. McEwen, an arch-protectionist, correctly suspected that McMahon favoured policies of free trade and deregulation.

McMahon therefore withdrew, and Senator John Gorton won the subsequent party room ballot for party leader and therefore Prime Minister. McMahon remained Treasurer and waited for his chance at a comeback. The Coalition was nearly defeated at the 1969 federal election. After the election, McMahon unsuccessfully challenged for the leadership, but was nonetheless re-elected as deputy leader. He was subsequently demoted from Treasurer to Minister for External Affairs. John McEwen had announced in the lead-up to the spill that he would lift his party&#x27;s veto on McMahon as prime minister.

In March 1971, the Defence Minister, Malcolm Fraser, resigned from Cabinet and denounced Gorton, who then announced a leadership spill. The ensuing party room vote was tied, and under the party rules of the time this meant the motion was lost and Gorton could have theoretically remained as leader and Prime Minister. Nevertheless, Gorton declared that a tie vote meant he no longer had the confidence of the party, and voluntarily resigned the leadership. McMahon was then elected leader (and thus prime minister), and Gorton was elected deputy leader.

==Prime Minister (1971–1972)==
McMahon came into office at a bad time for the Coalition, which was increasingly seen as tired and unfocused after more than 21 years in power. His first problem was Gorton. Since Gorton had been elected as Liberal deputy leader, McMahon was all but forced to name him Defence Minister. This farcical situation came to a head when Gorton published two articles detailing the problems he had with ministers leaking information from cabinet. McMahon forced Gorton&#x27;s resignation. Billy Snedden was chosen as the new deputy Liberal leader.

McMahon found himself dealing with a resurgent Labor Party under Gough Whitlam. Labor had come within four seats of winning government in 1969, and since then had positioned itself as a credible government-in-waiting. Over the next year-and-a-half, McMahon was unable to get the better of Whitlam. McMahon was no match in parliamentary debates for Whitlam, a witty and powerful orator. He frequently found himself on the defensive as Whitlam attacked the increasingly unpopular Vietnam War and advocated radical new policies such as universal health insurance. In a typical instance, McMahon attacked Whitlam for his demands that Australia recognise the People&#x27;s Republic of China, only to have to back down when U.S President Richard Nixon announced his visit to China. He was not helped by rising inflation, which hurt his reputation as a sound economic manager. Additionally, the Liberal Party was showing severe schisms, which came at an especially bad time since McMahon had, at most, two years before the next election. His voice and appearance also came across badly on television.

In June 1971, McMahon cancelled Gorton&#x27;s planned nuclear power program, which had included a reactor capable of generating weapons-grade plutonium. He considered it inconsistent with the goals of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, signed under Gorton in 1970 and ratified under Whitlam in 1973.

McMahon went into 1972 facing a statutory general election. By then, Labor had established a clear lead in the polls and McMahon&#x27;s approval ratings had dwindled to 28 percent. The press had turned on him so violently that the British psephologist David Butler recalled on a visit to Australia that he could not recall a prime minister in any country being &quot;so comprehensively panned&quot; as McMahon. By then, it was widely perceived that McMahon simply &quot;did not look or sound like a Prime Minister&quot;. He waited for as long as he could, but finally called a federal election for 2 December. During the campaign, McMahon was abandoned by some of his own ministers, unheard of in a Westminster system. The Coalition was swept from power on an eight-seat swing. Late on election night, with the result beyond doubt, McMahon conceded defeat, ending the longest unbroken run in government in Australian history.

McMahon had been a minister continuously for 21 years and 6 months, a record in the Australian Government that has never been threatened. Only Sir George Pearce and Sir John McEwen had longer overall ministerial service, but their terms were not continuous.

Political journalist Laurie Oakes described McMahon as &quot;devious, nasty, dishonest - he lied all the time and stole things&quot; before describing an incident where McMahon attempted to steal a tape recorder from his radio station by claiming ownership of the device despite it having the radio station&#x27;s name engraved on it. He concludes by saying that McMahon was a &quot;totally unworthy individual and the fact that he was Prime Minister of this country was a disgrace&quot;.

==Later parliamentary career (1972–1982)==
McMahon&#x27;s term as prime minister ended on 5 December 1972. He did not immediately resign as Liberal leader, but it soon became clear that there was no support for him to continue. 

McMahon became the first Prime Minister to have lost an election and had retained his seat who did not then serve as Leader of the Opposition.

On 20 December, the Liberal Party elected Billy Snedden as his successor. As a mark of respect for his past service, McMahon was included in Snedden&#x27;s new shadow cabinet (as was John Gorton). However, at his own request he was not allocated a specific portfolio. In an interview with HSV7 in June 1973, McMahon stated that &quot;disloyalty within our own party&quot; was the main reason the Liberals had lost the election. He also said that he had three regrets from his time as prime minister – that he failed to abolish national service, that he had mishandled the 1971 budget, and that he had been a poor communicator.

After the 1974 election, McMahon returned to the backbench for the first time since 1951. In the lead-up to the dismissal of the Whitlam government in 1975, he strongly defended the power of the Senate to block supply. However, he believed that Governor-General John Kerr had acted unconstitutionally in dismissing the prime minister, and said that he would have challenged the decision in the High Court if he had been in Whitlam&#x27;s position. McMahon believed that those responsible for the &quot;loans affair&quot; – including Whitlam and several of his ministers – had acted illegally and should be prosecuted for their involvement. He assisted Danny Sankey (a private citizen) in bringing a private prosecution against Whitlam, which eventually came before the High Court as &quot;Sankey v Whitlam&quot;. Malcolm Fraser had promised Kerr that his government would bring no action against its predecessor, and was frustrated by McMahon&#x27;s actions. In his memoirs, he said: &quot;I knew McMahon was running around up to his tricks ... I couldn&#x27;t control what he did, but I could make damn sure that the government, my government, did not get involved&quot;.

Prior to the 1977 election, McMahon was unsuccessfully challenged for Liberal preselection by John Abel, whose Division of Evans had been abolished in an electoral redistribution. After being re-elected, he became the joint Father of the House of Representatives with Clyde Cameron. He was the sole Father of the House after the 1980 election, winning election for a fourteenth and final time at the age of 72. In his final years in parliament he was often critical of the Fraser government. McMahon left parliament in January 1982, citing dissatisfaction with the 1981 budget as a major factor in his decision to retire before a general election. He nominated future prime minister Malcolm Turnbull as his preferred successor in Lowe, but the Liberal Party chose another candidate Philip Taylor. The by-election was won by the Labor Party on a 9.4-point swing.

He was the last former Prime Minister to be reelected to Parliament until Kevin Rudd in 2010.

==Final years and death==
In retirement, McMahon devoted much of his time to working on his memoirs, which he planned to title &quot;A Liberal View&quot;. They were rejected by six publishers, and reviewers (who included Barry Jones and Phillip Adams) considered them to be poorly written and overly detailed. In 1984, McMahon endorsed Bob Hawke and the Labor Party for re-election over the Coalition, which he said would not be ready for government for another four or five years. Later that year, he described Andrew Peacock&#x27;s hold on the Liberal leadership as &quot;very, very fragile&quot;, and tacitly endorsed John Howard as a future leader.

In his final years, McMahon underwent a series of operations related to skin cancer. He died in his sleep at St Luke&#x27;s Private Hospital, Potts Point, on the morning of 31 March 1988. His remains were cremated at the Northern Suburbs Crematorium. A state memorial service was held at St Andrew&#x27;s Cathedral, Sydney, on 8 April, with the eulogy given by David Fairbairn.

==Personal life==
In 1965, aged 57, McMahon married Sonia Rachel Hopkins, who was then aged 32. McMahon had proposed six months after the pair first met. The wedding was held three months later at St Mark&#x27;s Church, Darling Point, followed by a reception for 400 people at the Royal Sydney Golf Club. She would survive him by more than twenty years, dying aged 77 on 2 April 2010.

They had three children; Melinda, Julian and Deborah. Julian is an actor and model while Melinda and Deborah lead largely private lives.

Throughout his life there were also frequent rumours that he was homosexual. The suggestion was repeatedly denied by Lady McMahon; one occasion in the 1970s resulted in an infamous tabloid headline &quot;My Billy&#x27;s No Poofter – Sonia Tells&quot;.

===Religion===
McMahon was an Anglican. He did not have a strong religious upbringing – his father was a lapsed Catholic and self-described &quot;rationalist&quot;, while his mother&#x27;s family were Anglican. McMahon developed an interest in theology as a teenager, and read widely on the subject over the rest of his life. He cited the works of William Temple as a major influence. McMahon was one of the few contemporary politicians to speak publicly on the connection between their religious and political beliefs. In 1953, he gave an address to the Australian Institute of Political Science in which he explained how he believed Christian doctrines necessitated parliamentary democracy and a market economy.

==Evaluation==
McMahon is often ranked among Australia&#x27;s worst prime ministers. In 2001, five out of six historians surveyed by &quot;Australian Financial Review&quot; ranked him among their worst five prime ministers. Similarly, &quot;The Age&quot; surveyed eight historians in 2004 and all but one ranked McMahon as Australia&#x27;s worst prime minister since World War II. Some of McMahon&#x27;s most prominent critics have been those who served with him in cabinet. John Gorton called him &quot;utterly untrustworthy&quot;, while Doug Anthony said he was &quot;just not big enough for the job&quot;. Malcolm Fraser said he &quot;had an insatiable ambition [...] he wasn&#x27;t immoral, he was totally amoral&quot;. Billy Snedden considered McMahon &quot;conspiratorial, devious, untrustworthy&quot;, and Paul Hasluck viewed him as &quot;disloyal, devious, dishonest, untrustworthy, petty, cowardly&quot;, in his diaries referring to him as &quot;that treacherous bastard&quot;.

McMahon was nicknamed &quot;Billy the Leak&quot; for his willingness to divulge intimate and confidential information to the media. Despite this, he was disliked by many journalists and political commentators. Donald Horne called him &quot;perhaps the silliest prime minister we ever had&quot;, and Peter Ryan said that &quot;McMahon&#x27;s way of politics was one of lying and leaking, conniving and conspiring, deceit and double-crossing&quot;. Malcolm Mackerras thought that he had &quot;no achievements beyond actually getting the top job&quot;. Laurie Oakes, who spent more than 50 years in the Canberra Press Gallery, viewed McMahon as &quot;a liar and a sneak&quot; and rated him as the worst prime minister he had worked with. Oakes recalled that he had continued leaking cabinet discussions even after becoming prime minister, and accused him of once having stolen a tape recorder.

Some writers have defended McMahon&#x27;s reputation, arguing that he was a skilled politician who has been unfairly scapegoated for an almost inevitable election loss. According to John Hawkins, McMahon was &quot;grudgingly admired for his energy and diligence&quot;, and generally acknowledged as having a mastery of economic policy. Mungo MacCallum, while noting that he left no lasting achievements, called his prime ministership a &quot;brief but cheerful interlude&quot; and praised him for leaving office with good grace. Marian Simms compared McMahon to Richard Nixon, suggesting that his character traits have been overemphasised, while Troy Bramston viewed him as &quot;a prime minister who clearly understood the challenge of the times and was fighting to get his ship back on course&quot; when he was forced out of office. Andrew Peacock, who served in McMahon&#x27;s ministry, said that McMahon was &quot;much better than he has been painted... He is somewhat ill-treated by history&quot;, and described him as &quot;difficult, irascible, nervous yet capable&quot;. In his memoirs, Gough Whitlam wrote that McMahon was &quot;an extraordinarily skilful, resourceful and tenacious politician ... had he been otherwise, the ALP victory in December 1972 would have been more convincing than it was&quot;.

==Honours==
McMahon was appointed a Privy Counsellor in 1966, a Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour in the 1972 New Year Honours, and a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George in the Queen&#x27;s Birthday Honours of 1977.

Following the 2009 redistribution of New South Wales federal electorates, the Division of Prospect was renamed the Division of McMahon starting at the 2010 federal election.

==See also==
*McMahon Ministry

==Notes==
== References ==
==Further reading==
* Hughes, Colin A (1976), &quot;Mr Prime Minister. Australian Prime Ministers 1901–1972&quot;, Oxford University Press, Melbourne, Victoria, Ch.22. 
* Reid, Alan (1971), &quot;The Gorton Experiment&quot;, Shakespeare Head Press, Sydney.
* Sekuless, Peter (2000), &#x27;Sir William McMahon&#x27;, in Michelle Grattan (ed.), &quot;Australian Prime Ministers&quot;, New Holland, Sydney, New South Wales, pages 312–323. 

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q356261" start="0" end="19" title="William McMahon" label="Sir William McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q356261" start="67" end="80" title="William McMahon" label="Billy McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="134" end="161" title="prime minister of Australia" label="prime minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="217" end="243" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal Party of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="273" end="294" title="Minister (government)" label="ministerial positions"/>
<link wikidata="Q174825" start="348" end="366" title="History of Australia" label="Australian history"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="400" end="406" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q781360" start="485" end="500" title="Australian Army" label="Australian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="661" end="685" title="Australian House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586891" start="693" end="714" title="1949 Australian federal election" label="1949 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="716" end="730" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817718" start="846" end="864" title="Menzies government (1949–66)" label="Menzies government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865809" start="882" end="922" title="Minister for Labour and National Service" label="Minister for Labour and National Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978389" start="975" end="1005" title="National Service Act 1964" label="reintroduction of conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q312722" start="1079" end="1090" title="Harold Holt" label="Harold Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390270" start="1176" end="1185" title="Treasurer of Australia" label="Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884549" start="1193" end="1208" title="Holt government" label="Holt government"/>
<link wikidata="Q47654909" start="1302" end="1319" title="Disappearance of Harold Holt" label="Holt&amp;#x27;s death"/>
<link wikidata="Q23386" start="1410" end="1421" title="John McEwen" label="John McEwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="1441" end="1454" title="National Party of Australia" label="Country Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q356411" start="1483" end="1494" title="John Gorton" label="John Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586934" start="1547" end="1564" title="Gorton government" label="Gorton government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660943" start="1593" end="1622" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Australia)" label="Minister for External Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q42917065" start="1629" end="1654" title="Liberal Party of Australia leadership spill, 1969" label="an unsuccessful challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q42917067" start="1751" end="1765" title="Liberal Party of Australia leadership spill, 1971" label="winning a vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q863220" start="1774" end="1787" title="Billy Snedden" label="Billy Snedden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802279" start="1904" end="1918" title="McMahon government" label="His government"/>
<link wikidata="Q672680" start="1951" end="1985" title="Australian Dictionary of Biography" label="Australian Dictionary of Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054228" start="2149" end="2193" title="Military history of Australia during the Vietnam War" label="withdrawal of Australian troops from Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q23333" start="2255" end="2268" title="Gough Whitlam" label="Gough Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="2276" end="2287" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q427994" start="2312" end="2333" title="1972 Australian federal election" label="1972 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q731591" start="2554" end="2565" title="backbencher" label="backbencher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026829" start="3082" end="3114" title="Redfern, New South Wales" label="Redfern, Sydney, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q181862" start="3518" end="3530" title="County Clare" label="County Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q131438" start="3532" end="3539" title="Munster" label="Munster"/>
<link wikidata="Q190678" start="3576" end="3592" title="County Fermanagh" label="County Fermanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="3594" end="3600" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501371" start="3678" end="3693" title="freight company" label="freight company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916106" start="4095" end="4105" title="Kensington, New South Wales" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879718" start="4107" end="4115" title="Beecroft, New South Wales" label="Beecroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584750" start="4117" end="4123" title="Gordon, New South Wales" label="Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138446" start="4129" end="4144" title="Centennial Park, New South Wales" label="Centennial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="4256" end="4267" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412861" start="4287" end="4300" title="Samuel Walder" label="Samuel Walder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797067" start="4325" end="4345" title="Lord Mayor of Sydney" label="Lord Mayor of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q55603062" start="4425" end="4444" title="Abbotsholme College" label="Abbotsholme College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407286" start="4478" end="4485" title="Killara, New South Wales" label="Killara"/>
<link wikidata="Q312722" start="4520" end="4531" title="Harold Holt" label="Harold Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659951" start="4585" end="4606" title="Sydney Grammar School" label="Sydney Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758242" start="4779" end="4798" title="Higher School Certificate (New South Wales)" label="leaving certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787799" start="4844" end="4862" title="Matriculation examination" label="matriculation exam"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="4894" end="4914" title="University of Sydney" label="University of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q798137" start="4997" end="5013" title="Bachelor of Laws" label="Bachelor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595160" start="5045" end="5067" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s College, University of Sydney" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="5174" end="5183" title="racehorse" label="racehorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707606" start="5259" end="5268" title="Alan Reid (journalist)" label="Alan Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q14979598" start="5603" end="5620" title="Head of the River (New South Wales)" label="Head of the River"/>
<link wikidata="Q20968865" start="5681" end="5695" title="Don Whitington" label="Don Whitington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732021" start="6098" end="6124" title="Allens (law firm)" label="Allen, Allen &amp;amp; Hemsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q285328" start="6212" end="6229" title="Commonwealth Bank" label="Commonwealth Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049280" start="6238" end="6261" title="Bank of New South Wales" label="Bank of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="6356" end="6365" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862909" start="6645" end="6668" title="Citizens Military Force" label="Citizens Military Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742845" start="6692" end="6717" title="Second Australian Imperial Force" label="Australian Imperial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971461" start="7030" end="7038" title="II Corps (Australia)" label="II Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443028" start="7059" end="7070" title="Second Army (Australia)" label="Second Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="7443" end="7464" title="public administration" label="public administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q10752757" start="7486" end="7507" title="Bachelor of Economics" label="Bachelor of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586891" start="7768" end="7789" title="1949 Australian federal election" label="1949 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q666416" start="7817" end="7833" title="Division of Lowe" label="Division of Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q152666" start="7887" end="7899" title="Billy Hughes" label="Billy Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817718" start="8108" end="8126" title="Menzies government (1949–66)" label="Menzies government"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8134" end="8166" title="Australian Communist Party v Commonwealth#Background" label="Communist Party Dissolution Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="8213" end="8228" title="burden of proof (law)" label="burden of proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="8336" end="8346" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184053" start="8379" end="8393" title="Philip McBride" label="Philip McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315112" start="8397" end="8418" title="Minister for the Navy (Australia)" label="Minister for the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315112" start="8423" end="8439" title="Minister for Air (Australia)" label="Minister for Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294485" start="8478" end="8492" title="Donald Hardman" label="Donald Hardman"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="8527" end="8553" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908079" start="8618" end="8630" title="RAAF area commands" label="area command"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586893" start="8651" end="8664" title="1954 Australian federal election" label="1954 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865821" start="8688" end="8716" title="Minister for Social Services (Australia)" label="Minister for Social Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q4815639" start="8729" end="8742" title="Athol Townley" label="Athol Townley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865745" start="8781" end="8810" title="Minister for Agriculture (Australia)" label="Minister for Primary Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23386" start="8945" end="8956" title="John McEwen" label="John McEwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="8983" end="8996" title="National Party of Australia" label="Country Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865979" start="9001" end="9019" title="Minister for Trade (Australia)" label="Minister for Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956293" start="9222" end="9236" title="Department of Primary Industry (1956–74)" label="his department"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865809" start="9529" end="9569" title="Minister for Labour and National Service" label="Minister for Labour and National Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586895" start="9580" end="9593" title="1958 Australian federal election" label="1958 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q312722" start="9607" end="9618" title="Harold Holt" label="Harold Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978389" start="9863" end="9888" title="National Service Act 1964" label="National Service Act 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978389" start="9916" end="9939" title="National Service Act 1964" label="compulsory conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q176015" start="10129" end="10163" title="Australian Council of Trade Unions" label="Australian Council of Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120586" start="10318" end="10333" title="Communist Party of Australia" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q21003602" start="10352" end="10386" title="Waterside Workers&amp;#x27; Federation of Australia" label="Waterside Workers&amp;#x27; Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122003" start="10414" end="10453" title="Vice-President of the Executive Council" label="Vice-President of the Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q312722" start="10614" end="10625" title="Harold Holt" label="Harold Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390270" start="10660" end="10682" title="Treasurer of Australia" label="Treasurer of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="10717" end="10744" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="10749" end="10771" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q47654909" start="10799" end="10815" title="Disappearance of Harold Holt" label="Holt disappeared"/>
<link wikidata="Q23386" start="10893" end="10904" title="John McEwen" label="John McEwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="10947" end="10960" title="National Party of Australia" label="Country Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="11148" end="11166" title="protectionism" label="arch-protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="11222" end="11232" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q902410" start="11237" end="11249" title="deregulation" label="deregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="11284" end="11291" title="Australian Senate" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q356411" start="11292" end="11303" title="John Gorton" label="John Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q42916952" start="11312" end="11340" title="1968 Liberal Party of Australia leadership election" label="subsequent party room ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q281200" start="11497" end="11518" title="1969 Australian federal election" label="1969 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q42917065" start="11548" end="11592" title="Liberal Party of Australia leadership spill, 1969" label="unsuccessfully challenged for the leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660943" start="11689" end="11718" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Australia)" label="Minister for External Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23386" start="11720" end="11731" title="John McEwen" label="John McEwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q315979" start="11883" end="11897" title="Malcolm Fraser" label="Malcolm Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508684" start="11964" end="11980" title="leadership spill" label="leadership spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q42917067" start="12311" end="12334" title="1971 Liberal Party of Australia leadership election" label="was then elected leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q863220" start="12914" end="12927" title="Billy Snedden" label="Billy Snedden"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="13021" end="13032" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23333" start="13039" end="13052" title="Gough Whitlam" label="Gough Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="13628" end="13659" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="13706" end="13719" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q862054" start="13734" end="13748" title="1972 Nixon visit to China" label="visit to China"/>
<link wikidata="Q186444" start="14274" end="14306" title="Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons" label="Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15491632" start="14625" end="14637" title="David Butler (psephologist)" label="David Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q427994" start="14948" end="14981" title="1972 Australian federal election" label="a federal election for 2 December"/>
<link wikidata="Q364568" start="15447" end="15460" title="George Pearce" label="George Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501682" start="15580" end="15592" title="Laurie Oakes" label="Laurie Oakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q863220" start="16465" end="16478" title="Billy Snedden" label="Billy Snedden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755670" start="16712" end="16716" title="HSV7" label="HSV7"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586899" start="17061" end="17074" title="1974 Australian federal election" label="1974 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q575834" start="17159" end="17172" title="1975 Australian constitutional crisis" label="the dismissal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21406588" start="17262" end="17268" title="confidence and supply" label="supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354851" start="17313" end="17322" title="John Kerr (governor-general)" label="John Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="17445" end="17455" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663495" start="17553" end="17565" title="loans affair" label="loans affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q564163" start="17750" end="17769" title="private prosecution" label="private prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418703" start="17840" end="17856" title="Sankey v Whitlam" label="Sankey v Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q315979" start="17864" end="17878" title="Malcolm Fraser" label="Malcolm Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586900" start="18238" end="18251" title="1977 Australian federal election" label="1977 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218050" start="18319" end="18328" title="John Abel (politician)" label="John Abel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284523" start="18336" end="18353" title="Division of Evans" label="Division of Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437684" start="18449" end="18487" title="Father of the Australian House of Representatives" label="Father of the House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103607" start="18493" end="18506" title="Clyde Cameron" label="Clyde Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586901" start="18554" end="18567" title="1980 Australian federal election" label="1980 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493604" start="18698" end="18715" title="Fraser government" label="Fraser government"/>
<link wikidata="Q927550" start="18908" end="18924" title="Malcolm Turnbull" label="Malcolm Turnbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011539" start="19022" end="19037" title="1982 Lowe by-election" label="The by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864363" start="19404" end="19415" title="Barry Jones (Australian politician)" label="Barry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130016" start="19420" end="19433" title="Phillip Adams (writer)" label="Phillip Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q269372" start="19519" end="19528" title="Bob Hawke" label="Bob Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q374949" start="19695" end="19709" title="Andrew Peacock" label="Andrew Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q51330" start="19804" end="19815" title="John Howard" label="John Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918803" start="19979" end="19990" title="Potts Point, New South Wales" label="Potts Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018083" start="20058" end="20086" title="Northern Suburbs Crematorium, Sydney" label="Northern Suburbs Crematorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088015" start="20125" end="20159" title="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Sydney" label="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233527" start="20198" end="20213" title="David Fairbairn (politician)" label="David Fairbairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561735" start="20268" end="20288" title="Sonia McMahon" label="Sonia Rachel Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633845" start="20413" end="20434" title="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Church, Darling Point" label="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900456" start="20436" end="20449" title="Darling Point, New South Wales" label="Darling Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956691" start="20497" end="20519" title="Royal Sydney Golf Club" label="Royal Sydney Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223" start="20636" end="20642" title="Julian McMahon" label="Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q540766" start="21023" end="21031" title="Anglican Church of Australia" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q336315" start="21341" end="21355" title="William Temple (bishop)" label="William Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824315" start="21548" end="21589" title="Australian Institute of Political Science" label="Australian Institute of Political Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809545" start="21847" end="21874" title="Australian Financial Review" label="Australian Financial Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q631893" start="21949" end="21956" title="The Age" label="The Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q356411" start="22183" end="22194" title="John Gorton" label="John Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251694" start="22247" end="22259" title="Doug Anthony" label="Doug Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q315979" start="22317" end="22331" title="Malcolm Fraser" label="Malcolm Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q863220" start="22432" end="22445" title="Billy Snedden" label="Billy Snedden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382174" start="22521" end="22533" title="Paul Hasluck" label="Paul Hasluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294520" start="22906" end="22918" title="Donald Horne" label="Donald Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176720" start="22995" end="23005" title="Peter Ryan (columnist)" label="Peter Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742472" start="23143" end="23160" title="Malcolm Mackerras" label="Malcolm Mackerras"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501682" start="23246" end="23258" title="Laurie Oakes" label="Laurie Oakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031277" start="23296" end="23318" title="Canberra Press Gallery" label="Canberra Press Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936041" start="23924" end="23939" title="Mungo Wentworth MacCallum" label="Mungo MacCallum"/>
<link wikidata="Q112664500" start="24117" end="24129" title="Marian Simms" label="Marian Simms"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="24150" end="24163" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q374949" start="24423" end="24437" title="Andrew Peacock" label="Andrew Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q15778629" start="24468" end="24476" title="McMahon Ministry" label="ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23333" start="24683" end="24696" title="Gough Whitlam" label="Gough Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="24939" end="24955" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Counsellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137694" start="24967" end="25014" title="Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour" label="Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009641" start="25022" end="25043" title="1972 New Year Honours" label="1972 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="25051" end="25110" title="Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George" label="Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577796" start="25118" end="25155" title="1977 Silver Jubilee and Birthday Honours" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours of 1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284560" start="25236" end="25256" title="Division of Prospect" label="Division of Prospect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073946" start="25273" end="25292" title="Division of McMahon" label="Division of McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q665929" start="25309" end="25330" title="2010 Australian federal election" label="2010 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15778629" start="25347" end="25363" title="McMahon Ministry" label="McMahon Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145215" start="25414" end="25429" title="Colin Hughes" label="Hughes, Colin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176858" start="25651" end="25666" title="Peter Sekuless" label="Sekuless, Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837057" start="25711" end="25727" title="Michelle Grattan" label="Michelle Grattan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52642" wikidata="Q211736" url="?curid=52642" title="Van de Graaff generator">
<text>A Van de Graaff generator is an electrostatic generator which uses a moving belt to accumulate electric charge on a hollow metal globe on the top of an insulated column, creating very high electric potentials. It produces very high voltage direct current (DC) electricity at low current levels. It was invented by American physicist Robert J. Van de Graaff in 1929.
The potential difference achieved by modern Van de Graaff generators can be as much as 5 megavolts. A tabletop version can produce on the order of 100 kV and can store enough energy to produce visible electric sparks. Small Van de Graaff machines are produced for entertainment, and for physics education to teach electrostatics; larger ones are displayed in some science museums.

The Van de Graaff generator was originally developed as a particle accelerator for physics research, as its high potential can be used to accelerate subatomic particles to great speeds in an evacuated tube. It was the most powerful type of accelerator until the cyclotron was developed in the early 1930s. Van de Graaff generators are still used as accelerators to generate energetic particle and X-ray beams for nuclear research and nuclear medicine.

The voltage produced by an open-air Van de Graaff machine is limited by arcing and corona discharge to about 5 MV. Most modern industrial machines are enclosed in a pressurized tank of insulating gas; these can achieve potentials as large as about 25 MV.

== History ==


=== Background ===
The concept of an electrostatic generator in which charge is mechanically transported in small amounts into the interior of a high-voltage electrode originated with the Kelvin water dropper, invented in 1867 by William Thomson (Lord Kelvin), in which charged drops of water fall into a bucket with the same polarity charge, adding to the charge.
In a machine of this type, the gravitational force moves the drops against the opposing electrostatic field of the bucket. Kelvin himself first suggested using a belt to carry the charge instead of water. The first electrostatic machine that used an endless belt to transport charge was constructed in 1872 by Augusto Righi. It used an india rubber belt with wire rings along its length as charge carriers, which passed into a spherical metal electrode. The charge was applied to the belt from the grounded lower roller by electrostatic induction using a charged plate. John Gray also invented a belt machine about 1890. Another more complicated belt machine was invented in 1903 by Juan Burboa. A more immediate inspiration for Van de Graaff was a generator W. F. G. Swann was developing in the 1920s in which charge was transported to an electrode by falling metal balls, thus returning to the principle of the Kelvin water dropper.

=== Initial development ===

The Van de Graaff generator was developed, starting in 1929, by physicist Robert J. Van de Graaff at Princeton University, with help from colleague Nicholas Burke. The first model was demonstrated in October 1929. The first machine used an ordinary tin can, a small motor, and a silk ribbon bought at a five-and-dime store. After that, he went to the chairman of the physics department requesting $100 to make an improved version. He did get the money, with some difficulty. By 1931, he could report achieving 1.5 million volts, saying &quot;The machine is simple, inexpensive, and portable. An ordinary lamp socket provides the only power needed.&quot; According to a patent application, it had two 60-cm-diameter charge-accumulation spheres mounted on borosilicate glass columns 180 cm high; the apparatus cost $90 in 1931.

Van de Graaff applied for a second patent in December 1931, which was assigned to Massachusetts Institute of Technology in exchange for a share of net income; the patent was later granted.

In 1933, Van de Graaff built a 40 ft (12 m) model at MIT&#x27;s Round Hill facility, the use of which was donated by Colonel Edward H. R. Green. One consequence of the location of this generator in an aircraft hangar was the &quot;pigeon effect&quot;: arcing from accumulated droppings on the outer surface of the spheres.

=== Higher energy machines ===

In 1937, the Westinghouse Electric company built a machine, the Westinghouse Atom Smasher capable of generating 5 MeV in Forest Hills, Pennsylvania. It marked the beginning of nuclear research for civilian applications. It was decommissioned in 1958 and was partially demolished in 2015. (The enclosure was laid on its side for safety reasons.)

A more recent development is the tandem Van de Graaff accelerator, containing one or more Van de Graaff generators, in which negatively charged ions are accelerated through one potential difference before being stripped of two or more electrons, inside a high-voltage terminal, and accelerated again. An example of a three-stage operation has been built in Oxford Nuclear Laboratory in 1964 of a 10 MV single-ended &quot;injector&quot; and a 6 MV EN tandem.

By the 1970s, as much as 14 MV could be achieved at the terminal of a tandem that used a tank of high-pressure sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) gas to prevent sparking by trapping electrons. This allowed the generation of heavy ion beams of several tens of MeV, sufficient to study light-ion direct nuclear reactions. The greatest potential sustained by a Van de Graaff accelerator is 25.5 MV, achieved by the tandem in the Holifield Radioactive Ion Beam Facility in Oak Ridge National Laboratory.

A further development is the pelletron, where the rubber or fabric belt is replaced by a chain of short conductive rods connected by insulating links, and the air-ionizing electrodes are replaced by a grounded roller and inductive charging electrode. The chain can be operated at a much greater velocity than a belt, and both the voltage and currents attainable are much greater than with a conventional Van de Graaff generator. The 14 UD Heavy Ion Accelerator at the Australian National University houses a 15 MV pelletron. Its chains are more than 20 m long and can travel faster than .

The Nuclear Structure Facility (NSF) at Daresbury Laboratory was proposed in the 1970s, commissioned in 1981, and opened for experiments in 1983. It consisted of a tandem Van de Graaff generator operating routinely at 20 MV, housed in a distinctive building 70 m high. During its lifetime, it accelerated 80 different ion beams for experimental use, ranging from protons to uranium. A particular feature was the ability to accelerate rare isotopic and radioactive beams. Perhaps the most important discovery made using the NSF was that of super-deformed nuclei. These nuclei, when formed from the fusion of lighter elements, rotate very rapidly. The pattern of gamma rays emitted as they slow down provided detailed information about the inner structure of the nucleus. Following financial cutbacks, the NSF closed in 1993.

== Description ==
A simple Van de Graaff generator consists of a belt of rubber (or a similar flexible dielectric material) moving over two rollers of differing material, one of which is surrounded by a hollow metal sphere. A comb-shaped metal electrode with sharp points (2 and 7 in the diagram), is positioned near each roller. The upper comb (2) is connected to the sphere, and the lower one (7) to ground. When a motor is used to drive the belt, the triboelectric effect causes the transfer of electrons from the dissimilar materials of the belt and the two rollers. In the example shown, the rubber of the belt will become negatively charged while the acrylic glass of the upper roller will become positively charged. The belt carries away negative charge on its inner surface while the upper roller accumulates positive charge.

Next, the strong electric field surrounding the positive upper roller (3) induces a very high electric field near the points of the nearby comb (2). At the points of the comb, the field becomes strong enough to ionize air molecules. The electrons from the air molecules are attracted to the outside of the belt, while the positive ions go to the comb. At the comb they are neutralized by electrons from the metal, thus leaving the comb and the attached outer shell (1) with fewer net electrons and a net positive charge. By Gauss&#x27;s law (as illustrated in the Faraday ice pail experiment), the excess positive charge is accumulated on the outer surface of the outer shell, leaving no electric field inside the shell. Continuing to drive the belt causes further electrostatic induction, which can build up large amounts of charge on the shell. Charge will continue to accumulate until the rate of charge leaving the sphere (through leakage and corona discharge) equals the rate at which new charge is being carried into the sphere by the belt. 

Outside the terminal sphere, a high electric field results from the high voltage on the sphere, which would prevent the addition of further charge from the outside. However, since electrically charged conductors do not have any electric field inside, charges can be added continuously from the inside without needing to overcome the full potential of the outer shell. 
The larger the sphere and the farther it is from ground, the higher its peak potential. The sign of the charge (positive or negative) can be controlled by the selection of materials for the belt and rollers. Higher potentials on the sphere can also be achieved by using a voltage source to charge the belt directly, rather than relying solely on the triboelectric effect.

A Van de Graaff generator terminal does not need to be sphere-shaped to work, and in fact, the optimum shape is a sphere with an inward curve around the hole where the belt enters. A rounded terminal minimizes the electric field around it, allowing greater potentials to be achieved without ionization of the air, or other dielectric gas, surrounding it. Since a Van de Graaff generator can supply the same small current at almost any level of electrical potential, it is an example of a nearly ideal current source.

The maximal achievable potential is roughly equal to the sphere radius &quot;R&quot; multiplied by the electric field &quot;E&quot;max at which corona discharges begin to form within the surrounding gas. For air at standard temperature and pressure (STP) the breakdown field is about . Therefore, a polished spherical electrode in diameter could be expected to develop a maximal voltage of about . This explains why Van de Graaff generators are often made with the largest possible diameter.

== Use as a particle accelerator ==

The initial motivation for the development of the Van de Graaff generator was as a source of high voltage to accelerate particles for nuclear physics experiments. The high potential difference between the surface of the terminal and ground results in a corresponding electric field. When an ion source is placed near the surface of the sphere (typically within the sphere itself) the field will accelerate charged particles of the appropriate sign away from the sphere. By insulating the generator with pressurized gas, the breakdown voltage can be raised, increasing the maximum energy of accelerated particles.

=== Tandem accelerators ===

Particle-beam Van de Graaff accelerators are often used in a &quot;tandem&quot; configuration with the high potential terminal located at the center of the machine. Negatively charged ions are injected at one end, where they are accelerated by attractive force toward the terminal. When the particles reach the terminal, they are stripped of some electrons to make them positively charged, and are subsequently accelerated by repulsive forces away from the terminal. This configuration results in two accelerations for the cost of one Van de Graaff generator and has the added advantage of leaving the ion source instrumentation accessible near ground potential.

=== Pelletron ===

The pelletron is a style of tandem accelerator designed to overcome some of the disadvantages of using a belt to transfer charge to the high voltage terminal. In the pelletron, the belt is replaced with &quot;pellets&quot;, metal spheres joined by insulating links into a chain. This chain of spheres serves the same function as the belt in a traditional Van de Graff accelerator – to convey charge to the high voltage terminal. The separate charged spheres and higher durability of the chain mean that higher voltages can be achieved at the high voltage terminal, and charge can be conveyed to the terminal more quickly.

== Entertainment and educational generators ==

The largest air-insulated Van de Graaff generator in the world, built by Dr. Van de Graaff in the 1930s, is now displayed permanently at Boston&#x27;s Museum of Science. With two conjoined aluminium spheres standing on columns tall, this generator can often obtain 2 MV (2 million volts). Shows using the Van de Graaff generator and several Tesla coils are conducted two to three times a day. Many science museums, such as the American Museum of Science and Energy, have small-scale Van de Graaff generators on display, and exploit their static-producing qualities to create &quot;lightning&quot; or make people&#x27;s hair stand up. Van de Graaff generators are also used in schools and science shows.

== Comparison with other electrostatic generators ==
Other electrostatic machines such as the Wimshurst machine or Bonetti machine work similarly to the Van De Graaff generator; charge is transported by moving plates, disks, or cylinders to a high voltage electrode. For these generators, however, corona discharge from exposed metal parts at high potentials and poorer insulation result in smaller voltages. In an electrostatic generator, the rate of charge transported (current) to the high-voltage electrode is very small. After the machine is started, the voltage on the terminal electrode increases until the leakage current from the electrode equals the rate of charge transport. Therefore, leakage from the terminal determines the maximum voltage attainable. In the Van de Graaff generator, the belt allows the transport of charge into the interior of a large hollow spherical electrode. This is the ideal shape to minimize leakage and corona discharge, so the Van de Graaff generator can produce the greatest voltage. This is why the Van de Graaff design has been used for all electrostatic particle accelerators. In general, the larger the diameter and the smoother the sphere is, the higher the voltage that can be achieved.

== Patents ==
* — &quot;&quot;Electrostatic Generator&quot;
* — &quot;Apparatus For Reducing Electron Loading In Positive-Ion Accelerators&quot;&quot;

== See also ==
* 
* – Metalworking process used to fabricate thin metal spheres
* 

== References ==
== External links ==

* How Van de Graaff Generators Work with how to build, HowStuffWorks
* &quot;Interactive Java tutorial&quot; – Van de Graaff Generator National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
* Tandem Van de Graaff Accelerator Western Michigan University Physics
* Dr. Van de Graaff&#x27;s huge machine at Museum of Science
* Van de Graaff Generator Frequently Asked Questions, Science Hobbyist
* Illustration from Report on Van de Graaff Generator From &quot;Progress Report on the M.I.T. High-Voltage Generator at Round Hill&quot; 
* Nikola Tesla, &quot;&quot;&quot;. Scientific American, March, 1934. (.doc format)
* Paolo Brenni,&quot;The Van de Graaff Generator – An Electrostatic Machine for the 20th Century&quot; Bulletin of the Scientific Instrument Society No. 63 (1999)
* Charrier Jacques &quot;Le générateur de Van de Graaff&quot;&quot;. Faculté des Sciences de Nantes.
* Hellborg, Ragnar, ed. Electrostatic Accelerators: Fundamentals and Applications [N.Y., N.Y.: Springer, 2005]. Available online at: https://books.google.com/books?id=tc6CEuIV1jEC&amp;pg=PA51&amp;lpg=PA51&amp;dq=electrostatic+accelerator+book
* &quot;American Physical Society names ORNL&#x27;s Holifield Facility historic physics site&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q211736" start="2" end="25" title="Van de Graaff generator" label="Van de Graaff generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304371" start="32" end="55" title="electrostatic generator" label="electrostatic generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="95" end="110" title="electric charge" label="electric charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q55451" start="189" end="207" title="electric potential" label="electric potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139740" start="227" end="239" title="high voltage" label="high voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="240" end="254" title="direct current" label="direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q116879" start="333" end="356" title="Robert J. Van de Graaff" label="Robert J. Van de Graaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="370" end="390" title="potential difference" label="potential difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622721" start="567" end="581" title="electric spark" label="electric spark"/>
<link wikidata="Q26336" start="680" end="694" title="electrostatics" label="electrostatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q588140" start="730" end="744" title="science museum" label="science museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="806" end="826" title="particle accelerator" label="particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q177013" start="897" end="915" title="subatomic particle" label="subatomic particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q204469" start="1010" end="1019" title="cyclotron" label="cyclotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="1145" end="1150" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="1161" end="1177" title="nuclear research" label="nuclear research"/>
<link wikidata="Q214963" start="1182" end="1198" title="nuclear medicine" label="nuclear medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q165294" start="1284" end="1300" title="corona discharge" label="corona discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q384549" start="1661" end="1681" title="Kelvin water dropper" label="Kelvin water dropper"/>
<link wikidata="Q122701" start="1703" end="1718" title="William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin" label="William Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q134465" start="1869" end="1888" title="gravitational force" label="gravitational force"/>
<link wikidata="Q742634" start="2148" end="2161" title="Augusto Righi" label="Augusto Righi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="2174" end="2186" title="india rubber" label="india rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q841249" start="2361" end="2384" title="electrostatic induction" label="electrostatic induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009315" start="2597" end="2611" title="W. F. G. Swann" label="W. F. G. Swann"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="2904" end="2924" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3106" end="3125" title="variety store#North America" label="five-and-dime store"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637631" start="3557" end="3575" title="Pyrex" label="borosilicate glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="3712" end="3749" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371041" start="3884" end="3894" title="Round Hill, Massachusetts" label="Round Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292441" start="3937" end="3963" title="Edward Howland Robinson Green" label="Colonel Edward H. R. Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="4189" end="4210" title="Westinghouse Electric (1886)" label="Westinghouse Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q19361335" start="4240" end="4265" title="Westinghouse Atom Smasher" label="Westinghouse Atom Smasher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130460" start="4297" end="4323" title="Forest Hills, Pennsylvania" label="Forest Hills, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="4666" end="4669" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="4699" end="4719" title="potential difference" label="potential difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q279055" start="5092" end="5111" title="SF6" label="sulfur hexafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q714439" start="5441" end="5470" title="Oak Ridge National Laboratory" label="Oak Ridge National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270076" start="5502" end="5511" title="pelletron" label="pelletron"/>
<link wikidata="Q127990" start="5937" end="5971" title="the Australian National University" label="the Australian National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222556" start="6103" end="6123" title="Daresbury Laboratory" label="Daresbury Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q184996" start="6991" end="7001" title="dielectric" label="dielectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q176140" start="7132" end="7141" title="electrode" label="electrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q876377" start="7342" end="7362" title="triboelectric effect" label="triboelectric effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q190382" start="7934" end="7940" title="ionization" label="ionize"/>
<link wikidata="Q173356" start="8247" end="8263" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s law" label="Gauss&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434691" start="8287" end="8314" title="Faraday ice pail experiment" label="Faraday ice pail experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="8411" end="8425" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q165294" start="8670" end="8686" title="corona discharge" label="corona discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274910" start="9837" end="9851" title="dielectric gas" label="dielectric gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163768" start="10015" end="10029" title="current source" label="current source"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="10282" end="10285" title="Standard temperature and pressure" label="STP"/>
<link wikidata="Q422584" start="10291" end="10306" title="Electrical breakdown" label="breakdown field"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="10829" end="10843" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q905291" start="10853" end="10863" title="ion source" label="ion source"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358570" start="11272" end="11278" title="tandem accelerator" label="tandem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139748" start="12710" end="12727" title="Museum of Science, Boston" label="Museum of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="12748" end="12757" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="12840" end="12844" title="volt" label="volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q622424" start="12900" end="12910" title="Tesla coil" label="Tesla coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744476" start="12986" end="13023" title="American Museum of Science and Energy" label="American Museum of Science and Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304371" start="13322" end="13343" title="electrostatic machine" label="electrostatic machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753035" start="13357" end="13374" title="Wimshurst machine" label="Wimshurst machine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13378" end="13393" title="Bonetti machine" label="Bonetti machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="13735" end="13742" title="electric current" label="current"/>
<link wikidata="Q9036" start="15293" end="15305" title="Nikola Tesla" label="Nikola Tesla"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52644" wikidata="Q186474" url="?curid=52644" title="Cysteine">
<text>Cysteine (; symbol Cys or C) is a semiessential proteinogenic amino acid with the formula . The thiol side chain in cysteine enables the formation of disulfide bonds, and often participates in enzymatic reactions as a nucleophile. Cysteine is chiral, but both and -cysteine are found in nature. Cysteine is a protein monomer in all biota, and -cysteine acts as a signaling molecule in mammalian nervous systems. Cysteine is named after its discovery in urine, which comes from the urinary bladder or cyst, from Greek κύστις &quot;kýstis&quot;, &quot;bladder&quot;. 

The thiol is susceptible to oxidation to give the disulfide derivative cystine, which serves an important structural role in many proteins. In this case, the symbol Cyx is sometimes used. The deprotonated form can generally be described by the symbol Cym as well.

When used as a food additive, cysteine has the E number E920.

Cysteine is encoded by the codons UGU and UGC.

==Structure==
Like other amino acids (not as a residue of a protein), cysteine exists as a zwitterion. Cysteine has chirality in the older / notation based on homology to - and -glyceraldehyde. In the newer &quot;R&quot;/&quot;S&quot; system of designating chirality, based on the atomic numbers of atoms near the asymmetric carbon, cysteine (and selenocysteine) have &quot;R&quot; chirality, because of the presence of sulfur (or selenium) as a second neighbor to the asymmetric carbon atom. The remaining chiral amino acids, having lighter atoms in that position, have &quot;S&quot; chirality. Replacing sulfur with selenium gives selenocysteine.

==Dietary sources==
Cysteinyl is a residue in high-protein foods. Some foods considered rich in cysteine include poultry, eggs, beef, and whole grains. In high-protein diets, cysteine may be partially responsible for reduced blood pressure and stroke risk. Although classified as a nonessential amino acid, in rare cases, cysteine may be essential for infants, the elderly, and individuals with certain metabolic diseases or who suffer from malabsorption syndromes. Cysteine can usually be synthesized by the human body under normal physiological conditions if a sufficient quantity of methionine is available.

== Industrial sources ==
The majority of -cysteine is obtained industrially by hydrolysis of animal materials, such as poultry feathers or hog hair. Despite widespread rumor, human hair is rarely a source material. Indeed, food additive or cosmetic product manufactures may not legally source from human hair in the European Union. 

Some animal-originating sources of -cysteine as a food additive contravene kosher, halal, vegan, or vegetarian diets. To avoid this problem, synthetic -cysteine, compliant with Jewish kosher and Muslim halal laws, is also available, albeit at a higher price. The typical synthetic route involves fermentation with an artificial &quot;E. coli&quot; strain. 

Alternatively, Evonik (formerly Degussa) introduced a route from substituted thiazolines. &quot;Pseudomonas thiazolinophilum&quot; hydrolyzes racemic 2amino-Δ2thiazoline-4carboxylic acid to cysteine.

== Biosynthesis ==
In animals, biosynthesis begins with the amino acid serine. The sulfur is derived from methionine, which is converted to homocysteine through the intermediate &quot;S&quot;-adenosylmethionine. Cystathionine beta-synthase then combines homocysteine and serine to form the asymmetrical thioether cystathionine. The enzyme cystathionine gamma-lyase converts the cystathionine into cysteine and alpha-ketobutyrate. In plants and bacteria, cysteine biosynthesis also starts from serine, which is converted to &quot;O&quot;-acetylserine by the enzyme serine transacetylase. The enzyme cysteine synthase, using sulfide sources, converts this ester into cysteine, releasing acetate.

==Biological functions==
The cysteine sulfhydryl group is nucleophilic and easily oxidized. The reactivity is enhanced when the thiol is ionized, and cysteine residues in proteins have pKa values close to neutrality, so are often in their reactive thiolate form in the cell. Because of its high reactivity, the sulfhydryl group of cysteine has numerous biological functions.

===Precursor to the antioxidant glutathione===
Due to the ability of thiols to undergo redox reactions, cysteine and cysteinyl residues have antioxidant properties. Its antioxidant properties are typically expressed in the tripeptide glutathione, which occurs in humans and other organisms. The systemic availability of oral glutathione (GSH) is negligible; so it must be biosynthesized from its constituent amino acids, cysteine, glycine, and glutamic acid. While glutamic acid is usually sufficient because amino acid nitrogen is recycled through glutamate as an intermediary, dietary cysteine and glycine supplementation can improve synthesis of glutathione.

===Precursor to iron-sulfur clusters===
Cysteine is an important source of sulfide in human metabolism. The sulfide in iron-sulfur clusters and in nitrogenase is extracted from cysteine, which is converted to alanine in the process.

===Metal ion binding===
Beyond the iron-sulfur proteins, many other metal cofactors in enzymes are bound to the thiolate substituent of cysteinyl residues. Examples include zinc in zinc fingers and alcohol dehydrogenase, copper in the blue copper proteins, iron in cytochrome P450, and nickel in the [NiFe]-hydrogenases. The sulfhydryl group also has a high affinity for heavy metals, so that proteins containing cysteine, such as metallothionein, will bind metals such as mercury, lead, and cadmium tightly.

===Roles in protein structure===
In the translation of messenger RNA molecules to produce polypeptides, cysteine is coded for by the UGU and UGC codons.

Cysteine has traditionally been considered to be a hydrophilic amino acid, based largely on the chemical parallel between its sulfhydryl group and the hydroxyl groups in the side chains of other polar amino acids. However, the cysteine side chain has been shown to stabilize hydrophobic interactions in micelles to a greater degree than the side chain in the nonpolar amino acid glycine and the polar amino acid serine. In a statistical analysis of the frequency with which amino acids appear in various proteins, cysteine residues were found to associate with hydrophobic regions of proteins. Their hydrophobic tendency was equivalent to that of known nonpolar amino acids such as methionine and tyrosine (tyrosine is polar aromatic but also hydrophobic), those of which were much greater than that of known polar amino acids such as serine and threonine. Hydrophobicity scales, which rank amino acids from most hydrophobic to most hydrophilic, consistently place cysteine towards the hydrophobic end of the spectrum, even when they are based on methods that are not influenced by the tendency of cysteines to form disulfide bonds in proteins. Therefore, cysteine is now often grouped among the hydrophobic amino acids, though it is sometimes also classified as slightly polar, or polar.

Most cysteine residues are covalently bonded to other cysteine residues to form disulfide bonds, which play an important role in the folding and stability of some proteins, usually proteins secreted to the extracellular medium. Since most cellular compartments are reducing environments, disulfide bonds are generally unstable in the cytosol with some exceptions as noted below.

Disulfide bonds in proteins are formed by oxidation of the sulfhydryl group of cysteine residues. The other sulfur-containing amino acid, methionine, cannot form disulfide bonds. More aggressive oxidants convert cysteine to the corresponding sulfinic acid and sulfonic acid. Cysteine residues play a valuable role by crosslinking proteins, which increases the rigidity of proteins and also functions to confer proteolytic resistance (since protein export is a costly process, minimizing its necessity is advantageous). Inside the cell, disulfide bridges between cysteine residues within a polypeptide support the protein&#x27;s tertiary structure. Insulin is an example of a protein with cystine crosslinking, wherein two separate peptide chains are connected by a pair of disulfide bonds.

Protein disulfide isomerases catalyze the proper formation of disulfide bonds; the cell transfers dehydroascorbic acid to the endoplasmic reticulum, which oxidizes the environment. In this environment, cysteines are, in general, oxidized to cystine and are no longer functional as a nucleophiles.

Aside from its oxidation to cystine, cysteine participates in numerous post-translational modifications. The nucleophilic sulfhydryl group allows cysteine to conjugate to other groups, e.g., in prenylation. Ubiquitin ligases transfer ubiquitin to its pendant, proteins, and caspases, which engage in proteolysis in the apoptotic cycle. Inteins often function with the help of a catalytic cysteine. These roles are typically limited to the intracellular milieu, where the environment is reducing, and cysteine is not oxidized to cystine.

== Evolutionary role of cysteine ==
Cysteine is considered a &quot;newcomer&quot; amino acid, being the 17th amino acid incorporated into the genetic code. Similar to other later-added amino acids such as methionine, tyrosine, and tryptophan, cysteine exhibits strong nucleophilic and redox-active properties. These properties contribute to the depletion of cysteine from respiratory chain complexes, such as Complexes I and IV, since reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced by the respiratory chain can react with the cysteine residues in these complexes, leading to dysfunctional proteins and potentially contributing to aging. The primary response of a protein to ROS is the oxidation of cysteine and the loss of free thiol groups, resulting in increased thiyl radicals and associated protein cross-linking. In contrast, another sulfur-containing, redox-active amino acid, methionine, does not exhibit these biochemical properties and its content is relatively upregulated in mitochondrially encoded proteins.

==Applications==
Cysteine, mainly the -enantiomer, is a precursor in the food, pharmaceutical, and personal-care industries. One of the largest applications is the production of flavors. For example, the reaction of cysteine with sugars in a Maillard reaction yields meat flavors. -Cysteine is also used as a processing aid for baking.

In the field of personal care, cysteine is used for permanent-wave applications, predominantly in Asia. Again, the cysteine is used for breaking up the disulfide bonds in the hair&#x27;s keratin.

Cysteine is a very popular target for site-directed labeling experiments to investigate biomolecular structure and dynamics. Maleimides selectively attach to cysteine using a covalent Michael addition. Site-directed spin labeling for EPR or paramagnetic relaxation-enhanced NMR also uses cysteine extensively.

===Reducing toxic effects of alcohol===
Cysteine has been proposed as a preventive or antidote for some of the negative effects of alcohol, including liver damage and hangover. It counteracts the poisonous effects of acetaldehyde. It binds to acetaldehyde to form the low-toxicity heterocycle methylthioproline.

In a rat study, test animals received an LD90 dose of acetaldehyde. Those that received cysteine had an 80% survival rate; when both cysteine and thiamine were administered, all animals survived. The control group had a 10% survival rate.

In 2020 an article was published that suggests L-cysteine might also work in humans.

===&quot;N&quot;-Acetylcysteine===
&quot;N&quot;-Acetyl--cysteine is a derivative of cysteine wherein an acetyl group is attached to the nitrogen atom. This compound is sold as a dietary supplement, and used as an antidote in cases of acetaminophen overdose.

===Sheep===
Cysteine is required by sheep to produce wool. It is an essential amino acid that is taken in from their feed. As a consequence, during drought conditions, sheep produce less wool; however, transgenic sheep that can make their own cysteine have been developed.

==Chemical reactions==
Being multifunctional, cysteine undergoes a variety of reactions. Much attention has focused on protecting the sulfhydryl group. Methylation of cysteine gives S-methylcysteine. Treatment with formaldehyde gives the thiazolidine thioproline. Cysteine forms a variety of coordination complexes upon treatment with metal ions.

==Safety==
Relative to most other amino acids, cysteine is much more toxic.

==History==
In 1884 German chemist Eugen Baumann found that when cystine was treated with a reducing agent, cystine revealed itself to be a dimer of a monomer which he named &quot;cysteïne&quot;.

==See also==

* Amino acids
* Cysteine metabolism
* Cystinuria
* Saville reaction
* Sullivan reaction

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* Holly (2005). &quot;Cystinuria Clearinghouse&quot;
* Cysteine MS Spectrum
* International Kidney Stone Institute </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186474" start="0" end="8" title="Cysteine" label="Cysteine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186474" start="19" end="22" title="Cysteine" label="Cys"/>
<link wikidata="Q186474" start="26" end="27" title="Cysteine" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241589" start="48" end="72" title="proteinogenic amino acid" label="proteinogenic amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q83147" start="82" end="89" title="chemical formula" label="formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q220410" start="96" end="101" title="thiol" label="thiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="150" end="165" title="Disulfide" label="disulfide bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="193" end="202" title="enzymatic" label="enzymatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q745930" start="218" end="229" title="nucleophile" label="nucleophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="511" end="516" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="617" end="626" title="disulfide bond" label="disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q408626" start="638" end="645" title="cystine" label="cystine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="697" end="704" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q186474" start="732" end="735" title="Cysteine" label="Cyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q186474" start="818" end="821" title="Cysteine" label="Cym"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="879" end="887" title="E number" label="E number"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="907" end="914" title="Genetic code" label="encoded"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="922" end="927" title="codon" label="codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q245115" start="1034" end="1044" title="zwitterion" label="zwitterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q530648" start="1059" end="1068" title="dextrorotation and levorotation" label="chirality"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="1561" end="1569" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q408663" start="1576" end="1590" title="selenocysteine" label="selenocysteine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="1644" end="1651" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q245282" start="1878" end="1898" title="essential amino acid" label="essential amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442923" start="2034" end="2047" title="malabsorption" label="malabsorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q179630" start="2048" end="2056" title="syndrome" label="syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q180341" start="2179" end="2189" title="methionine" label="methionine"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="2284" end="2294" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="2723" end="2729" title="kosher" label="kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q177823" start="2741" end="2746" title="halal" label="halal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="2873" end="2880" title="Escherichia coli" label="E. coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q473513" start="2912" end="2918" title="Evonik" label="Evonik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606553" start="2974" end="2984" title="thiazoline" label="thiazoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q183290" start="3169" end="3175" title="serine" label="serine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180341" start="3204" end="3214" title="methionine" label="methionine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192466" start="3238" end="3250" title="homocysteine" label="homocysteine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27135598" start="3276" end="3308" title="S-adenosylmethionine" label="&amp;quot;S&amp;quot;-adenosylmethionine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201183" start="3310" end="3337" title="Cystathionine beta-synthase" label="Cystathionine beta-synthase"/>
<link wikidata="Q28529685" start="3411" end="3424" title="cystathionine" label="cystathionine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201182" start="3437" end="3462" title="cystathionine gamma-lyase" label="cystathionine gamma-lyase"/>
<link wikidata="Q209457" start="3508" end="3526" title="alpha-ketobutyrate" label="alpha-ketobutyrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="3531" end="3536" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="3542" end="3550" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q309897" start="3621" end="3647" title="O-acetylserine" label="&amp;quot;O&amp;quot;-acetylserine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957897" start="3662" end="3683" title="serine transacetylase" label="serine transacetylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201197" start="3696" end="3713" title="cysteine synthase" label="cysteine synthase"/>
<link wikidata="Q745930" start="3851" end="3863" title="nucleophile" label="nucleophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q735188" start="3952" end="3959" title="amino acid residue" label="residue"/>
<link wikidata="Q325519" start="3978" end="3981" title="acid dissociation constant" label="pKa"/>
<link wikidata="Q220410" start="4041" end="4049" title="thiolate" label="thiolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q133948" start="4310" end="4321" title="antioxidant" label="antioxidant"/>
<link wikidata="Q116907" start="4403" end="4414" title="glutathione" label="glutathione"/>
<link wikidata="Q620730" start="4600" end="4607" title="glycine" label="glycine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181136" start="4613" end="4626" title="glutamic acid" label="glutamic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q221205" start="4907" end="4914" title="sulfide" label="sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="4924" end="4934" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q312085" start="4951" end="4970" title="iron-sulfur cluster" label="iron-sulfur cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q410381" start="4979" end="4990" title="nitrogenase" label="nitrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q218642" start="5041" end="5048" title="alanine" label="alanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q204785" start="5247" end="5258" title="zinc finger" label="zinc finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q410754" start="5264" end="5285" title="alcohol dehydrogenase" label="alcohol dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q24722801" start="5301" end="5320" title="plastocyanin" label="blue copper protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q407693" start="5331" end="5346" title="cytochrome P450" label="cytochrome P450"/>
<link wikidata="Q424135" start="5373" end="5384" title="hydrogenase" label="hydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q899107" start="5424" end="5432" title="Affinity (pharmacology)" label="affinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q105789" start="5437" end="5448" title="Heavy metal (chemistry)" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q416896" start="5497" end="5512" title="metallothionein" label="metallothionein"/>
<link wikidata="Q193161" start="5519" end="5523" title="ligand" label="bind"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="5721" end="5726" title="codon" label="codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192197" start="5781" end="5792" title="hydrophilic" label="hydrophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q220410" start="5856" end="5872" title="thiol group" label="sulfhydryl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="5881" end="5889" title="hydroxyl" label="hydroxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q180341" start="6412" end="6422" title="methionine" label="methionine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188017" start="6427" end="6435" title="tyrosine" label="tyrosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186521" start="6576" end="6585" title="threonine" label="threonine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083939" start="6587" end="6608" title="Hydrophobicity scales" label="Hydrophobicity scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="7100" end="7114" title="disulfide bond" label="disulfide bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306351" start="7285" end="7305" title="reducing environment" label="reducing environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q220599" start="7354" end="7361" title="cytosol" label="cytosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q420304" start="7642" end="7655" title="sulfinic acid" label="sulfinic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q250437" start="7660" end="7673" title="sulfonic acid" label="sulfonic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="8048" end="8055" title="Insulin" label="Insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641611" start="8191" end="8218" title="Protein disulfide isomerase" label="Protein disulfide isomerase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="8253" end="8267" title="disulfide bond" label="disulfide bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116723" start="8289" end="8309" title="dehydroascorbic acid" label="dehydroascorbic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q79927" start="8317" end="8338" title="endoplasmic reticulum" label="endoplasmic reticulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q898362" start="8560" end="8591" title="post-translational modification" label="post-translational modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q745930" start="8598" end="8610" title="nucleophilic" label="nucleophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q901141" start="8683" end="8694" title="prenylation" label="prenylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q407111" start="8696" end="8705" title="Ubiquitin" label="Ubiquitin"/>
<link wikidata="Q410221" start="8706" end="8712" title="ligase" label="ligase"/>
<link wikidata="Q25805" start="8763" end="8770" title="caspase" label="caspase"/>
<link wikidata="Q899401" start="8825" end="8831" title="Intein" label="Intein"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="9169" end="9181" title="genetic code" label="genetic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q180341" start="9232" end="9242" title="methionine" label="methionine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188017" start="9244" end="9252" title="tyrosine" label="tyrosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181003" start="9258" end="9268" title="tryptophan" label="tryptophan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211016" start="9399" end="9416" title="Electron transport chain" label="respiratory chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22326958" start="9436" end="9447" title="Respiratory complex I" label="Complexes I"/>
<link wikidata="Q306116" start="9452" end="9454" title="Complex IV" label="IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q424361" start="9487" end="9490" title="Reactive oxygen species" label="ROS"/>
<link wikidata="Q55080305" start="9784" end="9798" title="Thiyl radical" label="thiyl radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="10005" end="10020" title="Mitochondrion" label="mitochondrially"/>
<link wikidata="Q494483" start="10079" end="10089" title="enantiomer" label="enantiomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q247994" start="10096" end="10105" title="precursor (chemistry)" label="precursor"/>
<link wikidata="Q647574" start="10282" end="10299" title="Maillard reaction" label="Maillard reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301082" start="10349" end="10363" title="improving agent" label="processing aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q869880" start="10429" end="10443" title="permanent wave" label="permanent-wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q28472" start="10552" end="10556" title="hair" label="hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q189474" start="10564" end="10571" title="keratin" label="keratin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743002" start="10699" end="10708" title="Maleimide" label="Maleimide"/>
<link wikidata="Q642233" start="10758" end="10774" title="Michael addition" label="Michael addition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531731" start="10776" end="10803" title="Site-directed spin labeling" label="Site-directed spin labeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q207334" start="11052" end="11060" title="hangover" label="hangover"/>
<link wikidata="Q61457" start="11102" end="11114" title="acetaldehyde" label="acetaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q27093808" start="11184" end="11195" title="thioproline" label="thioproline"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="11203" end="11206" title="rat" label="rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q21136" start="11239" end="11243" title="Lethal dose" label="LD90"/>
<link wikidata="Q83187" start="11344" end="11352" title="thiamine" label="thiamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836899" start="11398" end="11411" title="control group" label="control group"/>
<link wikidata="Q375613" start="11559" end="11589" title="N-Acetylcysteine" label="&amp;quot;N&amp;quot;-Acetyl--cysteine"/>
<link wikidata="Q481808" start="11629" end="11641" title="acetyl group" label="acetyl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q194168" start="11738" end="11746" title="antidote" label="antidote"/>
<link wikidata="Q57055" start="11759" end="11772" title="acetaminophen" label="acetaminophen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="11820" end="11825" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q430117" start="11986" end="11996" title="transgenic" label="transgenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q518328" start="12210" end="12221" title="Methylation" label="Methylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q27093260" start="12240" end="12256" title="S-Methylcysteine" label="S-methylcysteine"/>
<link wikidata="Q413761" start="12296" end="12308" title="thiazolidine" label="thiazolidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27093808" start="12309" end="12320" title="thioproline" label="thioproline"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="12350" end="12370" title="coordination complex" label="coordination complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q77114" start="12518" end="12531" title="Eugen Baumann" label="Eugen Baumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q762043" start="12623" end="12628" title="Dimer (chemistry)" label="dimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q178827" start="12634" end="12641" title="monomer" label="monomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="12696" end="12706" title="Amino acid" label="Amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201195" start="12710" end="12729" title="Cysteine metabolism" label="Cysteine metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149046" start="12732" end="12742" title="Cystinuria" label="Cystinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911559" start="12745" end="12761" title="Saville reaction" label="Saville reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966002" start="12764" end="12781" title="Sullivan reaction" label="Sullivan reaction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52647" wikidata="Q226629" url="?curid=52647" title="Liberty (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Liberty]] is the ability to do as one pleases, or have the power and resources to fulfill one&#x27;s purposes.

Liberty may also refer to:

==Arts, entertainment, and literature==
===Films and television===
* &quot;Liberty&quot; (serial), a 1916 film serial
* &quot;Liberty&quot; (1929 film), a short film starring Laurel and Hardy
* &quot;Liberty&quot; (1986 film), a television historical drama
* &quot;Liberty!&quot;, a 1997 documentary about the American Revolutionary War

===Magazines===
* &quot;Liberty&quot; (1881–1908 periodical), an anarchist political magazine
* &quot;Liberty&quot; (Adventist magazine), a religious liberty magazine
* &quot;Liberty&quot; (general interest magazine), a magazine published from 1924 to 1950
* &quot;Liberty&quot; (libertarian magazine), a political magazine published from 1987
* &quot;Liberties&quot;, an American literary magazine edited by Leon Wieseltier

===Newspapers===
* &quot;Liberty&quot; (British newspaper), an anarcho-communist paper published from 1894 to 1896
* &quot;Liberty&quot; (Thai newspaper), a defunct English-language newspaper published in Thailand

===Others===
* &quot;Liberty&quot; (manga), a 2017 manga by Izumi Kitta
* &quot;Liberty&quot; (poem), a 1942 poem by Paul Éluard
* &quot;Liberty&quot;, a 1730 poem by James Thomson
* &quot;Liberty! The Saga of Sycamore Shoals&quot;, an outdoor play performed seasonally in Tennessee, US
* &quot;Liberty Liberty!&quot;, a 2005 Japanese manga
* Liberty style, the Italian variant of Art Nouveau
* &quot;Liberty/Libertà&quot;, a 2019 exhibition by the sculptor Martin Puryear at the Venice Biennale&#x27;s American pavilion
* &quot;On Liberty&quot;, an 1859 political philosophy paper written by John Stuart Mill
* Liberty, a dachshund character in &quot;Paw Patrol&quot; and &quot;Paw Patrol: The Movie&quot;
* &quot;Liberty&quot; (&quot;Fringe&quot;), an episode of the television series &quot;Fringe&quot;

==Business==
* Liberty (department store), a London store founded in 1875 by Arthur Lasenby Liberty
* The Liberty, a shopping centre in Havering, London, England
** Liberty 2, a former name of The Mercury Mall, an adjacent shopping centre
* Liberty Aerospace, a manufacturer of general aviation aircraft
* Liberty Alliance, a standards consortium for identity management
* Liberty Broadcasting System, a defunct radio network
* Liberty Corporation, a defunct insurance and media company, based in South Carolina, United States
* Liberty Global, a media company and broadband provider
* Liberty Holdings Limited, a financial services company in South Africa
* Liberty Media, holding company for the media interests of John C. Malone
* Liberty Medical, a company that sells diabetes testers
* Liberty Mutual, a large United States insurance company
* Liberty Oil, Australian petrol retailer
* Liberty Reserve, a former digital currency service
* Liberty Safe, a safe manufacturer located in the United States founded in 1988
* Liberty Shoes, a shoe company based in India, established in 1954
* Liberty Steel Group, a British industrial and metals company

==Music==
===Albums===
* &quot;Liberty&quot; (Duran Duran album), 1990
* &quot;Liberty&quot;, a 1995 album by The Guess Who
* &quot;Liberty&quot; (Lindi Ortega album), 2018
* &quot;Liberty&quot; (Miliyah Kato album), 2016
* &quot;Liberty!&quot; (album), a 1997 album by Mark O&#x27;Connor

===Songs===
* &quot;Liberty&quot;, a song by Janis Ian from &quot;Present Company&quot;
* &quot;Liberty&quot;, a song by Heavenly from &quot;Virus&quot;
* &quot;Liberty&quot;, a song by John 5 from &quot;Vertigo&quot;
* &quot;Liberty&quot;, a song by Vertical Horizon from &quot;There and Back Again&quot;
* &quot;Liberty&quot;, a song by the Grateful Dead from &quot;So Many Roads (1965–1995)&quot; and &quot;Road Trips Volume 2 Number 4&quot;
* &quot;Liberty&quot;, a song by Journey from &quot;Time3&quot;

===Other uses===
* Liberty Music Shop Records, a record label
* Liberty Records, a former US record label
* Liberty X (formerly Liberty), a pop group founded on the British reality show &quot;Popstars&quot;

==People==

===Given name===
* Liberty Hyde Bailey (1858–1954) American botanist
* Liberty Barnes, American sociologist, ethnographer, and writer
* Liberty Bartlett (1810–unknown)
* Liberty Billings (1823–1877), American officer in the Union Army, minister, and politician
* Liberty DeVitto (born 1950), American rock drummer
* Liberty Ellman (born 1971), London-born American jazz guitarist
* Liberty Heap (born 2003), English cricketer
* Liberty Ma Mya Yin (1904–1945), Burmese dancer and singer
* Liberty Poole (born 1999), English television personality and model
* Liberty Ross (born 1978), English model
* Liberty Silver (born c. 1961), Canadian singer

===Mononym===
* Liberty, one half of the professional wrestling tag-team The American Eagles
* Liberty, a female professional wrestler from the Gorgeous Ladies of Wrestling

===Surname===
* Arthur Lasenby Liberty (1843–1917), English merchant and founder of Liberty &amp; Co.
* Clinton Liberty (born 1998), Irish actor

===Fictional characters===
* Liberty Valance, title character of the film &quot;The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance&quot;
* Liberty Savage, a character from the British Channel 4 soap opera &quot;Hollyoaks&quot;
* Liberty Van Zandt, a character from the Canadian television drama &quot;Degrassi: The Next Generation&quot;
* Liberty (personification), the anthropomorphic portrayal of the concept of liberty, often as a goddess

==Places==
* The Liberties, Dublin, a district in the south-west inner city of Dublin, Ireland
* Liberty, Saskatchewan, Canada

===United States===
* Liberty City (disambiguation)
* Liberty County (disambiguation)
* Liberty Township (disambiguation)
* Liberty, Arizona
* Liberty, California, a community in Sonoma County
* Liberty, San Joaquin County, California, a ghost town
* Liberty, Idaho
* Liberty, Illinois
* Liberty, Saline County, Illinois
* Liberty, Indiana
* Liberty, Kansas
* Liberty, Kentucky
* Garden Village, Kentucky or Liberty, a community in Pike County
* Liberty, Maine
* Liberty, Mississippi
* Liberty, Missouri
* Liberty, Nebraska
* Liberty (town), New York, a town in Sullivan County, New York
* Liberty (village), New York, a village in Sullivan County, New York
* Liberty, North Carolina
* Liberty, Ohio
* Liberty, Oklahoma
* Liberty, Pennsylvania (disambiguation), three places
* Liberty Mountain Resort, a ski area located in Carroll Valley, Pennsylvania
* Liberty, South Carolina
* Liberty, Tennessee
* Liberty, Texas
* Liberty, Utah
* Tridell, Utah, also called Liberty
* Liberty, Washington
* Liberty, West Virginia
* Liberty, Wisconsin (disambiguation), five places
* West Liberty (disambiguation)
* Liberty Bell, an iconic symbol of American independence located in Philadelphia
* Liberty University, a Christian research university in Lynchburg, Virginia
** Liberty Flames and Lady Flames, the university&#x27;s athletic program
* Statue of Liberty, an 1886 colossal neoclassical sculpture on Liberty Island in the middle of New York Harbor, in Manhattan, New York City

==Transportation==
===Water transport===
* Liberty ship, a design of cargo ship mass-produced in the United States during World War II
* &quot;Liberty&quot; (ship), a list of ships named &quot;Liberty&quot;
* Liberty pass, for shore leave
* HMS &quot;Liberty&quot; (J391), a World War II minesweeper

===Aviation===
* Liberty (rocket), a proposed rocket for crew and cargo
* Airco DH.4, at one point called &quot;Liberty Planes&quot;
* Associated Air Liberty 181, an American aircraft design
* Rolls-Royce AE 1107C-Liberty aeroengine

===Land transport===
* Avelia Liberty, a high-speed train built by Alstom for the North American market 
* Liberty Motor Car, an American car manufacturer from 1916 to 1923
* Liberty truck, a former United States cargo vehicle
* Jeep Liberty, an SUV
* Liberty L-12, a United States First World War V12 aero-engine also used in 1930s British tanks as the &quot;Nuffield Liberty&quot;
* Tank Mark VIII, the Mark VIII or &quot;Liberty&quot;, an Anglo-American development of the main British tank of the First World War
* Liberty (Muni), a station on the San Francisco Municipal Railway
* Liberty line, a railway line in London

== Plants and Animals ==

*Liberty (apple), a hybrid apple cultivar
* Liberty (cucumber), used for pickling
* Liberty (dog) (1974–1984), golden retriever pet of Gerald Ford

== Organizations ==

*Liberty (advocacy group), a United Kingdom pressure group that campaigns to protect civil liberties and human rights
* Liberty (division), a largely medieval English administrative unit
* New York Liberty, a women&#x27;s basketball team

==Other uses==
* Liberty (Go), an empty space adjacent to a group of stones in the board game Go
* Liberty, a term used for shore leave in the United States Coast Guard, United States Marine Corps, and United States Navy
* Liberty, a cheerleading stunt

==See also==
*
* Liberty Party (disambiguation)
* Liberty Stadium (disambiguation)
* Liberty Tree (disambiguation)
* Goddess of Liberty (disambiguation)
* Lady Liberty (disambiguation)
* Mount Liberty (disambiguation)
* Liberta (disambiguation)
* Libertas (disambiguation)
* Liberté (disambiguation)
* Libertyville, Illinois</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q226629" start="0" end="11" title="Liberty (disambiguation)" label="[[Liberty]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q226629" start="114" end="121" title="Liberty (disambiguation)" label="Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285307" start="211" end="239" title="Liberty (serial)" label="&amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (serial)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759277" start="262" end="293" title="Liberty (1929 film)" label="&amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (1929 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39073640" start="336" end="367" title="Liberty (1986 film)" label="&amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (1986 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541507" start="407" end="415" title="Liberty!" label="Liberty!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098886" start="498" end="540" title="Liberty ( 1881–1908 periodical)" label="&amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (1881–1908 periodical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318357" start="576" end="616" title="Liberty (Adventist magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (Adventist magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398744" start="649" end="696" title="Liberty (general interest magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (general interest magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541558" start="739" end="781" title="Liberty (libertarian magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (libertarian magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470191" start="889" end="904" title="Leon Wieseltier" label="Leon Wieseltier"/>
<link wikidata="Q114689412" start="925" end="964" title="Liberty (British newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (British newspaper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111915607" start="1023" end="1059" title="Liberty (Thai newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (Thai newspaper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391078" start="1136" end="1163" title="Liberty (manga)" label="&amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (manga)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237838" start="1195" end="1221" title="Liberty (poem)" label="&amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (poem)"/>
<link wikidata="Q555029" start="1288" end="1301" title="James Thomson (poet, born 1700)" label="James Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773657" start="1310" end="1346" title="Liberty! The Saga of Sycamore Shoals" label="Liberty! The Saga of Sycamore Shoals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754428" start="1416" end="1432" title="Liberty Liberty!" label="Liberty Liberty!"/>
<link wikidata="Q20645040" start="1464" end="1477" title="Liberty style" label="Liberty style"/>
<link wikidata="Q66371881" start="1522" end="1537" title="Liberty/Libertà" label="Liberty/Libertà"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055881" start="1650" end="1660" title="On Liberty" label="On Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15106029" start="1773" end="1783" title="Paw Patrol" label="Paw Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1800" end="1821" title="Paw Patrol: The Movie" label="Paw Patrol: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541561" start="1830" end="1870" title="Liberty (Fringe)" label="&amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Fringe&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237793" start="1943" end="1969" title="Liberty (department store)" label="Liberty (department store)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894126" start="2030" end="2041" title="The Liberty" label="The Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894551" start="2093" end="2102" title="Liberty 2" label="Liberty 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894551" start="2121" end="2137" title="The Mercury Mall" label="The Mercury Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237796" start="2169" end="2186" title="Liberty Aerospace" label="Liberty Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234599" start="2234" end="2250" title="Liberty Alliance" label="Liberty Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541631" start="2301" end="2328" title="Liberty Broadcasting System" label="Liberty Broadcasting System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747072" start="2356" end="2375" title="Liberty Corporation" label="Liberty Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q571779" start="2457" end="2471" title="Liberty Global" label="Liberty Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541825" start="2514" end="2538" title="Liberty Holdings Limited" label="Liberty Holdings Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516562" start="2587" end="2600" title="Liberty Media" label="Liberty Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541872" start="2662" end="2677" title="Liberty Medical" label="Liberty Medical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516450" start="2719" end="2733" title="Liberty Mutual" label="Liberty Mutual"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687078" start="2777" end="2788" title="Liberty Oil" label="Liberty Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6322020" start="2819" end="2834" title="Liberty Reserve" label="Liberty Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541935" start="2872" end="2884" title="Liberty Safe" label="Liberty Safe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541947" start="2953" end="2966" title="Liberty Shoes" label="Liberty Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q24957727" start="3021" end="3040" title="Liberty Steel Group" label="Liberty Steel Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314940" start="3108" end="3147" title="Liberty (Duran Duran album)" label="&amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (Duran Duran album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141238" start="3193" end="3206" title="The Guess Who" label="The Guess Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616824" start="3209" end="3249" title="Liberty (Lindi Ortega album)" label="&amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (Lindi Ortega album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30668100" start="3258" end="3298" title="Liberty (Miliyah Kato album)" label="&amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (Miliyah Kato album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541509" start="3307" end="3335" title="Liberty! (album)" label="&amp;quot;Liberty!&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108608404" start="3439" end="3454" title="Present Company" label="Present Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747610" start="3514" end="3519" title="Virus (Heavenly album)" label="Virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255733" start="3577" end="3584" title="Vertigo (John 5 album)" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782807" start="3652" end="3672" title="There and Back Again (Vertical Horizon album)" label="There and Back Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296230" start="3741" end="3766" title="So Many Roads (1965–1995)" label="So Many Roads (1965–1995)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804844" start="3870" end="3875" title="Time3" label="Time3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541888" start="3902" end="3928" title="Liberty Music Shop Records" label="Liberty Music Shop Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392321" start="3947" end="3962" title="Liberty Records" label="Liberty Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823053" start="3991" end="4000" title="Liberty X" label="Liberty X"/>
<link wikidata="Q152366" start="4122" end="4141" title="Liberty Hyde Bailey" label="Liberty Hyde Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062318" start="4174" end="4188" title="Liberty Barnes" label="Liberty Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541591" start="4239" end="4255" title="Liberty Bartlett" label="Liberty Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q81795220" start="4273" end="4289" title="Liberty Billings" label="Liberty Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q448366" start="4366" end="4381" title="Liberty DeVitto" label="Liberty DeVitto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823001" start="4419" end="4433" title="Liberty Ellman" label="Liberty Ellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q106307055" start="4485" end="4497" title="Liberty Heap" label="Liberty Heap"/>
<link wikidata="Q13073020" start="4531" end="4549" title="Liberty Ma Mya Yin" label="Liberty Ma Mya Yin"/>
<link wikidata="Q110613377" start="4591" end="4604" title="Liberty Poole" label="Liberty Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237809" start="4661" end="4673" title="Liberty Ross" label="Liberty Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541950" start="4703" end="4717" title="Liberty Silver" label="Liberty Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351924" start="4824" end="4843" title="The Nightmares (professional wrestling)" label="The American Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586265" start="4895" end="4923" title="Gorgeous Ladies of Wrestling" label="Gorgeous Ladies of Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069251" start="4941" end="4963" title="Arthur Lasenby Liberty" label="Arthur Lasenby Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q109969539" start="5029" end="5044" title="Clinton Liberty" label="Clinton Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q555687" start="5151" end="5183" title="The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance" label="The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541936" start="5192" end="5206" title="Liberty Savage" label="Liberty Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q13586793" start="5282" end="5299" title="Liberty Van Zandt" label="Liberty Van Zandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q833490" start="5392" end="5417" title="Liberty (personification)" label="Liberty (personification)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776828" start="5509" end="5530" title="The Liberties, Dublin" label="The Liberties, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085384" start="5593" end="5614" title="Liberty, Saskatchewan" label="Liberty, Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q448771" start="5646" end="5675" title="Liberty City (disambiguation)" label="Liberty City (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q226978" start="5678" end="5709" title="Liberty County (disambiguation)" label="Liberty County (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255160" start="5712" end="5745" title="Liberty Township (disambiguation)" label="Liberty Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541511" start="5748" end="5764" title="Liberty, Arizona" label="Liberty, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q108067" start="5767" end="5786" title="Liberty, California" label="Liberty, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q21593076" start="5819" end="5858" title="Liberty, San Joaquin County, California" label="Liberty, San Joaquin County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541515" start="5875" end="5889" title="Liberty, Idaho" label="Liberty, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488795" start="5892" end="5909" title="Liberty, Illinois" label="Liberty, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541526" start="5912" end="5944" title="Liberty, Saline County, Illinois" label="Liberty, Saline County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q577351" start="5947" end="5963" title="Liberty, Indiana" label="Liberty, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533973" start="5966" end="5981" title="Liberty, Kansas" label="Liberty, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912504" start="5984" end="6001" title="Liberty, Kentucky" label="Liberty, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221400" start="6004" end="6028" title="Garden Village, Kentucky" label="Garden Village, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888983" start="6070" end="6084" title="Liberty, Maine" label="Liberty, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q944375" start="6087" end="6107" title="Liberty, Mississippi" label="Liberty, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q959398" start="6110" end="6127" title="Liberty, Missouri" label="Liberty, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363569" start="6130" end="6147" title="Liberty, Nebraska" label="Liberty, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541521" start="6150" end="6174" title="Liberty (town), New York" label="Liberty (town), New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825966" start="6214" end="6241" title="Liberty (village), New York" label="Liberty (village), New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q583858" start="6284" end="6307" title="Liberty, North Carolina" label="Liberty, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q23698481" start="6310" end="6323" title="Liberty, Ohio" label="Liberty, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409381" start="6326" end="6343" title="Liberty, Oklahoma" label="Liberty, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779155" start="6346" end="6384" title="Liberty, Pennsylvania (disambiguation)" label="Liberty, Pennsylvania (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541882" start="6401" end="6424" title="Liberty Mountain Resort" label="Liberty Mountain Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979317" start="6479" end="6502" title="Liberty, South Carolina" label="Liberty, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231140" start="6505" end="6523" title="Liberty, Tennessee" label="Liberty, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q981297" start="6526" end="6540" title="Liberty, Texas" label="Liberty, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974828" start="6543" end="6556" title="Liberty, Utah" label="Liberty, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841360" start="6559" end="6572" title="Tridell, Utah" label="Tridell, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461503" start="6596" end="6615" title="Liberty, Washington" label="Liberty, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q10973599" start="6618" end="6640" title="Liberty, West Virginia" label="Liberty, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541535" start="6643" end="6678" title="Liberty, Wisconsin (disambiguation)" label="Liberty, Wisconsin (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q356697" start="6694" end="6723" title="West Liberty (disambiguation)" label="West Liberty (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q390306" start="6726" end="6738" title="Liberty Bell" label="Liberty Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468607" start="6808" end="6826" title="Liberty University" label="Liberty University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541715" start="6886" end="6916" title="Liberty Flames and Lady Flames" label="Liberty Flames and Lady Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="6959" end="6976" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q593485" start="7142" end="7154" title="Liberty ship" label="Liberty ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089035" start="7236" end="7262" title="Liberty (ship)" label="&amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (ship)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802798" start="7308" end="7320" title="Liberty pass" label="Liberty pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q21072429" start="7340" end="7370" title="HMS Liberty (J391)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (J391)"/>
<link wikidata="Q583947" start="7417" end="7433" title="Liberty (rocket)" label="Liberty (rocket)"/>
<link wikidata="Q408463" start="7474" end="7484" title="Airco DH.4" label="Airco DH.4"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981187" start="7535" end="7561" title="Associated Air Liberty 181" label="Associated Air Liberty 181"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351118" start="7593" end="7621" title="Rolls-Royce AE 1107C-Liberty" label="Rolls-Royce AE 1107C-Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q26724167" start="7657" end="7671" title="Avelia Liberty" label="Avelia Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541881" start="7741" end="7758" title="Liberty Motor Car" label="Liberty Motor Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237816" start="7809" end="7822" title="Liberty truck" label="Liberty truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q18456106" start="7863" end="7875" title="Jeep Liberty" label="Jeep Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738041" start="7886" end="7898" title="Liberty L-12" label="Liberty L-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q904879" start="8019" end="8033" title="Tank Mark VIII" label="Tank Mark VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541562" start="8153" end="8167" title="Liberty (Muni)" label="Liberty (Muni)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363198" start="8220" end="8232" title="Liberty line" label="Liberty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237794" start="8287" end="8302" title="Liberty (apple)" label="Liberty (apple)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23425" start="8330" end="8348" title="Liberty (cucumber)" label="Liberty (cucumber)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932652" start="8370" end="8383" title="Liberty (dog)" label="Liberty (dog)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189606" start="8456" end="8480" title="Liberty (advocacy group)" label="Liberty (advocacy group)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883346" start="8575" end="8593" title="Liberty (division)" label="Liberty (division)"/>
<link wikidata="Q974705" start="8644" end="8660" title="New York Liberty" label="New York Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344347" start="8711" end="8723" title="Liberty (Go)" label="Liberty (Go)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802798" start="8818" end="8829" title="shore leave" label="shore leave"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8928" end="8946" title="List of cheerleading stunts#Body positions" label="cheerleading stunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127027" start="8965" end="8995" title="Liberty Party (disambiguation)" label="Liberty Party (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237811" start="8998" end="9030" title="Liberty Stadium (disambiguation)" label="Liberty Stadium (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100261" start="9033" end="9062" title="Liberty Tree (disambiguation)" label="Liberty Tree (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576286" start="9065" end="9100" title="Goddess of Liberty (disambiguation)" label="Goddess of Liberty (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452754" start="9103" end="9132" title="Lady Liberty (disambiguation)" label="Lady Liberty (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921826" start="9135" end="9165" title="Mount Liberty (disambiguation)" label="Mount Liberty (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541296" start="9168" end="9192" title="Liberta (disambiguation)" label="Liberta (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q299124" start="9195" end="9220" title="Libertas (disambiguation)" label="Libertas (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q410373" start="9223" end="9247" title="Liberté (disambiguation)" label="Liberté (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787181" start="9250" end="9272" title="Libertyville, Illinois" label="Libertyville, Illinois"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52648" wikidata="Q15328" url="?curid=52648" title="Camera">
<text>A camera is an instrument used to capture and store images and videos, either digitally via an electronic image sensor, or chemically via a light-sensitive material such as photographic film. As a pivotal technology in the fields of photography and videography, cameras have played a significant role in the progression of visual arts, media, entertainment, surveillance, and scientific research. The invention of the camera dates back to the 19th century and has since evolved with advancements in technology, leading to a vast array of types and models in the 21st century.

Cameras function through a combination of multiple mechanical components and principles. These include exposure control, which regulates the amount of light reaching the sensor or film; the lens, which focuses the light; the viewfinder, which allows the user to preview the scene; and the film or sensor, which captures the image.

Several types of camera exist, each suited to specific uses and offering unique capabilities. Single-lens reflex (SLR) cameras provide real-time, exact imaging through the lens. Large-format and medium-format cameras offer higher image resolution and are often used in professional and artistic photography. Compact cameras, known for their portability and simplicity, are popular in consumer photography. Rangefinder cameras, with separate viewing and imaging systems, were historically widely used in photojournalism. Motion picture cameras are specialized for filming cinematic content, while digital cameras, which became prevalent in the late 20th and early 21st century, use electronic sensors to capture and store images.

The rapid development of smartphone camera technology in the 21st century has blurred the lines between dedicated cameras and multifunctional devices, as the smartphone camera is easier to use, profoundly influencing how society creates, shares, and consumes visual content.

==History==
=== 19th century ===
Beginning with the use of the camera obscura and transitioning to complex photographic cameras, the evolution of the technology in the 19th century was driven by pioneers like Thomas Wedgwood, Nicéphore Niépce, and Henry Fox Talbot. First using the camera obscura for chemical experiments, they ultimately created cameras specifically for chemical photography, and later reduced the camera&#x27;s size and optimized lens configurations.

The introduction of the daguerreotype process in 1839 facilitated commercial camera manufacturing, with various producers contributing diverse designs. As camera manufacturing became a specialized trade in the 1850s, designs and sizes were standardized.

The latter half of the century witnessed the advent of dry plates and roll-film, prompting a shift towards smaller and more cost-effective cameras, epitomized by the original Kodak camera, first produced in 1888. This period also saw significant advancements in lens technology and the emergence of color photography, leading to a surge in camera ownership.

=== 20th century ===
The first half of the 20th century saw continued miniaturization and the integration of new manufacturing materials. After World War I, Germany took the lead in camera development, spearheading industry consolidation and producing precision-made cameras. The industry saw significant product launches such as the Leica camera and the Contax, which were enabled by advancements in film and lens designs. Additionally, there was a marked increase in accessibility to cinematography for amateurs with Eastman Kodak&#x27;s production of the first 16-mm and 8-mm reversal safety films. The World War II era saw a focus on the development of specialized aerial reconnaissance and instrument-recording equipment, even as the overall pace of non-military camera innovation slowed.

In the second half of the century, Japanese manufacturers in particular advanced camera technology. From the introduction of the affordable Ricohflex III TLR in 1952 to the first 35mm SLR with automatic exposure, the Olympus AutoEye in 1960, new designs and features continuously emerged. Electronics became integral to camera design in the 1970s, evident in models like Polaroid&#x27;s SX-70 and Canon&#x27;s AE-1.

Transition to digital photography marked the late 20th century, culminating in digital camera sales surpassing film cameras in the United States by 2003. In contrast, the film camera industry in the UK, Western Europe, and the USA declined during this period, while manufacturing continued in the USSR, German Democratic Republic, and China, often mimicking Western designs.

=== 21st century ===
The 21st century witnessed the mass adoption of digital cameras and significant improvements in sensor technology. A major revolution came with the incorporation of cameras into smartphones, making photography a commonplace activity. The century also marked the rise of computational photography, using algorithms and AI to enhance image quality. Features like low-light and HDR photography, optical image stabilization, and depth-sensing became common in smartphone cameras.

== Mechanics ==

Most cameras capture light from the visible light spectrum, while specialized cameras capture other portions of the electromagnetic spectrum, such as infrared.

All cameras use the same basic design: light enters an enclosed box through a converging or convex lens and an image is recorded on a light-sensitive medium. A shutter mechanism controls the length of time that light enters the camera.

Most cameras also have a viewfinder, which shows the scene to be recorded, along with means to adjust various combinations of focus, aperture and shutter speed.

=== Exposure control ===
==== Aperture ====

Light enters the camera through an aperture, an opening adjusted by overlapping plates called the aperture ring. Typically located in the lens, this opening can be widened or narrowed to alter the amount of light that strikes the film or sensor. The size of the aperture can be set manually, by rotating the lens or adjusting a dial or automatically based on readings from an internal light meter.

As the aperture is adjusted, the opening expands and contracts in increments called &quot;f-stops&quot;. The smaller the f-stop, the more light is allowed to enter the lens, increasing the exposure. Typically, f-stops range from 1.4 to 32 in standard increments: 1.4, 2, 2.8, 4, 5.6, 8, 11, 16, 22, and 32. The light entering the camera is halved with each increasing increment.

The wider opening at lower f-stops narrows the range of focus so the background is blurry while the foreground is in focus. This depth of field increases as the aperture closes. A narrow aperture results in a high depth of field, meaning that objects at many different distances from the camera will appear to be in focus. What is acceptably in focus is determined by the circle of confusion, the photographic technique, the equipment in use and the degree of magnification expected of the final image.

==== Shutter ====
The shutter, along with the aperture, is one of two ways to control the amount of light entering the camera. The shutter determines the duration that the light-sensitive surface is exposed to light. The shutter opens, light enters the camera and exposes the film or sensor to light, and then the shutter closes.

There are two types of mechanical shutters: the leaf-type shutter and the focal-plane shutter. The leaf-type uses a circular iris diaphragm maintained under spring tension inside or just behind the lens that rapidly opens and closes when the shutter is released. 
More commonly, a focal-plane shutter is used. This shutter operates close to the film plane and employs metal plates or cloth curtains with an opening that passes across the light-sensitive surface. The curtains or plates have an opening that is pulled across the film plane during exposure. The focal-plane shutter is typically used in single-lens reflex (SLR) cameras, since covering the film (rather than blocking the light passing through the lens) allows the photographer to view the image through the lens at all times, except during the exposure itself. Covering the film also facilitates removing the lens from a loaded camera, as many SLRs have interchangeable lenses.

A digital camera may use a mechanical or electronic shutter, the latter of which is common in smartphone cameras. Electronic shutters either record data from the entire sensor simultaneously (a global shutter) or record the data line by line across the sensor (a rolling shutter). In movie cameras, a rotary shutter opens and closes in sync with the advancement of each frame of film.

The duration for which the shutter is open is called the &quot;shutter speed&quot; or &quot;exposure time&quot;. Typical exposure times can range from one second to 1/1,000 of a second, though longer and shorter durations are not uncommon. In the early stages of photography, exposures were often several minutes long. These long exposure times often resulted in blurry images, as a single object is recorded in multiple places across a single image for the duration of the exposure. To prevent this, shorter exposure times can be used. Very short exposure times can capture fast-moving action and eliminate motion blur. However, shorter exposure times require more light to produce a properly exposed image, so shortening the exposure time is not always possible.

Like aperture settings, exposure times increment in powers of two. The two settings determine the exposure value (EV), a measure of how much light is recorded during the exposure. There is a direct relationship between the exposure times and aperture settings so that if the exposure time is lengthened one step, but the aperture opening is also narrowed one step, then the amount of light that contacts the film or sensor is the same.

==== Light meter ====

In most modern cameras, the amount of light entering the camera is measured using a built-in light meter or exposure meter. Taken through the lens (called &quot; metering&quot;), these readings are taken using a panel of light-sensitive semiconductors. They are used to calculate optimal exposure settings. These settings are typically determined automatically as the reading is used by the camera&#x27;s microprocessor. The reading from the light meter is incorporated with aperture settings, exposure times, and film or sensor sensitivity to calculate the optimal exposure.

Light meters typically average the light in a scene to 18% middle gray. More advanced cameras are more nuanced in their metering—weighing the center of the frame more heavily (center-weighted metering), considering the differences in light across the image (matrix metering), or allowing the photographer to take a light reading at a specific point within the image (spot metering).

=== Lens ===

A camera lens is an assembly of multiple optical elements, typically made from high-quality glass. Its primary function is to focus light onto a camera&#x27;s film or digital sensor, thereby producing an image. This process significantly influences image quality, the overall appearance of the photo, and which parts of the scene are brought into focus.

A camera lens is constructed from a series of lens elements, small pieces of glass arranged to form an image accurately on the light-sensitive surface. Each element is designed to reduce optical aberrations, or distortions, such as chromatic aberration (a failure of the lens to focus all colors at the same point), vignetting (darkening of image corners), and distortion (bending or warping of the image). The degree of these distortions can vary depending on the subject of the photo.

The focal length of the lens, measured in millimeters, plays a critical role as it determines how much of the scene the camera can capture and how large the objects appear. Wide-angle lenses provide a broad view of the scene, while telephoto lenses capture a narrower view but magnify the objects. The focal length also influences the ease of taking clear pictures handheld, with longer lengths making it more challenging to avoid blur from small camera movements.

Two primary types of lenses include zoom and prime lenses. A zoom lens allows for changing its focal length within a certain range, providing the convenience of adjusting the scene capture without moving the camera or changing the lens. A prime lens, in contrast, has a fixed focal length. While less flexible, prime lenses often provide superior image quality, are typically lighter, and perform better in low light.

Focus involves adjusting the lens elements to sharpen the image of the subject at various distances. The focus is adjusted through the focus ring on the lens, which moves the lens elements closer or further from the sensor. Autofocus is a feature included in many lenses, which uses a motor within the lens to adjust the focus quickly and precisely based on the lens&#x27;s detection of contrast or phase differences. This feature can be enabled or disabled using switches on the lens body.

Advanced lenses may include mechanical image stabilization systems that move lens elements or the image sensor itself to counteract camera shake, especially beneficial in low-light conditions or at slow shutter speeds. Lens hoods, filters, and caps are accessories used alongside a lens to enhance image quality, protect the lens, or achieve specific effects.

=== Viewfinder ===
The camera&#x27;s viewfinder provides a real-time approximation of what will be captured by the sensor or film. It assists photographers in aligning, focusing, and adjusting the composition, lighting, and exposure of their shots, enhancing the accuracy of the final image.

Viewfinders fall into two primary categories: optical and electronic. Optical viewfinders, commonly found in Single-Lens Reflex (SLR) cameras, use a system of mirrors or prisms to reflect light from the lens to the viewfinder, providing a clear, real-time view of the scene. Electronic viewfinders, typical in mirrorless cameras, project an electronic image onto a small display, offering a wider range of information such as live exposure previews and histograms, albeit at the cost of potential lag and higher battery consumption. Specialized viewfinder systems exist for specific applications, like subminiature cameras for spying or underwater photography.

Parallax error, resulting from misalignment between the viewfinder and lens axes, can cause inaccurate representations of the subject&#x27;s position. While negligible with distant subjects, this error becomes prominent with closer ones. Some viewfinders incorporate parallax-compensating devices to mitigate that issue.

=== Film and sensor ===
Image capture in a camera occurs when light strikes a light-sensitive surface: photographic film or a digital sensor. Housed within the camera body, the film or sensor records the light&#x27;s pattern when the shutter is briefly opened to allow light to pass during the exposure.

Loading film into a film camera is a manual process. The film, typically housed in a cartridge, is loaded into a designated slot in the camera. One end of the film strip, the film leader, is manually threaded onto a take-up spool. Once the back of the camera is closed, the film advance lever or knob is used to ensure the film is correctly placed. The photographer then winds the film, either manually or automatically depending on the camera, to position a blank portion of the film in the path of the light. Each time a photo is taken, the film advance mechanism moves the exposed film out of the way, bringing a new, unexposed section of film into position for the next shot.

The film must be advanced after each shot to prevent double exposure — where the same section of film is exposed to light twice, resulting in overlapped images. Once all frames on the film roll have been exposed, the film is rewound back into the cartridge, ready to be removed from the camera for developing.

In digital cameras, sensors typically comprise Charge-Coupled Devices (CCDs) or Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (CMOS) chips, both of which convert incoming light into electrical charges to form digital images. CCD sensors, though power-intensive, are recognized for their excellent light sensitivity and image quality. Conversely, CMOS sensors offer individual pixel readouts, leading to less power consumption and faster frame rates, with their image quality having improved significantly over time.

Digital cameras convert light into electronic data that can be directly processed and stored. The volume of data generated is dictated by the sensor&#x27;s size and properties, necessitating storage media such as Compact Flash, Memory Sticks, and SD (Secure Digital) cards. Modern digital cameras typically feature a built-in monitor for immediate image review and adjustments. Digital images are also more readily handled and manipulated by computers, offering a significant advantage in terms of flexibility and post-processing potential over traditional film.

=== Camera accessories ===
==== Flash ====
A flash provides a short burst of bright light during exposure and is a commonly used artificial light source in photography. Most modern flash systems use a battery-powered high-voltage discharge through a gas-filled tube to generate bright light for a very short time (1/1,000 of a second or less).

Many flash units measure the light reflected from the flash to help determine the appropriate duration of the flash. When the flash is attached directly to the camera—typically in a slot at the top of the camera (the flash shoe or hot shoe) or through a cable—activating the shutter on the camera triggers the flash, and the camera&#x27;s internal light meter can help determine the duration of the flash.

Additional flash equipment can include a light diffuser, mount and stand, reflector, soft box, trigger and cord.

==== Other accessories ====
Accessories for cameras are mainly used for care, protection, special effects, and functions.
* Lens hood: used on the end of a lens to block the sun or other light source to prevent glare and lens flare (see also matte box).
* Lens cap: covers and protects the camera lens when not in use.
* Lens adapter: allows the use of lenses other than those for which the camera was designed.
* Filter: allows artificial colors or changes light density.
* Lens extension tube: allows close focus in macro photography.
* Care and protection: including camera case and cover, maintenance tools, and screen protector.
* Camera monitor: provides an off-camera view of the composition with a brighter and more colorful screen, and typically exposes more advanced tools such as framing guides, focus peaking, zebra stripes, waveform monitors (oftentimes as an &quot;RGB parade&quot;), vectorscopes and false color to highlight areas of the image critical to the photographer.
* Tripod: primarily used for keeping the camera steady while recording video, doing a long exposure, and time-lapse photography.
* Microscope adapter: used to connect a camera to a microscope to photograph what the microscope is examining.
* Cable release: used to remotely control the shutter using a remote shutter button that can be connected to the camera via a cable. It can be used to lock the shutter open for the desired period, and it is also commonly used to prevent the camera shake from pressing the built-in camera shutter button.
* Dew shield: prevents moisture build-up on the lens.
* UV filter: can protect the front element of a lens from scratches, cracks, smudges, dirt, dust, and moisture while keeping a minimum impact on image quality.
* Battery and sometimes a charger.
Large format cameras use special equipment that includes a magnifier loupe, view finder, angle finder, and focusing rail/truck. Some professional SLRs can be provided with interchangeable finders for eye-level or waist-level focusing, focusing screens, eyecup, data backs, motor-drives for film transportation or external battery packs.

== Primary types ==
=== Single-lens reflex (SLR) camera ===

In photography, the single-lens reflex camera (SLR) is provided with a mirror to redirect light from the lens to the viewfinder prior to releasing the shutter for composing and focusing an image. When the shutter is released, the mirror swings up and away, allowing the exposure of the photographic medium, and instantly returns after the exposure is finished. No SLR camera before 1954 had this feature, although the mirror on some early SLR cameras was entirely operated by the force exerted on the shutter release and only returned when the finger pressure was released. The Asahiflex II, released by Japanese company Asahi (Pentax) in 1954, was the world&#x27;s first SLR camera with an instant return mirror.

In the single-lens reflex camera, the photographer sees the scene through the camera lens. This avoids the problem of parallax which occurs when the viewfinder or viewing lens is separated from the taking lens. Single-lens reflex cameras have been made in several formats including sheet film 5x7&quot; and 4x5&quot;, roll film 220/120 taking 8,10, 12, or 16 photographs on a 120 roll, and twice that number of a 220 film. These correspond to 6x9, 6x7, 6x6, and 6x4.5 respectively (all dimensions in cm). Notable manufacturers of large format and roll film SLR cameras include Bronica, Graflex, Hasselblad, Seagull, Mamiya and Pentax. However, the most common format of SLR cameras has been 35 mm and subsequently the migration to digital SLR cameras, using almost identical sized bodies and sometimes using the same lens systems.

Almost all SLR cameras use a front-surfaced mirror in the optical path to direct the light from the lens via a viewing screen and pentaprism to the eyepiece. At the time of exposure, the mirror is flipped up out of the light path before the shutter opens. Some early cameras experimented with other methods of providing through-the-lens viewing, including the use of a semi-transparent pellicle as in the Canon Pellix and others with a small periscope such as in the Corfield Periflex series.

=== Large-format camera ===
The large-format camera, taking sheet film, is a direct successor of the early plate cameras and remained in use for high-quality photography and technical, architectural, and industrial photography. There are three common types: the view camera, with its monorail and field camera variants, and the press camera. They have extensible bellows with the lens and shutter mounted on a lens plate at the front. Backs taking roll film and later digital backs are available in addition to the standard dark slide back. These cameras have a wide range of movements allowing very close control of focus and perspective. Composition and focusing are done on view cameras by viewing a ground-glass screen which is replaced by the film to make the exposure; they are suitable for static subjects only and are slow to use.

==== Plate camera ====
The earliest cameras produced in significant numbers were &quot;plate cameras&quot;, using sensitized glass plates. Light entered a lens mounted on a lens board which was separated from the plate by extendible bellows. There were simple box cameras for glass plates but also single-lens reflex cameras with interchangeable lenses and even for color photography (Autochrome Lumière). Many of these cameras had controls to raise, lower, and tilt the lens forwards or backward to control perspective.

Focusing of these plate cameras was by the use of a ground glass screen at the point of focus. Because lens design only allowed rather small aperture lenses, the image on the ground glass screen was faint and most photographers had a dark cloth to cover their heads to allow focusing and composition to be carried out more quickly. When focus and composition were satisfactory, the ground glass screen was removed, and a sensitized plate was put in its place protected by a dark slide. To make the exposure, the dark decline was carefully slid out and the shutter opened, and then closed and the dark fall replaced.

Glass plates were later replaced by sheet film in a dark slide for sheet film; adapter sleeves were made to allow sheet film to be used in plate holders. In addition to the ground glass, a simple optical viewfinder was often fitted.

=== Medium-format camera ===
Medium-format cameras have a film size between the large-format cameras and smaller 35 mm cameras. Typically these systems use 120 or 220 roll film. The most common image sizes are 6×4.5 cm, 6×6 cm and 6×7 cm; the older 6×9 cm is rarely used. The designs of this kind of camera show greater variation than their larger brethren, ranging from monorail systems through the classic Hasselblad model with separate backs, to smaller rangefinder cameras. There are even compact amateur cameras available in this format.
==== Twin-lens reflex camera ====


Twin-lens reflex cameras used a pair of nearly identical lenses: one to form the image and one as a viewfinder. The lenses were arranged with the viewing lens immediately above the taking lens. The viewing lens projects an image onto a viewing screen which can be seen from above. Some manufacturers such as Mamiya also provided a reflex head to attach to the viewing screen to allow the camera to be held to the eye when in use. The advantage of a TLR was that it could be easily focused using the viewing screen and that under most circumstances the view seen on the viewing screen was identical to that recorded on film. At close distances, however, parallax errors were encountered, and some cameras also included an indicator to show what part of the composition would be excluded.

Some TLRs had interchangeable lenses, but as these had to be paired lenses, they were relatively heavy and did not provide the range of focal lengths that the SLR could support. Most TLRs used 120 or 220 films; some used the smaller 127 films.

=== Compact cameras ===
==== Instant camera ====
After exposure, every photograph is taken through pinch rollers inside the instant camera. Thereby the developer paste contained in the paper &#x27;sandwich&#x27; is distributed on the image. After a minute, the cover sheet just needs to be removed and one gets a single original positive image with a fixed format. With some systems, it was also possible to create an instant image negative, from which then could be made copies in the photo lab. The ultimate development was the SX-70 system of Polaroid, in which a row of ten shots – engine driven – could be made without having to remove any cover sheets from the picture. There were instant cameras for a variety of formats, as well as adapters for instant film use in medium- and large-format cameras.

==== Subminiature camera ====
Subminiature cameras were first produced in the twentieth century and use film significantly smaller than 35mm. The expensive 8×11mm Minox, the only type of camera produced by the company from 1937 to 1976, became very widely known and was often used for espionage (the Minox company later also produced larger cameras). Later inexpensive subminiatures were made for general use, some using rewound 16 mm cine film. Image quality with these small film sizes was limited.

==== Folding camera ====
The introduction of films enabled the existing designs for plate cameras to be made much smaller and for the baseplate to be hinged so that it could be folded up, compressing the bellows. These designs were very compact and small models were dubbed &quot;vest pocket&quot; cameras. One of the smallest and best-selling cameras was the Vest Pocket Kodak, sold in two generations between 1912 and 1934. Folding roll film cameras were preceded by folding plate cameras, more compact than other designs.

==== Box camera ====


Box cameras were introduced as budget-level cameras and had few if any controls. The original box Brownie models had a small reflex viewfinder mounted on the top of the camera and had no aperture or focusing controls and just a simple shutter. Later models such as the Brownie 127 had larger direct view optical viewfinders together with a curved film path to reduce the impact of deficiencies in the lens.

=== Rangefinder camera ===


As camera lens technology developed and wide aperture lenses became more common, rangefinder cameras were introduced to make focusing more precise. Early rangefinders had two separate viewfinder windows, one of which is linked to the focusing mechanisms and moved right or left as the focusing ring is turned. The two separate images are brought together on a ground glass viewing screen. When vertical lines in the object being photographed meet exactly in the combined image, the object is in focus. A normal composition viewfinder is also provided. Later the viewfinder and rangefinder were combined. Many rangefinder cameras had interchangeable lenses, each lens requiring its range- and viewfinder linkages.

Rangefinder cameras were produced in half- and full-frame 35 mm and roll film (medium format).

=== Motion picture cameras ===

A movie camera or a video camera operates similarly to a still camera, except it records a series of static images in rapid succession, commonly at a rate of 24 frames per second. When the images are combined and displayed in order, the illusion of motion is achieved.

Cameras that capture many images in sequence are known as movie cameras or as cine cameras in Europe; those designed for single images are still cameras. However, these categories overlap as still cameras are often used to capture moving images in special effects work and many modern cameras can quickly switch between still and motion recording modes.

A ciné camera or movie camera takes a rapid sequence of photographs on an image sensor or strips of film. In contrast to a still camera, which captures a single snapshot at a time, the ciné camera takes a series of images, each called a &quot;frame&quot;, through the use of an intermittent mechanism.

The frames are later played back in a ciné projector at a specific speed, called the &quot;frame rate&quot; (number of frames per second). While viewing, a person&#x27;s visual system merges the separate pictures to create the illusion of motion. The first ciné camera was built around 1888 and by 1890 several types were being manufactured. The standard film size for ciné cameras was quickly established as 35mm film and this remained in use until the transition to digital cinematography. Other professional standard formats include 70 mm film and 16 mm film whilst amateur filmmakers used 9.5 mm film, 8 mm film, or Standard 8 and Super 8 before the move into digital format.

The size and complexity of ciné cameras vary greatly depending on the uses required of the camera. Some professional equipment is very large and too heavy to be handheld whilst some amateur cameras were designed to be very small and light for single-handed operation.

==== Professional video camera ====


A professional video camera (often called a &quot;television camera&quot; even though the use has spread beyond television) is a high-end device for creating electronic moving images (as opposed to a movie camera, that earlier recorded the images on film). Originally developed for use in television studios, they are now also used for music videos, direct-to-video movies, corporate and educational videos, marriage videos, etc.

These cameras earlier used vacuum tubes and later electronic image sensors.

==== Camcorders ====

A camcorder is an electronic device combining a video camera and a video recorder. Although marketing materials may use the colloquial term &quot;camcorder&quot;, the name on the package and manual is often &quot;video camera recorder&quot;. Most devices capable of recording video are camera phones and digital cameras primarily intended for still pictures; the term &quot;camcorder&quot; is used to describe a portable, self-contained device, with video capture and recording its primary function.

=== Digital camera ===

A digital camera (or digicam) is a camera that encodes digital images and videos and stores them for later reproduction. They typically use semiconductor image sensors. Most cameras sold today are digital, and they are incorporated into many devices ranging from mobile phones (called camera phones) to vehicles.

Digital and film cameras share an optical system, typically using a lens of variable aperture to focus light onto an image pickup device. The aperture and shutter admit the correct amount of light to the imager, just as with film but the image pickup device is electronic rather than chemical. However, unlike film cameras, digital cameras can display images on a screen immediately after being captured or recorded, and store and delete images from memory. Most digital cameras can also record moving videos with sound. Some digital cameras can crop and stitch pictures &amp; perform other elementary image editing.

Consumers adopted digital cameras in the 1990s. Professional video cameras transitioned to digital around the 2000s–2010s. Finally, movie cameras transitioned to digital in the 2010s.

The first camera using digital electronics to capture and store images was developed by Kodak engineer Steven Sasson in 1975. He used a charge-coupled device (CCD) provided by Fairchild Semiconductor, which provided only 0.01 megapixels to capture images. Sasson combined the CCD device with movie camera parts to create a digital camera that saved black and white images onto a cassette tape.The images were then read from the cassette and viewed on a TV monitor. Later, cassette tapes were replaced by flash memory.

In 1986, Japanese company Nikon introduced an analog-recording electronic single-lens reflex camera, the Nikon SVC.

The first full-frame digital SLR cameras were developed in Japan from around 2000 to 2002: the MZ-D by Pentax, the N Digital by Contax&#x27;s Japanese R6D team, and the EOS-1Ds by Canon. Gradually in the 2000s, the full-frame DSLR became the dominant camera type for professional photography.

On most digital cameras a display, often a liquid crystal display (LCD), permits the user to view the scene to be recorded and settings such as ISO speed, exposure, and shutter speed.

==== Camera phone ====


In 2000, Sharp introduced the world&#x27;s first digital camera phone, the J-SH04 J-Phone, in Japan. By the mid-2000s, higher-end cell phones had an integrated digital camera, and by the beginning of the 2010s, almost all smartphones had an integrated digital camera.

== See also ==

* Camera matrix
* History of the camera
* List of camera types
* List of digital camera brands
== Footnotes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==

* How cameras works at How stuff works.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15328" start="2" end="8" title="Camera" label="camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q209121" start="106" end="118" title="image sensor" label="image sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293" start="173" end="190" title="photographic film" label="photographic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q196353" start="1003" end="1035" title="Single-lens reflex camera" label="Single-lens reflex (SLR) cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189460" start="1087" end="1099" title="Large format" label="Large-format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146074" start="1104" end="1117" title="Medium format" label="medium-format"/>
<link wikidata="Q209892" start="1315" end="1334" title="Rangefinder camera" label="Rangefinder cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q335095" start="1429" end="1451" title="Movie camera" label="Motion picture cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q62927" start="1505" end="1520" title="Digital camera" label="digital cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q210820" start="1664" end="1681" title="Camera phone" label="smartphone camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q183998" start="1978" end="1992" title="camera obscura" label="camera obscura"/>
<link wikidata="Q933545" start="2124" end="2139" title="Thomas Wedgwood (photographer)" label="Thomas Wedgwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q188342" start="2141" end="2157" title="Nicéphore Niépce" label="Nicéphore Niépce"/>
<link wikidata="Q299565" start="2163" end="2179" title="Henry Fox Talbot" label="Henry Fox Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q179744" start="2410" end="2423" title="daguerreotype" label="daguerreotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q355472" start="2696" end="2706" title="Dry-plate photography" label="dry plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599148" start="2711" end="2720" title="Roll film" label="roll-film"/>
<link wikidata="Q161833" start="3334" end="3339" title="Leica Camera" label="Leica"/>
<link wikidata="Q694099" start="3355" end="3361" title="Contax" label="Contax"/>
<link wikidata="Q194383" start="3564" end="3569" title="16 mm film" label="16-mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q270183" start="3574" end="3578" title="8 mm film" label="8-mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394062" start="4166" end="4187" title="Polaroid SX-70" label="Polaroid&amp;#x27;s SX-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q55674" start="4192" end="4209" title="Canon AE-1" label="Canon&amp;#x27;s AE-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157334" start="4879" end="4904" title="computational photography" label="computational photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q106239881" start="4984" end="4999" title="High dynamic range" label="HDR photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="5139" end="5161" title="visible spectrum" label="visible light spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="5219" end="5243" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="electromagnetic spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="5253" end="5261" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q768575" start="5342" end="5367" title="converging lens" label="converging or convex lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q190909" start="5627" end="5632" title="focus (optics)" label="focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q349600" start="5647" end="5660" title="shutter speed" label="shutter speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q862169" start="6191" end="6210" title="f-number" label="&amp;quot;f-stops&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q215932" start="6616" end="6630" title="depth of field" label="depth of field"/>
<link wikidata="Q196727" start="6859" end="6878" title="circle of confusion" label="circle of confusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q691823" start="7122" end="7129" title="Shutter (photography)" label="shutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928801" start="7603" end="7622" title="focal-plane shutter" label="focal-plane shutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q62927" start="8267" end="8281" title="digital camera" label="digital camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q349600" start="8714" end="8727" title="shutter speed" label="shutter speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="10114" end="10127" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="10282" end="10296" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q607093" start="10454" end="10465" title="Light meter" label="Light meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q639" start="11394" end="11413" title="Optical aberration" label="optical aberrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087688" start="11439" end="11459" title="chromatic aberration" label="chromatic aberration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136665" start="11523" end="11533" title="vignetting" label="vignetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q186634" start="11568" end="11578" title="Distortion (optics)" label="distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193540" start="11699" end="11711" title="focal length" label="focal length"/>
<link wikidata="Q210008" start="12804" end="12813" title="Autofocus" label="Autofocus"/>
<link wikidata="Q31009" start="13111" end="13130" title="image stabilization" label="image stabilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277847" start="14328" end="14348" title="Subminiature photography" label="subminiature cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q569406" start="14363" end="14385" title="underwater photography" label="underwater photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q906561" start="14388" end="14402" title="Stellar parallax" label="Parallax error"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293" start="14813" end="14830" title="photographic film" label="photographic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276157" start="14836" end="14850" title="digital sensor" label="digital sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561409" start="15749" end="15764" title="Multiple exposure" label="double exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="16054" end="16083" title="Charge-coupled device" label="Charge-Coupled Devices (CCDs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q678615" start="16731" end="16744" title="CompactFlash" label="Compact Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q733906" start="16746" end="16759" title="Memory Stick" label="Memory Sticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q466977" start="16765" end="16790" title="SD card" label="SD (Secure Digital) cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q221836" start="17127" end="17132" title="Flash (photography)" label="flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275430" start="17875" end="17889" title="Diffuser (optics)" label="light diffuser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823582" start="17919" end="17927" title="soft box" label="soft box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163650" start="18072" end="18081" title="Lens hood" label="Lens hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q287333" start="18190" end="18199" title="matte box" label="matte box"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011752" start="18204" end="18212" title="Lens cap" label="Lens cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q19572618" start="18269" end="18281" title="Lens adapter" label="Lens adapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q876650" start="18362" end="18368" title="Photographic filter" label="Filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q245048" start="18423" end="18442" title="Extension tube" label="Lens extension tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q272444" start="18466" end="18483" title="macro photography" label="macro photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850314" start="18584" end="18598" title="Camera monitor" label="Camera monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978605" start="18755" end="18768" title="focus peaking" label="focus peaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067014" start="18770" end="18783" title="zebra patterning" label="zebra stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q488684" start="18785" end="18801" title="waveform monitor" label="waveform monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165575" start="18846" end="18857" title="vectorscope" label="vectorscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q519022" start="18863" end="18874" title="false color" label="false color"/>
<link wikidata="Q683906" start="18939" end="18945" title="Tripod (photography)" label="Tripod"/>
<link wikidata="Q186563" start="19042" end="19052" title="Time-lapse photography" label="time-lapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q929346" start="19179" end="19192" title="Bulb (photography)" label="Cable release"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267999" start="19483" end="19493" title="Dew shield" label="Dew shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118402" start="19537" end="19546" title="UV filter" label="UV filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189460" start="19730" end="19750" title="Large format" label="Large format cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q209906" start="19918" end="19925" title="Viewfinder" label="finders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309339" start="19965" end="19980" title="focusing screen" label="focusing screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214905" start="20003" end="20015" title="Motor drive" label="motor-drives"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="20415" end="20434" title="Photography" label="photographic medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034434" start="20707" end="20719" title="Asahiflex IIB" label="Asahiflex II"/>
<link wikidata="Q503673" start="20750" end="20764" title="Pentax" label="Asahi (Pentax)"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="20962" end="20970" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q191313" start="21421" end="21428" title="Bronica" label="Bronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420855" start="21430" end="21437" title="Graflex" label="Graflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q64545" start="21439" end="21449" title="Hasselblad" label="Hasselblad"/>
<link wikidata="Q963501" start="21451" end="21458" title="Seagull Camera" label="Seagull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778561" start="21460" end="21466" title="Mamiya" label="Mamiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q503673" start="21471" end="21477" title="Pentax" label="Pentax"/>
<link wikidata="Q196342" start="21575" end="21586" title="digital SLR" label="digital SLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q866442" start="21806" end="21816" title="pentaprism" label="pentaprism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105223" start="22062" end="22070" title="Pellicle mirror" label="pellicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033535" start="22081" end="22093" title="Canon Pellix" label="Canon Pellix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170484" start="22143" end="22160" title="Corfield Periflex" label="Corfield Periflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901934" start="22454" end="22462" title="Monorail camera" label="monorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q313672" start="22467" end="22479" title="field camera" label="field camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q313770" start="22498" end="22510" title="press camera" label="press camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599148" start="22618" end="22627" title="roll film" label="roll film"/>
<link wikidata="Q209099" start="22638" end="22650" title="digital back" label="digital back"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226075" start="22873" end="22885" title="ground-glass" label="ground-glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q355674" start="23395" end="23413" title="Autochrome Lumière" label="Autochrome Lumière"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187781" start="23635" end="23646" title="Photographic lens design" label="lens design"/>
<link wikidata="Q33231" start="23746" end="23758" title="photographer" label="photographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223551" start="24006" end="24016" title="dark slide (photography)" label="dark slide"/>
<link wikidata="Q64545" start="24791" end="24801" title="Hasselblad" label="Hasselblad"/>
<link wikidata="Q494389" start="26541" end="26549" title="Polaroid Corporation" label="Polaroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q688121" start="26966" end="26971" title="Minox" label="Minox"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352130" start="27665" end="27682" title="Vest Pocket Kodak" label="Vest Pocket Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q209892" start="28372" end="28390" title="rangefinder camera" label="rangefinder camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q205722" start="28924" end="28944" title="interchangeable lens" label="interchangeable lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q362054" start="29042" end="29047" title="Half-frame" label="half-"/>
<link wikidata="Q335095" start="29135" end="29147" title="movie camera" label="movie camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q313614" start="29153" end="29165" title="video camera" label="video camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q119565" start="29283" end="29287" title="frame rate" label="rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q381243" start="29651" end="29665" title="special effect" label="special effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q508993" start="30245" end="30273" title="persistence of vision" label="merges the separate pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q226528" start="30470" end="30479" title="35mm movie film" label="35mm film"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30597" end="30607" title="70 mm film" label="70 mm film"/>
<link wikidata="Q313625" start="31051" end="31076" title="professional video camera" label="professional video camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745370" start="31299" end="31303" title="filmstock" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q844580" start="31399" end="31414" title="direct-to-video" label="direct-to-video"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670447" start="31507" end="31519" title="Video camera tube" label="vacuum tubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q209121" start="31541" end="31554" title="image sensors" label="image sensors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250322" start="32159" end="32172" title="digital image" label="digital image"/>
<link wikidata="Q210820" start="32389" end="32401" title="camera phone" label="camera phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="32868" end="32874" title="Flash memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="32932" end="32937" title="Sound recording and reproduction" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q785116" start="32964" end="32968" title="Cropping (image)" label="crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364242" start="32973" end="32979" title="Image stitching" label="stitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q545981" start="33020" end="33033" title="image editing" label="image editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092981" start="33324" end="33337" title="Steven Sasson" label="Steven Sasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096013" start="33397" end="33420" title="Fairchild Semiconductor" label="Fairchild Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="33600" end="33613" title="Compact cassette" label="cassette tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218180" start="33766" end="33771" title="Nikon" label="Nikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345091" start="33867" end="33889" title="full-frame digital SLR" label="full-frame digital SLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164925" start="33972" end="33981" title="Contax N Digital" label="N Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q694099" start="33985" end="33991" title="Contax" label="Contax"/>
<link wikidata="Q63950" start="34026" end="34033" title="Canon EOS-1Ds" label="EOS-1Ds"/>
<link wikidata="Q62621" start="34037" end="34042" title="Canon Inc." label="Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="34194" end="34216" title="liquid crystal display" label="liquid crystal display"/>
<link wikidata="Q24613" start="34295" end="34304" title="Film speed" label="ISO speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q53227" start="34370" end="34375" title="Sharp Corporation" label="Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6103778" start="34436" end="34442" title="J-SH04" label="J-SH04"/>
<link wikidata="Q201653" start="34443" end="34450" title="J-Phone" label="J-Phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="34491" end="34502" title="cell phones" label="cell phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="34583" end="34593" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026015" start="34648" end="34661" title="Camera matrix" label="Camera matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870762" start="34664" end="34685" title="History of the camera" label="History of the camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608719" start="34688" end="34708" title="List of camera types" label="List of camera types"/>
<link wikidata="Q12480266" start="34711" end="34740" title="List of digital camera brands" label="List of digital camera brands"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52649" wikidata="Q180623" url="?curid=52649" title="Acetylcholine">
<text>Acetylcholine (ACh) is an organic compound that functions in the brain and body of many types of animals (including humans) as a neurotransmitter. Its name is derived from its chemical structure: it is an ester of acetic acid and choline. Parts in the body that use or are affected by acetylcholine are referred to as cholinergic.

Acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter used at the neuromuscular junction—in other words, it is the chemical that motor neurons of the nervous system release in order to activate muscles. This property means that drugs that affect cholinergic systems can have very dangerous effects ranging from paralysis to convulsions. Acetylcholine is also a neurotransmitter in the autonomic nervous system, both as an internal transmitter for both the sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous system, and as the final product released by the parasympathetic nervous system. Acetylcholine is the primary neurotransmitter of the parasympathetic nervous system.

In the brain, acetylcholine functions as a neurotransmitter and as a neuromodulator. The brain contains a number of cholinergic areas, each with distinct functions; such as playing an important role in arousal, attention, memory and motivation. Acetylcholine has also been found in cells of non-neural origins as well as microbes. Recently, enzymes related to its synthesis, degradation and cellular uptake have been traced back to early origins of unicellular eukaryotes. The protist pathogens &quot;Acanthamoeba&quot; spp. have shown evidence of the presence of ACh, which provides growth and proliferative signals via a membrane-located M1-muscarinic receptor homolog.

Partly because of acetylcholine&#x27;s muscle-activating function, but also because of its functions in the autonomic nervous system and brain, many important drugs exert their effects by altering cholinergic transmission. Numerous venoms and toxins produced by plants, animals, and bacteria, as well as chemical nerve agents such as sarin, cause harm by inactivating or hyperactivating muscles through their influences on the neuromuscular junction. Drugs that act on muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, such as atropine, can be poisonous in large quantities, but in smaller doses they are commonly used to treat certain heart conditions and eye problems. Scopolamine, or diphenhydramine, which also act mainly on muscarinic receptors in an inhibitory fashion in the brain (especially the M1 receptor) can cause delirium, hallucinations, and amnesia through receptor antagonism at these sites. So far as of 2016, only the M1 receptor subtype has been implicated in anticholinergic delirium. The addictive qualities of nicotine are derived from its effects on nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the brain.
==Chemistry==

Acetylcholine is a choline molecule that has been acetylated at the oxygen atom. Because of the charged ammonium group, acetylcholine does not penetrate lipid membranes. Because of this, when the molecule is introduced externally, it remains in the extracellular space and at present it is considered that the molecule does not pass through the blood–brain barrier.

==Biochemistry==

Acetylcholine is synthesized in certain neurons by the enzyme choline acetyltransferase from the compounds choline and acetyl-CoA. Cholinergic neurons are capable of producing ACh. An example of a central cholinergic area is the nucleus basalis of Meynert in the basal forebrain.
The enzyme acetylcholinesterase converts acetylcholine into the inactive metabolites choline and acetate. This enzyme is abundant in the synaptic cleft, and its role in rapidly clearing free acetylcholine from the synapse is essential for proper muscle function. Certain neurotoxins work by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase, thus leading to excess acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction, causing paralysis of the muscles needed for breathing and stopping the beating of the heart.

==Functions==
Acetylcholine functions in both the central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS). In the CNS, cholinergic projections from the basal forebrain to the cerebral cortex and hippocampus support the cognitive functions of those target areas. In the PNS, acetylcholine activates muscles and is a major neurotransmitter in the autonomic nervous system.

===Cellular effects===

Like many other biologically active substances, acetylcholine exerts its effects by binding to and activating receptors located on the surface of cells. There are two main classes of acetylcholine receptor, nicotinic and muscarinic. They are named for chemicals that can selectively activate each type of receptor without activating the other: muscarine is a compound found in the mushroom &quot;Amanita muscaria&quot;; nicotine is found in tobacco.

Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors are ligand-gated ion channels permeable to sodium, potassium, and calcium ions. In other words, they are ion channels embedded in cell membranes, capable of switching from a closed to an open state when acetylcholine binds to them; in the open state they allow ions to pass through. Nicotinic receptors come in two main types, known as muscle-type and neuronal-type. The muscle-type can be selectively blocked by curare, the neuronal-type by hexamethonium. The main location of muscle-type receptors is on muscle cells, as described in more detail below. Neuronal-type receptors are located in autonomic ganglia (both sympathetic and parasympathetic), and in the central nervous system.

Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors have a more complex mechanism, and affect target cells over a longer time frame. In mammals, five subtypes of muscarinic receptors have been identified, labeled M1 through M5. All of them function as G protein-coupled receptors, meaning that they exert their effects via a second messenger system. The M1, M3, and M5 subtypes are Gq-coupled; they increase intracellular levels of IP3 and calcium by activating phospholipase C. Their effect on target cells is usually excitatory. The M2 and M4 subtypes are Gi/Go-coupled; they decrease intracellular levels of cAMP by inhibiting adenylate cyclase. Their effect on target cells is usually inhibitory. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors are found in both the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system of the heart, lungs, upper gastrointestinal tract, and sweat glands.

===Neuromuscular junction===
Acetylcholine is the substance the nervous system uses to activate skeletal muscles, a kind of striated muscle. These are the muscles used for all types of voluntary movement, in contrast to smooth muscle tissue, which is involved in a range of involuntary activities such as movement of food through the gastrointestinal tract and constriction of blood vessels. Skeletal muscles are directly controlled by motor neurons located in the spinal cord or, in a few cases, the brainstem. These motor neurons send their axons through motor nerves, from which they emerge to connect to muscle fibers at a special type of synapse called the neuromuscular junction.

When a motor neuron generates an action potential, it travels rapidly along the nerve until it reaches the neuromuscular junction, where it initiates an electrochemical process that causes acetylcholine to be released into the space between the presynaptic terminal and the muscle fiber. The acetylcholine molecules then bind to nicotinic ion-channel receptors on the muscle cell membrane, causing the ion channels to open. Sodium ions then flow into the muscle cell, initiating a sequence of steps that finally produce muscle contraction.

Factors that decrease release of acetylcholine (and thereby affecting P-type calcium channels):

# Antibiotics (clindamycin, polymyxin)
# Magnesium: antagonizes P-type calcium channels
# Hypocalcemia
# Anticonvulsants
# Diuretics (furosemide)
# Eaton-Lambert syndrome: inhibits P-type calcium channels
# Myasthenia gravis
# Botulinum toxin: inhibits SNARE proteins

Calcium channel blockers (nifedipine, diltiazem) do not affect P-channels. These drugs affect L-type calcium channels.

===Autonomic nervous system===
The autonomic nervous system controls a wide range of involuntary and unconscious body functions. Its main branches are the sympathetic nervous system and parasympathetic nervous system. Broadly speaking, the function of the sympathetic nervous system is to mobilize the body for action; the phrase often invoked to describe it is fight-or-flight. The function of the parasympathetic nervous system is to put the body in a state conducive to rest, regeneration, digestion, and reproduction; the phrase often invoked to describe it is &quot;rest and digest&quot; or &quot;feed and breed&quot;. Both of these aforementioned systems use acetylcholine, but in different ways.

At a schematic level, the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems are both organized in essentially the same way: preganglionic neurons in the central nervous system send projections to neurons located in autonomic ganglia, which send output projections to virtually every tissue of the body. In both branches the internal connections, the projections from the central nervous system to the autonomic ganglia, use acetylcholine as a neurotransmitter to innervate (or excite) ganglia neurons. In the parasympathetic nervous system the output connections, the projections from ganglion neurons to tissues that do not belong to the nervous system, also release acetylcholine but act on muscarinic receptors. In the sympathetic nervous system the output connections mainly release noradrenaline, although acetylcholine is released at a few points, such as the sudomotor innervation of the sweat glands.

==== Direct vascular effects ====
Acetylcholine in the serum exerts a direct effect on vascular tone by binding to muscarinic receptors present on vascular endothelium. These cells respond by increasing production of nitric oxide, which signals the surrounding smooth muscle to relax, leading to vasodilation.

===Central nervous system===

In the central nervous system, ACh has a variety of effects on plasticity, arousal and reward. ACh has an important role in the enhancement of alertness when we wake up, in sustaining attention and in learning and memory.

Damage to the cholinergic (acetylcholine-producing) system in the brain has been shown to be associated with the memory deficits associated with Alzheimer&#x27;s disease. ACh has also been shown to promote REM sleep.

In the brainstem acetylcholine originates from the Pedunculopontine nucleus and laterodorsal tegmental nucleus collectively known as the mesopontine tegmentum area or pontomesencephalotegmental complex. In the basal forebrain, it originates from the basal nucleus of Meynert and medial septal nucleus:
* The &quot;pontomesencephalotegmental complex&quot; acts mainly on M1 receptors in the brainstem, deep cerebellar nuclei, pontine nuclei, locus coeruleus, raphe nucleus, lateral reticular nucleus and inferior olive. It also projects to the thalamus, tectum, basal ganglia and basal forebrain.
* Basal nucleus of Meynert acts mainly on M1 receptors in the neocortex.
* Medial septal nucleus acts mainly on M1 receptors in the hippocampus and parts of the cerebral cortex.

In addition, ACh acts as an important internal transmitter in the striatum, which is part of the basal ganglia. It is released by cholinergic interneurons. In humans, non-human primates and rodents, these interneurons respond to salient environmental stimuli with responses that are temporally aligned with the responses of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra.

====Memory====
Acetylcholine has been implicated in learning and memory in several ways. The anticholinergic drug scopolamine impairs acquisition of new information in humans and animals. In animals, disruption of the supply of acetylcholine to the neocortex impairs the learning of simple discrimination tasks, comparable to the acquisition of factual information and disruption of the supply of acetylcholine to the hippocampus and adjacent cortical areas produces forgetfulness, comparable to anterograde amnesia in humans.

==Diseases and disorders==

===Myasthenia gravis===

The disease myasthenia gravis, characterized by muscle weakness and fatigue, occurs when the body inappropriately produces antibodies against acetylcholine nicotinic receptors, and thus inhibits proper acetylcholine signal transmission. Over time, the motor end plate is destroyed. Drugs that competitively inhibit acetylcholinesterase (e.g., neostigmine, physostigmine, or primarily pyridostigmine) are effective in treating the symptoms of this disorder. They allow endogenously released acetylcholine more time to interact with its respective receptor before being inactivated by acetylcholinesterase in the synaptic cleft (the space between nerve and muscle).

==Pharmacology==

Blocking, hindering or mimicking the action of acetylcholine has many uses in medicine. Drugs acting on the acetylcholine system are either agonists to the receptors, stimulating the system, or antagonists, inhibiting it. Acetylcholine receptor agonists and antagonists can either have an effect directly on the receptors or exert their effects indirectly, e.g., by affecting the enzyme acetylcholinesterase, which degrades the receptor ligand. Agonists increase the level of receptor activation; antagonists reduce it.

Acetylcholine itself does not have therapeutic value as a drug for intravenous administration because of its multi-faceted action (non-selective) and rapid inactivation by cholinesterase. However, it is used in the form of eye drops to cause constriction of the pupil during cataract surgery, which facilitates quick post-operational recovery.

===Nicotinic receptors===

Nicotine binds to and activates nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, mimicking the effect of acetylcholine at these receptors. ACh opens a Na+ channel upon binding so that Na+ flows into the cell. This causes a depolarization, and results in an excitatory post-synaptic potential. Thus, ACh is excitatory on skeletal muscle; the electrical response is fast and short-lived. Curares are arrow poisons, which act at nicotinic receptors and have been used to develop clinically useful therapies.

===Muscarinic receptors===

Muscarinic receptors form G protein-coupled receptor complexes in the cell membranes of neurons and other cells. Atropine is a non-selective competitive antagonist with Acetylcholine at muscarinic receptors.

===Cholinesterase inhibitors===

Many ACh receptor agonists work indirectly by inhibiting the enzyme acetylcholinesterase. The resulting accumulation of acetylcholine causes continuous stimulation of the muscles, glands, and central nervous system, which can result in fatal convulsions if the dose is high.

They are examples of enzyme inhibitors, and increase the action of acetylcholine by delaying its degradation; some have been used as nerve agents (Sarin and VX nerve gas) or pesticides (organophosphates and the carbamates). Many toxins and venoms produced by plants and animals also contain cholinesterase inhibitors. In clinical use, they are administered in low doses to reverse the action of muscle relaxants, to treat myasthenia gravis, and to treat symptoms of Alzheimer&#x27;s disease (rivastigmine, which increases cholinergic activity in the brain).

===Synthesis inhibitors===
Organic mercurial compounds, such as methylmercury, have a high affinity for sulfhydryl groups, which causes dysfunction of the enzyme choline acetyltransferase. This inhibition may lead to acetylcholine deficiency, and can have consequences on motor function.

===Release inhibitors===
Botulinum toxin (Botox) acts by suppressing the release of acetylcholine, whereas the venom from a black widow spider (alpha-latrotoxin) has the reverse effect. ACh inhibition causes paralysis. When bitten by a black widow spider, one experiences the wastage of ACh supplies and the muscles begin to contract. If and when the supply is depleted, paralysis occurs.

== Comparative biology and evolution ==

Acetylcholine is used by organisms in all domains of life for a variety of purposes. It is believed that choline, a precursor to acetylcholine, was used by single celled organisms billions of years ago for synthesizing cell membrane phospholipids. Following the evolution of choline transporters, the abundance of intracellular choline paved the way for choline to become incorporated into other synthetic pathways, including acetylcholine production. Acetylcholine is used by bacteria, fungi, and a variety of other animals. Many of the uses of acetylcholine rely on its action on ion channels via GPCRs like membrane proteins.

The two major types of acetylcholine receptors, muscarinic and nicotinic receptors, have convergently evolved to be responsive to acetylcholine. This means that rather than having evolved from a common homolog, these receptors evolved from separate receptor families. It is estimated that the nicotinic receptor family dates back longer than 2.5 billion years. Likewise, muscarinic receptors are thought to have diverged from other GPCRs at least 0.5 billion years ago. Both of these receptor groups have evolved numerous subtypes with unique ligand affinities and signaling mechanisms. The diversity of the receptor types enables acetylcholine to create varying responses depending on which receptor types are activated, and allow for acetylcholine to dynamically regulate physiological processes. ACh receptors are related to 5-HT3 (serotonin), GABA, and Glycine receptors, both in sequence and structure, strongly suggesting that they have a common evolutionary origin.

==History==
In 1867, Adolf von Baeyer resolved the structures of choline and acetylcholine and synthesized them both, referring to the latter as &quot;acetylneurin&quot; in the study. Choline is a precursor for acetylcholine. Acetylcholine was first noted to be biologically active in 1906, when Reid Hunt (1870–1948) and René de M. Taveau found that it decreased blood pressure in exceptionally tiny doses. This was after Frederick Walker Mott and William Dobinson Halliburton noted in 1899 that choline injections decreased the blood pressure of animals.

In 1914, Arthur J. Ewins was the first to extract acetylcholine from nature. He identified it as the blood pressure-decreasing contaminant from some &quot;Claviceps purpurea&quot; ergot extracts, by the request of Henry Hallett Dale. Later in 1914, Dale outlined the effects of acetylcholine at various types of peripheral synapses and also noted that it lowered the blood pressure of cats via subcutaneous injections even at doses of one nanogram.

The concept of neurotransmitters was unknown until 1921, when Otto Loewi noted that the vagus nerve secreted a substance that inhibited the heart muscle whilst working as a professor in the University of Graz. He named it &quot;vagusstoff&quot; (&quot;vagus substance&quot;), noted it to be a structural analog of choline and suspected it to be acetylcholine. In 1926, Loewi and E. Navratil deduced that the compound is probably acetylcholine, as vagusstoff and synthetic acetylcholine lost their activity in a similar manner when in contact with tissue lysates that contained acetylcholine-degrading enzymes (now known to be cholinesterases). This conclusion was accepted widely. Later studies confirmed the function of acetylcholine as a neurotransmitter.

In 1936, H. H. Dale and O. Loewi shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their studies of acetylcholine and nerve impulses.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* as PDF
* as PDF
==External links==

* Warning over combining common medicines for elderly</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q180623" start="0" end="13" title="Acetylcholine" label="Acetylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180623" start="15" end="18" title="Acetylcholine" label="ACh"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="26" end="42" title="organic compound" label="organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="129" end="145" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="205" end="210" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="214" end="225" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q193166" start="230" end="237" title="choline" label="choline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862743" start="318" end="329" title="cholinergic" label="cholinergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q776995" start="382" end="404" title="neuromuscular junction" label="neuromuscular junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133903" start="445" end="457" title="motor neuron" label="motor neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="627" end="636" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q852376" start="640" end="650" title="convulsion" label="convulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="701" end="725" title="autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q187215" start="772" end="783" title="sympathetic nervous system" label="sympathetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185589" start="792" end="822" title="parasympathetic nervous system" label="parasympathetic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="1026" end="1042" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q905905" start="1052" end="1066" title="neuromodulator" label="neuromodulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q379784" start="1185" end="1192" title="arousal" label="arousal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501338" start="1194" end="1203" title="attention" label="attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="1205" end="1211" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q644302" start="1216" end="1226" title="motivation" label="motivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152218" start="1484" end="1496" title="Acanthamoeba" label="Acanthamoeba"/>
<link wikidata="Q184651" start="1899" end="1904" title="toxin" label="toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612896" start="1969" end="1980" title="nerve agent" label="nerve agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q187695" start="1990" end="1995" title="sarin" label="sarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q410959" start="2125" end="2158" title="muscarinic acetylcholine receptor" label="muscarinic acetylcholine receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q26272" start="2169" end="2177" title="atropine" label="atropine"/>
<link wikidata="Q337188" start="2313" end="2324" title="Hyoscine hydrobromide" label="Scopolamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q413486" start="2329" end="2344" title="diphenhydramine" label="diphenhydramine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17861926" start="2446" end="2448" title="Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M1" label="M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q160796" start="2469" end="2477" title="delirium" label="delirium"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="2479" end="2492" title="hallucination" label="hallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072" start="2499" end="2506" title="amnesia" label="amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q410943" start="2515" end="2534" title="receptor antagonism" label="receptor antagonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="2675" end="2683" title="nicotine" label="nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q412256" start="2716" end="2748" title="nicotinic acetylcholine receptor" label="nicotinic acetylcholine receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q193166" start="2798" end="2805" title="choline" label="choline"/>
<link wikidata="Q796604" start="2829" end="2839" title="Acetylation" label="acetylated"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="2847" end="2853" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q190901" start="2883" end="2891" title="ammonium" label="ammonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="3204" end="3210" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="3219" end="3225" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q14863671" start="3226" end="3251" title="choline acetyltransferase" label="choline acetyltransferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q193166" start="3271" end="3278" title="choline" label="choline"/>
<link wikidata="Q715317" start="3283" end="3293" title="acetyl-CoA" label="acetyl-CoA"/>
<link wikidata="Q22676679" start="3455" end="3475" title="acetylcholinesterase" label="acetylcholinesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q407595" start="3517" end="3528" title="metabolites" label="metabolites"/>
<link wikidata="Q193166" start="3529" end="3536" title="choline" label="choline"/>
<link wikidata="Q212527" start="3541" end="3548" title="acetate" label="acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407752" start="3715" end="3726" title="neurotoxins" label="neurotoxins"/>
<link wikidata="Q776995" start="3812" end="3834" title="neuromuscular junction" label="neuromuscular junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="3980" end="4002" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q169953" start="4017" end="4042" title="peripheral nervous system" label="peripheral nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407681" start="4095" end="4110" title="basal forebrain" label="basal forebrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="4118" end="4133" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q48360" start="4138" end="4149" title="hippocampus" label="hippocampus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="4162" end="4171" title="Cognition" label="cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q208467" start="4449" end="4458" title="receptor (biochemistry)" label="receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q412256" start="4546" end="4555" title="nicotinic acetylcholine receptor" label="nicotinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q410959" start="4560" end="4570" title="muscarinic acetylcholine receptor" label="muscarinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q407952" start="4683" end="4692" title="muscarine" label="muscarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131227" start="4735" end="4751" title="Amanita muscaria" label="Amanita muscaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="4759" end="4767" title="nicotine" label="nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q412256" start="4790" end="4822" title="Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor" label="Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q418536" start="4828" end="4852" title="ligand-gated ion channel" label="ligand-gated ion channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="4867" end="4873" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="4875" end="4884" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="4890" end="4897" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q138919" start="5237" end="5243" title="curare" label="curare"/>
<link wikidata="Q410557" start="5266" end="5279" title="hexamethonium" label="hexamethonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q410959" start="5512" end="5545" title="Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor" label="Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q38173" start="5747" end="5773" title="G protein-coupled receptor" label="G protein-coupled receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q899814" start="5820" end="5843" title="second messenger system" label="second messenger system"/>
<link wikidata="Q24726231" start="5877" end="5879" title="Gq alpha subunit" label="Gq"/>
<link wikidata="Q138145" start="5927" end="5930" title="inositol trisphosphate" label="IP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="5935" end="5942" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q420248" start="5957" end="5972" title="phospholipase C" label="phospholipase C"/>
<link wikidata="Q24719569" start="6053" end="6058" title="Gi alpha subunit" label="Gi/Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q210041" start="6106" end="6110" title="cyclic adenosine monophosphate" label="cAMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q356257" start="6125" end="6142" title="adenylate cyclase" label="adenylate cyclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048687" start="6476" end="6491" title="skeletal muscle" label="skeletal muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208453" start="6600" end="6620" title="smooth muscle tissue" label="smooth muscle tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133903" start="6816" end="6828" title="motor neuron" label="motor neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="6845" end="6856" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="6881" end="6890" title="brainstem" label="brainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="6923" end="6928" title="axons" label="axons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422765" start="6937" end="6948" title="motor nerve" label="motor nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643251" start="7023" end="7030" title="chemical synapse" label="synapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q776995" start="7042" end="7064" title="neuromuscular junction" label="neuromuscular junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q194277" start="7100" end="7116" title="action potential" label="action potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q127006" start="7587" end="7605" title="muscle contraction" label="muscle contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116939" start="7678" end="7700" title="P-type calcium channel" label="P-type calcium channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="7707" end="7718" title="Antibiotics" label="Antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q422273" start="7720" end="7731" title="clindamycin" label="clindamycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q423765" start="7733" end="7742" title="polymyxin" label="polymyxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q936382" start="7795" end="7807" title="Hypocalcemia" label="Hypocalcemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q576618" start="7810" end="7824" title="Anticonvulsant" label="Anticonvulsant"/>
<link wikidata="Q200656" start="7828" end="7836" title="Diuretic" label="Diuretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q388801" start="7839" end="7849" title="furosemide" label="furosemide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756898" start="7853" end="7875" title="Eaton-Lambert syndrome" label="Eaton-Lambert syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8285" start="7912" end="7929" title="Myasthenia gravis" label="Myasthenia gravis"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="7932" end="7947" title="Botulinum toxin" label="Botulinum toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q421700" start="7974" end="7997" title="Calcium channel blocker" label="Calcium channel blocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600696" start="8068" end="8090" title="L-type calcium channel" label="L-type calcium channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="8129" end="8153" title="autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q187215" start="8249" end="8275" title="sympathetic nervous system" label="sympathetic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q185589" start="8280" end="8310" title="parasympathetic nervous system" label="parasympathetic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640582" start="8456" end="8471" title="fight-or-flight response" label="fight-or-flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="9583" end="9596" title="noradrenaline" label="noradrenaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633918" start="9662" end="9671" title="sudomotor" label="sudomotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q110084" start="9761" end="9766" title="Serum (blood)" label="serum"/>
<link wikidata="Q456026" start="9793" end="9806" title="vascular tone" label="vascular tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q410959" start="9821" end="9840" title="Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor" label="muscarinic receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q111140" start="9862" end="9873" title="endothelium" label="endothelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="9923" end="9935" title="nitric oxide" label="nitric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859627" start="10002" end="10014" title="vasodilation" label="vasodilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q670713" start="10134" end="10140" title="reward system" label="reward"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="10261" end="10267" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="10415" end="10439" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q211402" start="10476" end="10479" title="Rapid eye movement sleep" label="REM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345673" start="10539" end="10563" title="Pedunculopontine nucleus" label="Pedunculopontine nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17095874" start="10568" end="10598" title="laterodorsal tegmental nucleus" label="laterodorsal tegmental nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228298" start="10629" end="10646" title="pontine tegmentum" label="pontine tegmentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813830" start="10738" end="10762" title="basal optic nucleus of Meynert" label="basal nucleus of Meynert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452044" start="10774" end="10788" title="septal nucleus" label="septal nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17861926" start="10858" end="10869" title="M1 receptor" label="M1 receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="10878" end="10887" title="brainstem" label="brainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q130983" start="10894" end="10911" title="cerebellar nuclei" label="cerebellar nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228296" start="10913" end="10927" title="pontine nuclei" label="pontine nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470452" start="10929" end="10944" title="locus coeruleus" label="locus coeruleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061493" start="10946" end="10959" title="raphe nucleus" label="raphe nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495688" start="10961" end="10986" title="lateral reticular nucleus" label="lateral reticular nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620438" start="10991" end="11005" title="inferior olive" label="inferior olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q184215" start="11031" end="11039" title="thalamus" label="thalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185080" start="11041" end="11047" title="tectum" label="tectum"/>
<link wikidata="Q464210" start="11049" end="11062" title="basal ganglia" label="basal ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407681" start="11067" end="11082" title="basal forebrain" label="basal forebrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813830" start="11086" end="11110" title="Basal optic nucleus of Meynert" label="Basal nucleus of Meynert"/>
<link wikidata="Q17861926" start="11126" end="11137" title="M1 receptor" label="M1 receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q726562" start="11146" end="11155" title="neocortex" label="neocortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452044" start="11166" end="11180" title="septal nucleus" label="septal nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17861926" start="11196" end="11207" title="M1 receptor" label="M1 receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q48360" start="11216" end="11227" title="hippocampus" label="hippocampus"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="11245" end="11260" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319792" start="11329" end="11337" title="striatum" label="striatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q464210" start="11360" end="11373" title="basal ganglia" label="basal ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500732" start="11405" end="11417" title="interneurons" label="interneurons"/>
<link wikidata="Q753278" start="11615" end="11631" title="substantia nigra" label="substantia nigra"/>
<link wikidata="Q133500" start="11686" end="11694" title="learning" label="learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="11699" end="11705" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q337188" start="11748" end="11759" title="scopolamine" label="scopolamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q726562" start="11883" end="11892" title="neocortex" label="neocortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q48360" start="12052" end="12063" title="hippocampus" label="hippocampus"/>
<link wikidata="Q572111" start="12130" end="12149" title="anterograde amnesia" label="anterograde amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8285" start="12227" end="12244" title="myasthenia gravis" label="myasthenia gravis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="12338" end="12348" title="antibody" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q410546" start="12558" end="12569" title="neostigmine" label="neostigmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q410595" start="12571" end="12584" title="physostigmine" label="physostigmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q419472" start="12599" end="12613" title="pyridostigmine" label="pyridostigmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643251" start="12826" end="12840" title="synaptic cleft" label="synaptic cleft"/>
<link wikidata="Q22676679" start="13285" end="13305" title="acetylcholinesterase" label="acetylcholinesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q412256" start="13823" end="13855" title="nicotinic acetylcholine receptor" label="nicotinic acetylcholine receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q138919" start="14163" end="14169" title="Curare" label="Curare"/>
<link wikidata="Q38173" start="14337" end="14363" title="G protein-coupled receptor" label="G protein-coupled receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="14381" end="14394" title="cell membrane" label="cell membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="14399" end="14405" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q26272" start="14424" end="14432" title="Atropine" label="Atropine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22676679" start="14621" end="14641" title="acetylcholinesterase" label="acetylcholinesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q427492" start="14850" end="14867" title="enzyme inhibitors" label="enzyme inhibitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612896" start="14962" end="14973" title="nerve agent" label="nerve agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q187695" start="14976" end="14981" title="Sarin" label="Sarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q421809" start="14986" end="14988" title="VX (nerve agent)" label="VX"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="15003" end="15012" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q411097" start="15015" end="15031" title="organophosphates" label="organophosphates"/>
<link wikidata="Q422899" start="15040" end="15050" title="carbamates" label="carbamates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225289" start="15224" end="15239" title="muscle relaxant" label="muscle relaxant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8285" start="15251" end="15268" title="myasthenia gravis" label="myasthenia gravis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="15295" end="15319" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q411887" start="15321" end="15333" title="rivastigmine" label="rivastigmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="15423" end="15432" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercurial"/>
<link wikidata="Q414075" start="15452" end="15465" title="methylmercury" label="methylmercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q220410" start="15492" end="15509" title="thiol" label="sulfhydryl groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="15702" end="15717" title="Botulinum toxin" label="Botulinum toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q385932" start="15801" end="15819" title="latrodectus" label="black widow spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q410658" start="15821" end="15837" title="alpha-latrotoxin" label="alpha-latrotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="15885" end="15894" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q385932" start="15913" end="15931" title="latrodectus" label="black widow spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="16048" end="16057" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193166" start="16213" end="16220" title="choline" label="choline"/>
<link wikidata="Q412256" start="17031" end="17056" title="Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor" label="nicotinic receptor family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454515" start="17566" end="17571" title="5-HT3 receptor" label="5-HT3"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="17573" end="17582" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q210021" start="17585" end="17589" title="Gamma-Aminobutyric acid" label="GABA"/>
<link wikidata="Q426887" start="17595" end="17611" title="Glycine receptor" label="Glycine receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q57078" start="17733" end="17749" title="Adolf von Baeyer" label="Adolf von Baeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193166" start="17777" end="17784" title="choline" label="choline"/>
<link wikidata="Q63111430" start="18008" end="18017" title="Reid Hunt" label="Reid Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="18076" end="18090" title="blood pressure" label="blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498988" start="18135" end="18156" title="Frederick Walker Mott" label="Frederick Walker Mott"/>
<link wikidata="Q935766" start="18161" end="18189" title="William Dobinson Halliburton" label="William Dobinson Halliburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q217227" start="18425" end="18443" title="Claviceps purpurea" label="Claviceps purpurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445454" start="18450" end="18455" title="ergot" label="ergot"/>
<link wikidata="Q72194" start="18484" end="18502" title="Henry Hallett Dale" label="Henry Hallett Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="18664" end="18686" title="subcutaneous injection" label="subcutaneous injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q846759" start="18709" end="18717" title="nanogram" label="nanogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="18735" end="18751" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q77173" start="18782" end="18792" title="Otto Loewi" label="Otto Loewi"/>
<link wikidata="Q190140" start="18808" end="18819" title="vagus nerve" label="vagus nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q84133" start="18860" end="18872" title="heart muscle" label="heart muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q622683" start="18910" end="18928" title="University of Graz" label="University of Graz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908566" start="18948" end="18958" title="vagusstoff" label="vagusstoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q485014" start="19013" end="19030" title="structural analog" label="structural analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218293" start="19274" end="19280" title="lysate" label="lysate"/>
<link wikidata="Q415635" start="19346" end="19360" title="cholinesterase" label="cholinesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="19460" end="19476" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="19523" end="19560" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52652" wikidata="Q342337" url="?curid=52652" title="NIH (disambiguation)">
<text>[[NIH]] is the National Institutes of Health in the United States.

NIH may also refer to:

==Organisations==
* National Institute of Health (Pakistan)
* National Institute of Homoeopathy, India
* National Institute of Hydrology, an Indian government body
* Norwegian School of Sport Sciences (), a university in Oslo, Norway

==Other uses==
* Not invented here, whereby something from another organization or culture is deemed inferior to something from one&#x27;s own organization or culture
* Nih (town), an ancient town in Sistan (modern Iran and Afghanistan)
* NIH shift, a rearrangement of hydrogen in a molecule
* Nickel–hydrogen battery (NiH2 or NIH)

==See also==

* Nickel–metal hydride battery (NiMH or NIMH)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q342337" start="0" end="7" title="NIH (disambiguation)" label="[[NIH]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q342337" start="68" end="71" title="NIH (disambiguation)" label="NIH"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973660" start="112" end="151" title="National Institute of Health (Pakistan)" label="National Institute of Health (Pakistan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973661" start="154" end="187" title="National Institute of Homoeopathy" label="National Institute of Homoeopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973667" start="197" end="228" title="National Institute of Hydrology" label="National Institute of Hydrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769401" start="258" end="292" title="Norwegian School of Sport Sciences" label="Norwegian School of Sport Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782368" start="344" end="361" title="Not invented here" label="Not invented here"/>
<link wikidata="Q7034179" start="496" end="506" title="Nih (town)" label="Nih (town)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954318" start="566" end="575" title="NIH shift" label="NIH shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q900403" start="621" end="644" title="Nickel–hydrogen battery" label="Nickel–hydrogen battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q308567" start="676" end="704" title="Nickel–metal hydride battery" label="Nickel–metal hydride battery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52653" wikidata="Q133201" url="?curid=52653" title="Squash (sport)">
<text>Squash, sometimes called squash rackets, is a racket sport played by two (singles) or four players (doubles) in a four-walled court with a small, hollow, rubber ball. The players alternate in striking the ball with their rackets onto the playable surfaces of the four walls of the court. The objective of the game is to hit the ball in such a way that the opponent is not able to play a valid return. There are about 20 million people who play squash regularly world-wide in over 185 countries. The governing body of squash, the World Squash Federation (WSF), is recognized by the International Olympic Committee (IOC), and the sport will be included in the Olympic Games, starting with the 2028 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles. The Professional Squash Association (PSA) organizes the pro tour.

==History==
Squash has its origins in the older game of rackets, which was played in London&#x27;s prisons in the 19th century. Later, around 1830, boys at Harrow School noticed that a punctured ball, which &quot;squashed&quot; on impact with the wall, offered more variety to the game. The game spread to other schools. The first courts built at Harrow were dangerous because they were near water pipes, buttresses, chimneys, and ledges. Natural rubber was the preferred material for the ball. Students modified their rackets to have a smaller reach and improve their ability to play in these cramped conditions. In 1864, the school built four outside courts.

In the 20th century, the game increased in popularity with various schools, clubs and private individuals building squash courts, but with no set dimensions. The first squash court in North America was at St. Paul&#x27;s School in Concord, New Hampshire, in 1884. In 1904 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, the earliest national association of squash in the world, the United States Squash Racquets Association, now known as U.S. Squash, was formed. In April 1907, the Tennis, Rackets &amp; Fives Association of Queens, New York, which regulated those three sports (fives being a similar sport using hands instead of a racket), established a subcommittee to set standards for squash. In 1912, the association published rules for &quot;squash&quot;, combining aspects of these three sports.

In 1912, the RMS &quot;Titanic&quot; had a squash court in first class, available for 8 pence (£12.22 in 2022 terms). The 1st-Class Squash Court was situated on G-Deck. The Spectators Viewing Gallery was one level higher, on F-Deck. Passengers could use the court for one hour unless others were waiting.

In 1923, the Royal Automobile Club hosted a meeting to further discuss the rules and regulations. Five years later, the Squash Rackets Association, now known as England Squash, was formed to set standards for the game in Great Britain and internationally.
The rackets were made from one piece English ash, with a suede leather grip and natural gut.

The 1980s witnessed a period of restructuring and consolidation. The Cambridge rackets factory was forced to close in face of the move to graphite rackets, and production was moved to East Asia. Customization of squash rackets has grown over the years as well. There are custom variations on racket head shape, racket balance, and racket weight. The most common racket variation for international singles squash is a teardrop (closed throat) head shape, even balance, and racket weight of 130g. For hardball doubles, the most common variation is an open throat head shape, even balance, and racket weight of 140g.

There are several variations of squash played across the world, although the international version of the sport has become the dominant form. In the United States, a variant of squash known as hardball was traditionally played with a harder ball and differently sized courts. Hardball squash has lost much of its popularity in North America (in favor of the international version). Doubles squash is a variant played by four players. There is a tennis-like variation of squash known as squash tennis. Finally, racketball, a similar sport played on a squash court (as distinguished from racquetball), has been rebranded as Squash 57 by the World Squash Federation.

==Equipment==

===Racket===

Squash rackets have maximum dimensions of 686 mm (27.0 in) long and 215 mm (8.5 in) wide, with a maximum strung area of 500 square centimeters (77.5 sq in). The permitted maximum weight is , but most have a weight between 90 and 150 grams (3–5.3 oz.). The strings of the racket usually have a tension of 25–30 pounds.

===Ball===

Squash balls are between 39.5 and 40.5 mm in diameter and weigh 23 to 25 grams. They are made with two pieces of rubber compound, glued together to form a hollow sphere and buffed to a matte finish. Different balls are provided for varying temperature and atmospheric conditions and standards of play: more experienced players use slow balls that have less bounce than those used by less experienced players (slower balls tend to &quot;die&quot; in court corners, rather than &quot;standing up&quot; to allow easier shots). Squash balls must be hit dozens of times to warm them up at the beginning of a session; cold squash balls have very little bounce. Small colored dots on the ball indicate its dynamic level (bounciness). 
The &quot;double-yellow dot&quot; ball, introduced in 2000, is the competition standard, replacing the earlier &quot;yellow-dot&quot; ball. There is also an &quot;orange dot&quot; ball for use at high altitudes. The recognized colors are:

Some ball manufacturers such as Dunlop use a different method of grading balls based on experience. They still have the equivalent dot rating but are named to help choose a ball that is appropriate for one&#x27;s skill level. The four different ball types are Intro (Blue dot, 140% of Pro bounce), Progress (Red dot, 120% of Pro bounce), Competition (single yellow dot, 110% of Pro bounce) and Pro (double yellow dot).

Many squash venues mandate the use of shoes with non-marking tread and eye protection. Some associations require that all juniors and doubles players must wear eye protection. The National Institutes of Health recommends wearing goggles with polycarbonate lenses.

===Court===
The squash court is a playing surface surrounded by four walls. The court surface contains a front line separating the front and back of the court and a half court line, separating the left and right sides of the back portion of the court, creating three &#x27;boxes&#x27;: the front half, the back left quarter and the back right quarter. The back two boxes contain smaller service boxes.

The court&#x27;s four walls are divided into a front wall, two side walls, and a back wall. An &#x27;out line&#x27; runs along the top of the front wall, descending along the side walls to the back wall. The bottom line of the front wall marks the top of the &#x27;tin&#x27;, a half meter-high metal area. The middle line of the front wall is the service line. The dimensions of the court are:

North American hardball doubles courts are larger than international singles courts because of a hard ball that has a much faster pace. With double the number of players, the doubles court needs to be significantly larger than a singles court. Doubles courts measure 25 feet wide by 45 feet long and have a ceiling height of at least 24.

==Manner of play==

===Service===
The players spin a racket to decide who serves first. This player starts the first rally by electing to serve from either the left or right service box. For a legal serve, one of the server&#x27;s feet must be in the service box, not touching any part of the service box lines, as the player strikes the ball. After being struck by the racket, the ball must strike the front wall above the service line and below the out line and land in the opposite back quarter court. The receiving player can choose to volley a serve after it has hit the front wall or may let it bounce. If the server wins the point, the two players switch sides for the following point. If the server loses the point, the opponent then serves, and can serve from either box.

===Play===

After the serve, the players take turns hitting the ball against the front wall, above the tin and below the out line. The ball may strike the side or back walls at any time, as long as it hits below the out line. It must not hit the floor after hitting the racket and before hitting the front wall. A ball landing on either the out line or the line along the top of the tin is considered to be out. After the ball hits the front wall, it is allowed to bounce once on the floor (and any number of times against the side or back walls) before a player must return it. Players may move anywhere around the court, but accidental or deliberate obstruction of the other player&#x27;s movements is forbidden and could result in the point being redone or given to the player being obstructed. Players typically return to the centre of the court after making a shot, as it is the optimal position in the court to receive the opponent&#x27;s shot. The centre of the court is typically referred to as &quot;the T&quot;, named after the shape of the floor lines.

===Strategy and tactics===
A key strategy in squash is known as &quot;dominating the T&quot; (the intersection of the red lines near the centre of the court, shaped like the letter &quot;T&quot;, where the player is in the best position to retrieve the opponent&#x27;s next shot). Skilled players will return a shot, and then move back toward the &quot;T&quot; before playing the next shot. From this position, the player can quickly access any part of the court to retrieve the opponent&#x27;s next shot with a minimum of movement and possibly maximizing the movement required by the opponent to answer the returned shot. Very skilled players will, oftentimes, shift slightly away from the &quot;T,&quot; based on the position of the other player, if they believe that their shot selection is limited. 

A common tactic is to hit the ball straight up the side walls to the back corners; this is the basic squash shot, referred to as a &quot;rail&quot;, straight drive, wall, or &quot;length&quot;. After hitting this shot, the player will then move to the centre of the court near the &quot;T&quot; to be well placed to retrieve the opponent&#x27;s return. Attacking with soft or &quot;short&quot; shots to the front corners (referred to as &quot;drop shots&quot;) causes the opponent to cover more of the court and may result in a winner. Boasts or angle shots are deliberately struck off one of the side walls before the ball reaches the front. They are used for deception and again to cause the opponent to cover more of the court. Rear wall shots float to the front either straight or diagonally drawing the opponent to the front. One goal of a player is to try to move the opponent into each of the four corners so that they have to cover a lot of distance and will get tired. Advantageous tactical shots are available in response to a weak return by the opponent if stretched, the majority of the court being free to the striker. Nicks are when the ball comes into contact with the intersection of the floor and any sidewall.

Rallies between experienced players may involve 30 or more shots and therefore a very high premium is placed on fitness, both aerobic and anaerobic. As players become more skilled and, in particular, better able to retrieve shots, points often become a war of attrition. At higher levels of the game, the fitter player has a major advantage.

The ability to change the direction of the ball at the last instant is also a tactic used to unbalance the opponent often called &quot;holding.&quot; Expert players can anticipate the opponent&#x27;s shot a few tenths of a second before the average player, giving them a chance to react sooner.

Depending on the style of play, it is common to refer to squash players as

* Power players: powerful shots to take time away from their opponent. For example, John White, Omar Mosaad, Mohamed El Shorbagy, Nouran Gohar
* Shotmakers: accurate shots to take time away from their opponent. For example, Jonathon Power, Ramy Ashour, Amr Shabana, James Willstrop.
* Retrievers: excellent retrieval to counter power and accuracy and to return shots more quickly to take time away from their opponent. For example, Peter Nicol, Grégory Gaultier, Nicol David, Ng Eain Yow.
* Attritional players: a consistently high-paced game both from shot speed and running speed to wear their opponent down over time. For example, David Palmer, Nick Matthew, Jansher Khan, Jahangir Khan.

===Interference and obstruction===
Interference and obstruction are an inevitable aspect of squash, since two players are confined within a shared space. Generally, the rules entitle players to a direct straight-line access to the ball, room for a reasonable swing and an unobstructed shot to any part of the front wall. When interference occurs, a player may appeal for a &quot;let&quot; and the referee (or the players themselves if there is no official) then interprets the extent of the interference. The referee may allow a let and the players then replay the point or award a &quot;stroke&quot; to the appealing player (meaning that he is declared the winner of that point) depending on the degree of interference, whether the interfering player made an adequate effort to avoid interfering, and whether the player interfered with was likely to have hit a winning shot had the interference not occurred. An exception occurs when the interfering player is directly in the path of the other player&#x27;s swing, effectively preventing the swing, in which case a stroke is always awarded.

When it is deemed that there has been little or no interference, the rules provide that no let is to be allowed in the interests of continuity of play and the discouraging of spurious appeals for lets. Because of the subjectivity in interpreting the nature and magnitude of interference, awarding (or withholding) of lets and strokes is often controversial and professional players will get &quot;reviews&quot; where a different referee will review the footage and make a decision. If the review is successful than the player will get their review back but if the review is unsuccessful they lose their review. 

Interference also occurs when a player&#x27;s shot hits their opponent prior to hitting the front wall. If the ball was travelling towards the side wall when it hit the opponent, or if it had already hit the side wall and was travelling directly to the front wall, it is usually a let. However, it is a stroke to the player who hit the ball if the ball was travelling straight to the front wall when the ball hit the opponent, without having first hit the side wall. Generally, after a player has been hit by the ball, both players stand still; if the struck player is standing directly in front of the player who hit the ball, he loses the stroke; if he is not straight in front, a let is played. If it is deemed that the player who is striking the ball is deliberately trying to hit his opponent, they will lose the stroke. An exception occurs when the player hitting the ball has &quot;turned&quot;, i.e., letting the ball pass them on one side, but then hitting it on the other side as it came off the back wall. In these cases, the stroke goes to the player who was hit by the ball.

===Referee===
The referee is usually a certified position issued by the club or assigned squash league. Any conflict or interference is dealt with by the referee. The referee may also take away points or games due to improper etiquette regarding conduct or rules. Improper etiquette may include swearing, purposeful physical contact, and throwing equipment. The referee is also usually responsible for the scoring of games. Three referees are usually used in professional tournaments. The Central referee has responsibility to call the score and make decisions with the two side referees.

==Scoring system==
===Point-a-Rally to 11===
Games are played according to point-a-rally scoring (PARS) to 11 points. PARS is almost universally preferred by the game&#x27;s top professionals and is the current official scoring system for all levels of professional squash tournaments. In PARS, the winner of a rally receives a point, regardless of whether they were the server or returner. Games are played to 11 and must be won by two points. That is, if the score reaches 10–10, play continues until one player wins by two points. Competition matches are usually played to &quot;best-of-five&quot; games (i.e., the first player to win three games).

Squash can also be played with different scoring systems, such as PARS to 15, traditional English or Hand-in-Hand-Out (HiHo) scoring to 9, or RAM scoring (see below). Players often experience PARS and Hi-Ho as requiring different tactics and player attributes.

=== Other scoring systems ===
====Point-a-Rally to 15====
Point-a-rally scoring to 15 was used for the World Championships between 1989 and 2003. PARS to 15, with the tiebreak being two clear points (as per standard PARS) from 14–14, was used in many amateur leagues because PARS to 11 was considered too short. This system fell out of favor in 2004 when the Professional Squash Association (PSA) decided to switch to PARS to 11. Games were considered to last too long and the winner would usually be the fitter player, not necessarily the better player.

====English/Hand-In-Hand-Out to 9====
Known as English or hand-in-hand-out scoring, under this system, if the server wins a rally, they receive a point, while if the returner wins rally, only the service changes (i.e., the ball goes &quot;hand-out&quot;) and no point is given. The first player to reach nine points wins the game. However, if the score reaches 8–8, the player who was first to reach eight decides whether the game will be played to nine, as before (called &quot;set one&quot;), or to 10 (called &quot;set two&quot;). This scoring system was formerly preferred in Britain, and also among countries with traditional British ties, such as Australia, Canada, Pakistan, South Africa, India and Sri Lanka.

====RAM====
The RAM scoring system is a proposed new scoring system created by former World Champion, Ramy Ashour and co-founded by Osama Khalifa. This consists of playing a best of five games. Each game is three minutes long; however, this only refers to the three minutes in play. The &#x27;downtime&#x27; in between the end of a rally and a serve is not counted. Once the time is up, the clock stops, and the leading player needs to win a final point. If the player who is behind wins the point the game continues until the trailing player catches up and wins one more point than the initially leading player.

For example, Player one is leading 5–3 and the clock stops. Player two wins the next two points and the score is 5–5. Whoever wins the next point wins the game. This is called sudden death. If the score is 0–0 when the clock stops the clock is reset and the game restarts. For Let Calls the clock reverts to the start time of that point. Further rules include that there must be a referee and a time keeper to make this match official. Players have two minutes of rest between games, and all other standard PSA and WSF rules apply.

===Transition from English/HiHo to PARS 11===
In 2004, the Professional Squash Association (PSA) decided to switch to PARS 11. This decision was ratified in 2009 when the World Squash Federation confirmed the switch to the PARS 11 scoring system. Since that time, almost all professional and league games have been played according to PARS to 11. One of the reasons for switching to PARS was that long, taxing matches became less frequent and promoters could more easily predict match and session length. Gawain Briars, who served as the Executive Director of the Professional Squash Association when the body decided to switch to PARS in 2004 hoped that PARS would make the &quot;professional game more exciting to watch, [and] then more people will become involved in the game and our chances of Olympic entry may be enhanced.&quot;

One of the problems with English or Hi-Ho scoring is that games often last longer as players continually win service before losing service to the other player without the score being affected. Consequently, the winner is more often than not the fitter athlete. Moreover, English or Hi-Ho scoring can encourage players to play defensively with the aim of wearing down one&#x27;s opponent before winning by virtue of one&#x27;s fitness. Such exhausting, defensive play can affect player&#x27;s prospects in knock-out tournaments and does not make for riveting TV. In English or Hi-Ho, one player might win by 9–0 despite the opponent having repeatedly won service, but without converting that service into actual points.

For the World Championships: HiHo to 9 was used until 1988; PARS to 15 from 1989 to 2003; and PARS to 11 from 2004. For the British Open: HiHo to 9 was used until 1994; PARS to 15 from 1995 to 2003; and PARS to 11 from 2004.

The WSF&#x27;s decision to switch to PARS 11 proved controversial in the United Kingdom and Commonwealth where games were usually played according to English or Hi-Ho. When the Veterans Squash Rackets Club of Great Britain surveyed their members in 2012, they found that 80% of their members were against switching from HiHo to PARS. President Philip Ayton argued that PARS would &quot;kill the essence of the game.&quot; Ayton was particularly concerned that the &quot;great comebacks&quot; that characterised English or Hi-Ho when &quot;the player who is down in a game can still attack when in hand serving&quot; would disappear as PARS fostered an &quot;ultra-defensive attitude, because every rally counts the same.&quot;

Jahangir Khan has countered that PARS actually made the game far more attacking, but diminished the psychological aspect of the game: &quot;With the nine points scoring system, matches were more mental and physical and could go longer, but now with the 11-point system, every rally counts, and even if you go behind you can still recover. That makes it a lot more attacking.&quot; Maj Madan, one of the game&#x27;s top referees, similarly stated that PARS had &quot;destroyed the fitness element and, more importantly, the cerebral magic of the…game.&quot; His comments were unearthed when an email chain of referees discussing the problem of shorter and shorter squash matches was leaked in 2011.

==Contribution to health==
Squash provides an excellent cardiovascular workout. Players can expend approximately 600–1,000 food calories (3,000–4,000 kJ) every hour playing squash, according to English or Hi-Ho scoring. The sport also provides a good upper- and lower-body workout by exercising both the legs in running around the court and the arms (especially the racket arm) and torso in swinging the racket. In 2003, &quot;Forbes&quot; rated squash as the number-one healthiest sport to play. However, one study has implicated squash as a cause of possible fatal cardiac arrhythmia and argued that squash is an inappropriate form of exercise for older men with heart disease.

==Around the world==
As of November 2019, there were players from eighteen countries in the top fifty of the men&#x27;s world rankings, with Egypt dominating with fifteen players, six of whom were in the top ten, including ranks one through four. Similarly, the women&#x27;s world rankings featured players from sixteen countries, again led by Egypt taking thirteen spots of the top fifty, whilst holding spots one through four in the world.

The men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s Professional Squash Association tour, men&#x27;s rankings and women&#x27;s rankings are run by the Professional Squash Association (PSA).

The Professional Squash Tour is a tour based in the United States.

===Inclusion in multi-sport events===
Squash has been featured regularly at the multi-sport events of the Commonwealth Games and Asian Games since 1998. Squash is also a regular sport at the Pan American Games since 1995. Squash players and associations have lobbied for many years for the sport to be accepted into the Olympic Games. Squash narrowly missed being instated for the 2012 London Games and the 2016 Rio de Janeiro Games (missed out again as the IOC assembly decided to add golf and rugby sevens to the Olympic programme). Squash also was not selected as an event in the 2020 Olympic Games. At the 125th IOC Session in Buenos Aires, the IOC voted for Wrestling instead of Squash or Baseball/Softball. The usual reason cited for the failure of the sport to be adopted for Olympic competition is that it is difficult for spectators to follow the action, especially via television. Previous world number one Peter Nicol stated that he believed squash had a &quot;very realistic chance&quot; of being added to the list of Olympic sports for the 2016 Olympic Games, but it ultimately lost out to golf and rugby sevens. Squash has been part of the World Games since 1997.

Squash was accepted as a demonstration sport for the 2018 Summer Youth Olympics. The World Squash Federation had hoped that this inclusion would create a strong bid for a potential inclusion at the 2024 Summer Olympics.

Although not included in the 2024 Summer Olympics, squash received approval from the International Olympic Committee for inclusion in the 2028 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles, on 16 October 2023.

==Major tournaments==
*World Open Championship
*World Tour Finals
*World Team Championships
*British Open
*Tournament of Champions
*US Open
*Hong Kong Open
*Qatar Classic
*Windy City Open
*El Gouna International
*Summer Olympics
*World Games
*Commonwealth Games
*Asian Games

==Players, records and rankings==

The (British) Squash Rackets Association (now known as England Squash) conducted its first British Open championship for men in December 1930, using a &quot;challenge&quot; system. Charles Read was designated champion in 1930, but he was beaten in home and away matches by Don Butcher, who was then recorded as the champion for 1931. The championship continues to this day, but it has been conducted with a &quot;knockout&quot; format since 1947.

The women&#x27;s championship started in 1921, and it has been dominated by relatively few players: Joyce Cave, Nancy Cave, Cecily Fenwick (England) in the 1920s; Margot Lumb and Susan Noel (England) in the 1930s; Janet Morgan (England) in the 1950s; Heather McKay (Australia) in the 1960s and 1970s; Vicki Cardwell (Australia) and Susan Devoy (New Zealand) in the 1980s; Michelle Martin and Sarah Fitz-Gerald (Australia) in the 1990s; and Nicol David (Malaysia) in the 2000s.

The Men&#x27;s British Open has similarly been dominated by relatively few players: F. D. Amr Bey (Egypt) in the 1930s; Mahmoud Karim (Egypt) in the 1940s; brothers Hashim Khan and Azam Khan (Pakistan) in the 1950s and 1960s; Jonah Barrington (Great Britain and Ireland) and Geoff Hunt (Australia) in the 1960s and 1970s; Jahangir Khan (Pakistan) 1980s; Jansher Khan (Pakistan) in the 1990s; and more recently, David Palmer and Nick Matthew.

The World Open professional championship was inaugurated in 1976 and serves as the main competition today. Jansher Khan holds the record of winning eight World titles followed by Jahangir Khan with six, Geoff Hunt &amp; Amr Shabana four, Nick Matthew &amp; Ramy Ashour three. The women&#x27;s record is held by Nicol David with eight wins followed by Sarah Fitzgerald five, Susan Devoy four, and Michelle Martin three.

Heather McKay remained undefeated in competitive matches for 19 years (between 1962 and 1981) and won sixteen consecutive British Open titles between 1962 and 1977.

===Current rankings===
The Professional Squash Association (PSA) publishes monthly rankings of professional players:

====Men&#x27;s====

====Women&#x27;s====

=== Current champions ===
== See also ==

* Basque pelota
* British Open Squash Championships
* Hardball squash
* The Howe Cup
* List of US Intercollegiate squash champions
* List of PSA number 1 ranked players
* List of WSA number 1 ranked players
* List of squash players
* Longest squash match records
* Padel
* PSA World Tour records
* PSA World Tour
* Rackets (also called &quot;hard rackets&quot;, &quot;prison tennis&quot;)
* Racquetball
* Squash tennis
* Table squash
* US Junior Open squash championship
* World Championship
* World Squash Federation
* World Team Squash Championships

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== General sources ===
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* Zug, James; Plimpton, George (2003). &quot;Squash: a history of the game&quot;. New York: Scribner. .

== External links ==

* World Squash Federation official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q133201" start="0" end="6" title="Squash (sport)" label="Squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q118145884" start="46" end="52" title="List of racket sports" label="racket"/>
<link wikidata="Q11573502" start="53" end="58" title="ball game" label="sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299530" start="529" end="552" title="World Squash Federation" label="World Squash Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="581" end="612" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="658" end="671" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451505" start="691" end="711" title="2028 Summer Olympics" label="2028 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135111" start="732" end="763" title="Professional Squash Association" label="Professional Squash Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457676" start="851" end="858" title="rackets (sport)" label="rackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247373" start="951" end="964" title="Harrow School" label="Harrow School"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="1234" end="1248" title="Natural rubber" label="Natural rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q906930" start="1662" end="1684" title="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s School (Concord, New Hampshire)" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q28249" start="1688" end="1710" title="Concord, New Hampshire" label="Concord, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863420" start="1878" end="1889" title="U.S. Squash" label="U.S. Squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421910" start="2019" end="2024" title="fives" label="fives"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173" start="2257" end="2280" title="RMS Titanic" label="RMS &amp;quot;Titanic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151679" start="2303" end="2314" title="First class facilities of the RMS Titanic" label="first class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445883" start="2563" end="2584" title="Royal Automobile Club" label="Royal Automobile Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378003" start="2711" end="2725" title="England Squash" label="England Squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="2771" end="2784" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655706" start="3708" end="3716" title="hardball squash" label="hardball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582101" start="3897" end="3911" title="Squash Doubles" label="Doubles squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3967457" start="4001" end="4014" title="squash tennis" label="squash tennis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4025" end="4035" title="racquetball#United Kingdom" label="racketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q754586" start="4101" end="4112" title="racquetball" label="racquetball"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="6108" end="6137" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q831550" start="11464" end="11480" title="Attrition warfare" label="war of attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q719350" start="12010" end="12020" title="John White (squash player)" label="John White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757727" start="12022" end="12033" title="Omar Mosaad" label="Omar Mosaad"/>
<link wikidata="Q895762" start="12035" end="12054" title="Mohamed El Shorbagy" label="Mohamed El Shorbagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240132" start="12056" end="12068" title="Nouran Gohar" label="Nouran Gohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067663" start="12150" end="12164" title="Jonathon Power" label="Jonathon Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q979323" start="12166" end="12177" title="Ramy Ashour" label="Ramy Ashour"/>
<link wikidata="Q477498" start="12179" end="12190" title="Amr Shabana" label="Amr Shabana"/>
<link wikidata="Q525287" start="12192" end="12207" title="James Willstrop" label="James Willstrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q719333" start="12358" end="12369" title="Peter Nicol" label="Peter Nicol"/>
<link wikidata="Q908632" start="12371" end="12387" title="Grégory Gaultier" label="Grégory Gaultier"/>
<link wikidata="Q867189" start="12389" end="12400" title="Nicol David" label="Nicol David"/>
<link wikidata="Q26261274" start="12402" end="12413" title="Ng Eain Yow" label="Ng Eain Yow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067643" start="12560" end="12572" title="David Palmer (squash player)" label="David Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q571095" start="12574" end="12586" title="Nick Matthew" label="Nick Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q174595" start="12588" end="12600" title="Jansher Khan" label="Jansher Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q741690" start="12602" end="12615" title="Jahangir Khan" label="Jahangir Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q581634" start="17021" end="17040" title="World Squash Championships" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135111" start="17277" end="17308" title="Professional Squash Association" label="Professional Squash Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q979323" start="18294" end="18305" title="Ramy Ashour" label="Ramy Ashour"/>
<link wikidata="Q20949600" start="18324" end="18337" title="Osama Khalifa" label="Osama Khalifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135111" start="19398" end="19429" title="Professional Squash Association" label="Professional Squash Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299530" start="19510" end="19533" title="World Squash Federation" label="World Squash Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528418" start="19844" end="19857" title="Gawain Briars" label="Gawain Briars"/>
<link wikidata="Q741690" start="21849" end="21862" title="Jahangir Khan" label="Jahangir Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130964" start="22676" end="22683" title="calorie" label="calorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="22698" end="22700" title="kilojoule" label="kJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="23115" end="23133" title="cardiac arrhythmia" label="cardiac arrhythmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="23213" end="23226" title="coronary artery disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135111" start="23736" end="23740" title="PSA World Tour" label="tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976144" start="23742" end="23761" title="Official Men&amp;#x27;s Squash World Ranking" label="men&amp;#x27;s rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079578" start="23766" end="23787" title="Official Women&amp;#x27;s Squash World Ranking" label="women&amp;#x27;s rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135111" start="23803" end="23834" title="Professional Squash Association" label="Professional Squash Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="24017" end="24035" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q483463" start="24040" end="24051" title="Asian Games" label="Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q230186" start="24102" end="24120" title="Pan American Games" label="Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="24231" end="24244" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548451" start="24521" end="24538" title="125th IOC Session" label="125th IOC Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="24542" end="24554" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="24560" end="24563" title="IOC" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q42486" start="24574" end="24583" title="Wrestling" label="Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="24605" end="24613" title="Baseball" label="Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q171038" start="24614" end="24622" title="Softball" label="Softball"/>
<link wikidata="Q719333" start="24828" end="24839" title="Peter Nicol" label="Peter Nicol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="24941" end="24948" title="Olympics" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="24964" end="24982" title="2016 Olympic Games" label="2016 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="25014" end="25018" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q270102" start="25023" end="25035" title="rugby sevens" label="rugby sevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q673097" start="25065" end="25076" title="World Games" label="World Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315779" start="25083" end="25087" title="1997 World Games" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123217" start="25115" end="25134" title="demonstration sport" label="demonstration sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q870879" start="25143" end="25169" title="2018 Summer Youth Olympics" label="2018 Summer Youth Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q995653" start="25288" end="25308" title="2024 Summer Olympics" label="2024 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="25396" end="25427" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451505" start="25449" end="25469" title="2028 Summer Olympics" label="2028 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="25473" end="25484" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q581634" start="25530" end="25553" title="Squash World Open" label="World Open Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036183" start="25555" end="25572" title="World Series Squash Finals" label="World Tour Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498529" start="25574" end="25598" title="WSF World Team Squash Championships" label="World Team Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q843417" start="25600" end="25612" title="British Open Squash Championships" label="British Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757473" start="25614" end="25637" title="Tournament of Champions (squash)" label="Tournament of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547518" start="25639" end="25646" title="United States Open (squash)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815625" start="25648" end="25662" title="Hong Kong Open (squash)" label="Hong Kong Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795779" start="25664" end="25677" title="Qatar Classic" label="Qatar Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15532381" start="25679" end="25694" title="Windy City Open" label="Windy City Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815206" start="25696" end="25718" title="El Gouna International" label="El Gouna International"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="25720" end="25735" title="Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863006" start="25737" end="25748" title="Squash at the World Games" label="World Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="25750" end="25768" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269643" start="25770" end="25781" title="2022 Asian Games" label="Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378003" start="25873" end="25887" title="England Squash" label="England Squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q843417" start="25909" end="25921" title="British Open Squash Championships" label="British Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081957" start="25999" end="26011" title="Charles Read (squash player)" label="Charles Read"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292351" start="26091" end="26102" title="Don Butcher" label="Don Butcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297422" start="26366" end="26376" title="Joyce Cave" label="Joyce Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962594" start="26378" end="26388" title="Nancy Cave" label="Nancy Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056511" start="26390" end="26404" title="Cecily Fenwick" label="Cecily Fenwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760687" start="26429" end="26440" title="Margot Lumb" label="Margot Lumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q638491" start="26445" end="26455" title="Susan Noel" label="Susan Noel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362233" start="26480" end="26492" title="Janet Morgan (squash player)" label="Janet Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q538855" start="26517" end="26530" title="Heather McKay" label="Heather McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455970" start="26567" end="26581" title="Vicki Cardwell" label="Vicki Cardwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913290" start="26598" end="26609" title="Susan Devoy" label="Susan Devoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145289" start="26638" end="26653" title="Michelle Martin" label="Michelle Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476134" start="26658" end="26675" title="Sarah Fitz-Gerald" label="Sarah Fitz-Gerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q867189" start="26706" end="26717" title="Nicol David" label="Nicol David"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423852" start="26828" end="26841" title="F. D. Amr Bey" label="F. D. Amr Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6734354" start="26864" end="26877" title="Mahmoud Karim" label="Mahmoud Karim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648565" start="26909" end="26920" title="Hashim Khan" label="Hashim Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832169" start="26925" end="26934" title="Azam Khan (squash player)" label="Azam Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183249" start="26970" end="26986" title="Jonah Barrington (squash player)" label="Jonah Barrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q471139" start="27019" end="27029" title="Geoff Hunt" label="Geoff Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q741690" start="27066" end="27079" title="Jahangir Khan" label="Jahangir Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q174595" start="27098" end="27110" title="Jansher Khan" label="Jansher Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067643" start="27155" end="27167" title="David Palmer (squash player)" label="David Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q571095" start="27172" end="27184" title="Nick Matthew" label="Nick Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q581634" start="27191" end="27201" title="World Squash Championships" label="World Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q174595" start="27294" end="27306" title="Jansher Khan" label="Jansher Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q741690" start="27366" end="27379" title="Jahangir Khan" label="Jahangir Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q471139" start="27390" end="27400" title="Geoff Hunt" label="Geoff Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q477498" start="27407" end="27418" title="Amr Shabana" label="Amr Shabana"/>
<link wikidata="Q571095" start="27425" end="27437" title="Nick Matthew" label="Nick Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q979323" start="27444" end="27455" title="Ramy Ashour" label="Ramy Ashour"/>
<link wikidata="Q867189" start="27498" end="27509" title="Nicol David" label="Nicol David"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476134" start="27538" end="27554" title="Sarah Fitzgerald" label="Sarah Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913290" start="27561" end="27572" title="Susan Devoy" label="Susan Devoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145289" start="27583" end="27598" title="Michelle Martin" label="Michelle Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q538855" start="27607" end="27620" title="Heather McKay" label="Heather McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135111" start="27800" end="27831" title="Professional Squash Association" label="Professional Squash Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q212845" start="27977" end="27990" title="Basque pelota" label="Basque pelota"/>
<link wikidata="Q843417" start="27993" end="28026" title="British Open Squash Championships" label="British Open Squash Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655706" start="28029" end="28044" title="Hardball squash" label="Hardball squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847708" start="28047" end="28059" title="The Howe Cup" label="The Howe Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28062" end="28105" title="Intercollegiate sports team champions#Squash" label="List of US Intercollegiate squash champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16067387" start="28108" end="28143" title="List of PSA number 1 ranked players" label="List of PSA number 1 ranked players"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514574" start="28146" end="28181" title="List of WSA number 1 ranked players" label="List of WSA number 1 ranked players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067649" start="28184" end="28206" title="List of squash players" label="List of squash players"/>
<link wikidata="Q21072585" start="28209" end="28237" title="Longest squash match records" label="Longest squash match records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582389" start="28240" end="28245" title="Padel" label="Padel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036506" start="28248" end="28270" title="PSA World Tour records" label="PSA World Tour records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135111" start="28273" end="28287" title="PSA World Tour" label="PSA World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457676" start="28290" end="28297" title="Rackets (sport)" label="Rackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q754586" start="28366" end="28377" title="Racquetball" label="Racquetball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3967457" start="28380" end="28393" title="Squash tennis" label="Squash tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673169" start="28396" end="28408" title="Table squash" label="Table squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875898" start="28411" end="28445" title="US Junior Open squash championship" label="US Junior Open squash championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q581634" start="28448" end="28466" title="World Open (squash)" label="World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299530" start="28469" end="28492" title="World Squash Federation" label="World Squash Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498529" start="28495" end="28526" title="World Team Squash Championships" label="World Team Squash Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508079" start="28629" end="28645" title="George Plimpton" label="Plimpton, George"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52659" wikidata="Q1326883" url="?curid=52659" title="Albert Brudzewski">
<text>Albert Brudzewski, &quot;also&quot; Albert Blar (of Brudzewo), Albert of Brudzewo or Wojciech Brudzewski (in Latin, &quot;Albertus de Brudzewo&quot;; c.1445–c.1497) was a Polish astronomer, mathematician, philosopher and diplomat.

==Life==
Albert (in Polish, &quot;Wojciech&quot;), who would sign himself &quot;de Brudzewo&quot; (&quot;of Brudzewo&quot;), was born about 1445, in Brudzewo, near Kalisz. Scant information exists about his early life. It is only known that as a 23-year-old he matriculated at the Kraków Academy (now Jagiellonian University), where he remained through nearly all his life, teaching there for two decades. He served as the academy&#x27;s dean, as &quot;procurator&quot; (administrator of its property), and as head of the &quot;Bursa Hungarorum&quot; (&quot;Hungarians&#x27; Dormitory&quot;).

Albert is remembered as a remarkable teacher. At the Kraków Academy he impressed students by his extraordinary knowledge of literature, and taught mathematics and astronomy. When in 1490 he became a bachelor of theology, he also lectured on Aristotle&#x27;s philosophy. These lectures were attended by Nicolaus Copernicus, who enrolled at the academy in 1491. A major accomplishment of Albert&#x27;s was his modernization of the teaching of astronomy by introducing the most up-to-date texts.

Albert was well versed in Georg von Peuerbach&#x27;s &quot;Theory of the Planets&quot; and Regiomontanus&#x27; &quot;Astronomical Tables&quot;. He was skeptical of the geocentric system. He was the first to state that the Moon moves in an ellipse and always shows its same side to the Earth.

He drew up tables for calculating the positions of heavenly bodies. In 1482 he wrote a &quot;Commentariolum super Theoricas novas planetarum Georgii Purbachii [...] per Albertum de Brudzewo&quot; — a commentary on Georg von Peuerbach&#x27;s text, &quot;Theoricae novae planetarum – New Theories of the Planets&quot; — published in Milan, Mediolani, in 1495, by his pupil, Jan Otto de Kraceusae with this title &quot;Commentaria utilissima in theoricis planetarum&quot;.

Besides Copernicus, Albert&#x27;s students included the mathematician Bernard Wapowski and the German poet and Renaissance humanist, Conrad Celtis, who in Kraków established the first Central European literary society, &quot;Sodalitas Litterana Vistulana&quot;.

In 1495, at the behest of Cardinal Fryderyk Jagiellończyk (Frederick Jagiellon), Brudzewski moved to Vilnius as secretary to Grand Duke of Lithuania Aleksander Jagiellon, who would later become King Alexander of Poland. He served the Grand Duke as a diplomat; one of his most important missions involved negotiations with Muscovy&#x27;s Tsar Ivan the Terrible. It was in Vilnius that Albert wrote his treatise, &quot;Conciliator&quot;, the original of which has not yet been found.

Albert of Brudzewo died in Vilnius. The exact date of his death is not known; some sources state that he died at the age of fifty.

=== Albert Brudzewski and Averroes ===
Albert of Brudzewo or Albert Brudzewski was seen as influential and persuasive astronomer, a fictionalist, and an opponent of Averroes. Averroes disagreed with the majority of the astronomer Ptolemy&#x27;s work. He believed that Ptolemy&#x27;s devices and principles disobeyed the fundamental principles and basic consequences of Aristotle&#x27;s physics. Averroes worked to replace the Ptolemaic astronomical system with a novel system that was similar to a system created by Eudoxus. Albert Brudzewski disagreed and criticized Averroes immediately. The major dispute was the figuring out the number of celestial orbs or spheres that lay in the heavens. Averroes refused to believe that there was a ninth sphere in the heavens. He believed that the creation of all celestial beings had to arise from the stars, but the ninth sphere did not possess any stars, so this could not be true. Albert Brudzewski argued with this and said that the heavens possessed more than ten spheres. He believed that the Sun itself had three spheres and the planets had their own as well.

To make sense and clarify to his followers, Brudzewski said that the terms &#x27;orb&#x27; or &#x27;sphere&#x27; had three meanings of interpretation. The first meaning could be the whole entire heavens was designated into a single object which was the orb or sphere. This object was not separate from the whole heavens yet it could exist by itself. The second meaning he paralleled it to the sphere or orb from George Peurbach&#x27;s &quot;Theoricae novae planetarum&quot; although it was unconventional, it still existed in the heavens. The third meaning or clarification of orb was an orb that was aligned with the Earth. The third meaning was actually a collection of orbs that was crucial to the motion of a planet.

Albert Brudzewski further disputes Averroes by depending on the assumptions of Aristotle. He said that Aristotle demonstrated and verified five claims about the heavens that could disprove Averroes. The first claim was that the heavens was a simple being. The second claim was that because the heavens was a simple being, the motion of the being also had to be simple and uncomplicated. There could only be one motion and it had to follow the laws of nature. The third claim was that any motion that did not follow the laws of nature had to have an addition motion that did follow the laws of nature. The fourth claim was that a single sphere or orb could not be moved by several motions because it was a simple body. The fifth claim was that any superior or greater orb could have an impact on lesser orbs and spheres but the lesser orbs and spheres could not have any leverage on the superior&#x27;s ones.

To finally disprove Averroes, Albert Brudzewski mentions the three recognizable motions of the sphere of fixed stars. The first motion was that the sphere possessed a daily rotation that occurred from the East to the West. The second motion was movement of the sphere in the opposition direction from West to East. The third motion was a cyclical motion that Brudzewski named trepidation. Brudzewski gave these three motions to the last three spheres respectively. With the assumptions of Aristotle as well as the motions of the sphere of the fixed stars, Brudzewski is able to prove that Averroes is wrong about the number of celestial spheres in the heavens.

=== Albert Brudzewski&#x27;s Views on the Heavens and Planetary Motion ===
Albert Brudzewski was known as a fictionalist. He did not think that the motions of the heavens were understood by any human. Richard of Wallingford, an astronomer in the 1300s, had an opposing view for the spheres of the planets. He claimed that no mortal knows whether eccentrics truly exist in the spheres of the planets, but spirits could give humans revelations about the true planetary motion of the heavens through mathematicians. This claim limits the astronomical knowledge of mortals and suggests that spirits do not have the same limitations. Brudzewski acknowledges the existence of these viewpoints but criticized their validity. To astronomers, spirits had an accurate knowledge of the number of celestial orbs. Although, he did not want to discredit the ability of mortals to make claims based on astronomical observations. Albert Brudzewski made the claim for the fundamental principle of astrology that the heavens exert causal influences on the earth.

The paths of planets were thought to be moved by orbs instead of circles. This was a claim by Brudzeski about causal relationships between the planets and their motion. With this view, he disagreed with Averroes about the number of orbs, the concept of epicycles and eccentric circles, and on theoretical orbs. Brudzewski was seen as a source for some of Copernicus&#x27;s work on orbs, specifically with the Tusi Couple.

=== Brudzewski&#x27;s views on Tusi&#x27;s Couple ===
Tusi&#x27;s couple was known as an epicycle arrangement that creates straight line motion of the planets, created by Copernicus. Some think that Brudzewski is the source for Copernicus&#x27;s model of the Tusi couple. Albert does account for the moon and its double epicycles where he mentions a spot on the moon. The spot on the moon is the problem of explaining the appearance of the face of the moon when always viewing the Earth. These views were not aligned with the Tusi couple. Although, it is speculated that Copernicus could have encountered such a model, where the primary epicycle carries the center of a second epicycle. This is not the Tusi couple, but it could be slightly changed to match its model. The spot on the moon that is always viewed from the Earth would not appear if there was no epicyclical motion of the moon. The motion of the moon was termed as &quot;prosneusis motion&quot; which was part of the lunar theory. This motion means motion of inclination and turning, which corresponds to the single epicycle in Ptolemy&#x27;s theory of the moon, and the two epicycles in Brudzewski&#x27;s model.

Brudzewski was aware of the possibility of linear motions from circular motions based on his model of Mercury&#x27;s motion. This could be an alternative way that Copernicus generated his idea of linear motion for the Tusi couple. Although it seems that Copernicus used Albert&#x27;s ideas, he highly relied on Islamic sources for the Tusi couple. Copernicus&#x27;s parameters for the moon are exactly the same as those of Ibn ash-Shātir. It is unclear where Copernicus truly got his ideas.

==See also==
*Nicolaus Copernicus
*List of Poles

==Notes==
==References==
* &quot;Brudzewski, Wojciech, [or] Wojciech z Brudzewa,&quot; &quot;Encyklopedia Powszechna PWN&quot; (PWN Universal Encyclopedia), Warsaw, Państwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, 1973, vol. 1, p. 353.
* M. Iłowiecki, &quot;Dzieje nauki polskiej&quot; (History of Polish Science), Warsaw, 1981.
* Zbigniew Lenartowicz, &quot;Kaliszanie w Warszawie&quot; (Kaliszians in Warsaw), no. 32/33, 2002.
* Józef Retinger, &quot;Polacy w cywilizacjach świata&quot; (Poles in the World&#x27;s Civilizations), Warsaw, 1937.
* Tadeusz Rójek, &quot;Sławni i nieznani&quot; (The Famous and the Unknown).
* Michela Malpangotto, &quot;La critique de l&#x27;univers de Peurbach développée par Albert de Brudzewo a-t-elle influencé Copernic ? Un nouveau regard sur les réflexions astronomiques au XVe siècle&quot;, Almagest, 41/1, 2013, pp. 1–47.
* Michela Malpangotto, &quot;The original motivation for Copernicus&#x27; research: Albert of Brudzewo&#x27;s Commentariolum super Theoricas novas Georgii Purbachii&quot;, Archive for History of Exact Sciences, 70/4, 2016, pp. 361–411.
* Michela Malpangotto, &quot;Theoricae novae planetarum Georgii Peurbachii dans l&#x27;histoire de l&#x27;astronomie — Sources — Édition critique avec traduction française — Commentaire technique — Diffusion du XVe au XVIIe siècle&quot;, Paris, CNRS Éditions, 2020.

==External links==
*Adler Planetarium 
*(https://web.archive.org/web/20070927222403/http://www.info.kalisz.pl/Biograf/Wojciechzb.htm) Biographical note on Wojciech of Brudzewo</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1326883" start="0" end="17" title="Albert Brudzewski" label="Albert Brudzewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326883" start="36" end="61" title="Albert Brudzewski" label="Albert Blar (of Brudzewo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326883" start="63" end="81" title="Albert Brudzewski" label="Albert of Brudzewo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326883" start="85" end="104" title="Albert Brudzewski" label="Wojciech Brudzewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="109" end="114" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="178" end="188" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="190" end="203" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="205" end="216" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q193391" start="221" end="229" title="diplomat" label="diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="252" end="258" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978641" start="381" end="389" title="Brudzewo, Greater Poland Voivodeship" label="Brudzewo"/>
<link wikidata="Q52842" start="396" end="402" title="Kalisz" label="Kalisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q189441" start="533" end="556" title="Jagiellonian University" label="Jagiellonian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q798128" start="1025" end="1045" title="bachelor of theology" label="bachelor of theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="1067" end="1076" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1128" end="1147" title="Nicolaus Copernicus#Education" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="1267" end="1276" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q84289" start="1346" end="1365" title="Georg von Peuerbach" label="Georg von Peuerbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q76365" start="1411" end="1424" title="Regiomontanus" label="Regiomontanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="1488" end="1498" title="geocentric" label="geocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="1542" end="1546" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="1559" end="1566" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="1605" end="1610" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="1664" end="1679" title="heavenly body" label="heavenly bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q84289" start="1827" end="1846" title="Georg von Peuerbach" label="Georg von Peuerbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="1944" end="1949" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="2092" end="2102" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q822770" start="2154" end="2170" title="Bernard Wapowski" label="Bernard Wapowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2179" end="2185" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="2195" end="2215" title="Renaissance humanist" label="Renaissance humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60625" start="2217" end="2230" title="Conrad Celtis" label="Conrad Celtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="2268" end="2282" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q497893" start="2285" end="2301" title="literary society" label="literary society"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="2373" end="2381" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="2448" end="2455" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639920" start="2472" end="2495" title="Grand Duke of Lithuania" label="Grand Duke of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q53450" start="2496" end="2516" title="Aleksander Jagiellon" label="Aleksander Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q53450" start="2546" end="2565" title="Alexander of Poland" label="Alexander of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193391" start="2597" end="2605" title="diplomat" label="diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q170770" start="2669" end="2676" title="Grand Duchy of Moscow" label="Muscovy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="2684" end="2688" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996" start="2689" end="2706" title="Ivan the Terrible" label="Ivan the Terrible"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="2718" end="2725" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q39837" start="3127" end="3135" title="Averroes" label="Averroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="3192" end="3206" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066873" start="6566" end="6588" title="Richard of Wallingford" label="Richard of Wallingford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035674" start="7820" end="7831" title="Tusi couple" label="Tusi Couple"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9518" end="9537" title="Nicolaus Copernicus#Education" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9539" end="9552" title="List of Poles#Astronomy" label="List of Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="9711" end="9717" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428376" start="9719" end="9748" title="Państwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe" label="Państwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q302073" start="9967" end="9981" title="Józef Retinger" label="Józef Retinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q106517993" start="10161" end="10180" title="Michela Malpangotto" label="Michela Malpangotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q106517993" start="10400" end="10419" title="Michela Malpangotto" label="Michela Malpangotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q106517993" start="10636" end="10655" title="Michela Malpangotto" label="Michela Malpangotto"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52662" wikidata="Q40770" url="?curid=52662" title="65 BC">
<text>The year 65 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Cotta and Torquatus (or, less frequently, the year 689 &quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&quot;). The denomination 65 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.

== Events ==
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;

=== By place ===

==== Roman Republic ====
* In response to the illegal exercise of citizen rights by foreigners, the Roman Senate passes the &quot;Lex Papia&quot;, which expels all foreigners from Rome
* Tigranes of Armenia is defeated and captured by Pompey, thus ending all hostilities on the northeastern frontier of Rome.
* Pompey the Great subjugates the kingdom of Iberia and makes Colchis a Roman province.

==== Western Han Empire ====
*9th year of the reign of Emperor Xuan of Han
&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;

== Births ==
* December 8 – Horace, Roman poet (d. 8 BC)
* Gaius Asinius Pollio, Roman orator, poet and historian (d. AD 4)

== Deaths ==
* Xiphares, son of Mithridates VI (b. c. 85 BC)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q40770" start="9" end="14" title="65 BC" label="65 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="33" end="58" title="Roman calendar" label="pre-Julian Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40770" start="93" end="138" title="65 BC" label="Year of the Consulship of Cotta and Torquatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40770" start="165" end="199" title="65 BC" label="year 689 &amp;quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="301" end="312" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="313" end="325" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="501" end="515" title="citizen rights" label="citizen rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="535" end="547" title="Roman Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="615" end="619" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q121296483" start="622" end="630" title="Tigranes" label="Tigranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="634" end="641" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="670" end="676" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="746" end="762" title="Pompey" label="Pompey the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650934" start="763" end="773" title="Pompey&amp;#x27;s Georgian campaign" label="subjugates"/>
<link wikidata="Q19083" start="778" end="795" title="Kingdom of Iberia (antiquity)" label="kingdom of Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183150" start="806" end="813" title="Colchis" label="Colchis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="816" end="830" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230" start="888" end="907" title="Emperor Xuan of Han" label="Emperor Xuan of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301" start="945" end="955" title="December 8" label="December 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="958" end="964" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="966" end="971" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="972" end="976" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q39166" start="981" end="985" title="8 BC" label="8 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q319273" start="989" end="1009" title="Gaius Asinius Pollio (consul 40 BC)" label="Gaius Asinius Pollio"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="1011" end="1016" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859263" start="1017" end="1023" title="orator" label="orator"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="1025" end="1029" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="1034" end="1043" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414645" start="1048" end="1052" title="AD 4" label="AD 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003480" start="1070" end="1078" title="Xiphares" label="Xiphares"/>
<link wikidata="Q185126" start="1087" end="1101" title="Mithridates VI Eupator" label="Mithridates VI"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52663" wikidata="Q41887" url="?curid=52663" title="64 BC">
<text>Year 64 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Figulus (or, less frequently, year 690 &quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&quot;). The denomination 64 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.

== Events ==
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;

=== By place ===

==== Roman Republic ====
* Pompey destroys the kingdom of Pontus; king Mithridates VI commits suicide after escaping to the Crimea.
* Pompey annexes Syria and captures Jerusalem, annexing Judea.

==== Syria ====
* King Antiochus XIII Asiaticus is deposed and killed by the Syrian chieftain Sampsiceramus I – this is considered by some the end of the Seleucid dynasty.
&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;
*64 BC Syria earthquake, mentioned in catalogues of historical earthquakes. It affected the region of Syria and may have caused structural damage in the city of Jerusalem.

== Births ==
* Marcus Valerius Messalla Corvinus, Roman general and consul (d. AD 8)
* Nicolaus of Damascus, Jewish historian and philosopher (approximate date)
* Strabo, Greek philosopher and historian in Amaseia

== Deaths ==
* Antiochus XIII Asiaticus, king of the Seleucid Empire

== References ==
=== Bibliography ===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41887" start="5" end="10" title="64 BC" label="64 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="29" end="54" title="Roman calendar" label="pre-Julian Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41887" start="88" end="132" title="64 BC" label="Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Figulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41887" start="155" end="189" title="64 BC" label="year 690 &amp;quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="291" end="302" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="303" end="315" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="452" end="458" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380487" start="472" end="489" title="kingdom of Pontus" label="kingdom of Pontus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185126" start="496" end="510" title="Mithridates VI" label="Mithridates VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="549" end="555" title="Crimean Peninsula" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="574" end="579" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="593" end="602" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q104028" start="613" end="618" title="Judea" label="Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q313733" start="644" end="668" title="Antiochus XIII Asiaticus" label="Antiochus XIII Asiaticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18277266" start="715" end="730" title="Sampsiceramus I" label="Sampsiceramus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="775" end="791" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371118" start="815" end="837" title="64 BC Syria earthquake" label="64 BC Syria earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415123" start="916" end="921" title="Syria (region)" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="975" end="984" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q508117" start="1002" end="1035" title="Marcus Valerius Messalla Corvinus" label="Marcus Valerius Messalla Corvinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="1055" end="1061" title="Roman consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414645" start="1066" end="1070" title="AD 8" label="AD 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q313924" start="1074" end="1094" title="Nicolaus of Damascus" label="Nicolaus of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="1117" end="1128" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="1150" end="1156" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170532" start="1193" end="1200" title="Amaseia" label="Amaseia"/>
<link wikidata="Q313733" start="1217" end="1241" title="Antiochus XIII Asiaticus" label="Antiochus XIII Asiaticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="1255" end="1270" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid Empire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52664" wikidata="Q240502" url="?curid=52664" title="Racket (sports equipment)">
<text>A racket or racquet is an item of sporting equipment used to strike a ball or shuttlecock in a variety of sports. A racket consists of three major components: a widened distal end known as the &quot;head&quot;, an elongated handle known as the &quot;grip&quot;, and a reinforced connection between the head and handle known as the &quot;throat&quot; or &quot;heart&quot;. The head of the racket forms a flattened firm surface, known as the &quot;face&quot;, which is used to strike the ball or shuttlecock.

In the strictest sense, the word &quot;racket&quot; specifically refers to a striking implement with a mesh face made of interlaced, tightly stretched strings fixed on an ovoid frame known as the &quot;rim&quot;. This type of racket is used in sports such as tennis, badminton, and racquetball. Some rackets have a rigid one-piece head with a solid or fenestrated face instead of a meshwork of strings. Such rackets are called a paddle or bat, and are used in sports such as table tennis, pickleball and padel. Collectively, sporting games using rackets and paddles are all known as racket sports.

Racket design, materials and manufacturing has changed considerably over the centuries. The frame of rackets for all sports was traditionally made of solid wood (later laminated wood) and the strings of animal intestine known as catgut. The traditional racket size was limited by the strength and weight of the wooden frame which had to be strong enough to hold the strings and stiff enough to hit the ball or shuttle. Manufacturers started adding non-wood laminates to wood rackets to improve stiffness. Non-wood rackets were made first of steel, then of aluminum, and then carbon fiber composites. Wood is still used for real tennis, rackets, and xare. Most rackets are now made of composite materials including carbon fiber or fiberglass, metals such as titanium alloys, or ceramics.

Catgut has partially been replaced by synthetic materials including nylon, polyamide, and other polymers. Rackets are restrung when necessary, which may be after every match for a professional. Despite the name, &quot;catgut&quot; has never been made from any part of a cat.

== Spelling ==
&quot;Racket&quot; is the standard American spelling of the word. &quot;Racquet&quot; is an alternative spelling more common in Britain, as evidenced by the BBC style guide. &quot;Racquet&quot; is used more commonly in certain sports, such as tennis, squash, racquetball, and badminton, and less commonly in others. However, the International Tennis Federation uses &quot;racket&quot;, which is the original spelling; dating from the 16th century. &quot;Racquet&quot; appeared in the 19th century as a French-influenced variant of &quot;racket&quot;.

==Etymology==
The origin of the term &quot;racket&quot; is unclear. It may be derived from the Flemish word &quot;raketsen&quot; which is itself derived from Middle French &quot;rachasser&quot;, meaning &quot;to strike (the ball) back&quot;.

== Badminton ==
Badminton rackets are light, with top quality rackets weighing between about 70 and 95  grams. Modern rackets are composed of carbon fiber composite (graphite reinforced plastic), which may be augmented by a variety of materials. Carbon fiber has an excellent strength to weight ratio, is stiff, and gives excellent kinetic energy transfer. Before the adoption of carbon fiber composite, rackets were made of wood to their excessive weight and cost.

There is a wide variety of racket designs, although the badminton racket size and shape are limited by the laws of the game. Different rackets have playing characteristics that appeal to different players. The traditional oval head shape is still available, but an isometric head shape is increasingly common in new rackets.
Various companies have emerged but Yonex of Japan and Victor of Taiwan are the dominant players in the market. The majority of top tournaments are sponsored by these companies. Every year new technology is introduced by these companies but predominantly, all rackets are made of carbon graphite composite.

== Rackets or Raquets ==
This predecessor to the modern game of squash, rackets, is played with wooden rackets. While squash equipment has evolved in the intervening century, rackets equipment has changed little.

== Racquetball ==
According to the current racquetball rules there are no limitations on the weight of a racquetball racket.

Racquetball rackets, unlike many other types, generally have little or no neck, the grip connecting directly to the head. They also tend to have head shapes that are notably wider at the top, with some older rackets looking almost triangular or teardrop shaped.

== Real tennis ==
In real tennis, also called court tennis, 27-inch (686-mm) long rackets are made of wood and very tight strings to cope with the game&#x27;s heavy balls. The racket heads are bent slightly to make striking balls close to the floor or in corners easier.

== Squash ==

Standard squash rackets are governed by the rules of the game. Traditionally they were made of laminated timber (typically Ash), with a small strung area using natural gut strings. After a rule change in the mid-1980s, they are now almost always made of composite materials such as carbon fiber or metals (graphite, Kevlar, titanium, and/or boron) with synthetic strings. Modern rackets are 70 cm long, with a maximum strung area of 500 square centimetres (approximately 75 square inches) and a mass between 90 and 200 grams (4–7 ounces).

==Table tennis==
Table tennis uses a table tennis racket made from laminated wood covered with rubber on one or two sides depending on the grip of the player. Unlike a conventional racket, it does not contain strings strung across an open frame. This is called either a paddle, racket, or a bat, with usage differing by region. In the USA the term &quot;paddle&quot; is common, in Europe the term is &quot;bat&quot;, and the official ITTF term is &quot;racket.&quot;

Table Tennis racket specs are defined at the ITTF handbook section 2.04 and currently include the following.
== Tennis ==

Popular lawn tennis rackets vary primarily in length, weight, balance point, stiffness, beam thickness, string pattern, string density, and head size. They generally conform to unofficial standards that differ from past rackets. Currently, almost all adult rackets are made from a graphite composite. Those made from wood (the original racket frame row material), steel, fiberglass, or aluminium are considered obsolete, although those materials are technically legal for play. Inexpensive rackets often have poor performance characteristics such as excessive flexibility and inadequate weight. No recent manufacturers use single-throated beams, although Prince tried to reintroduce the single throat design in the 1990s: the only professional who used one was Mirjana Lučić. Braided graphite rackets were considered high-end until recently and molded rackets have been the norm for some time. Molding is less expensive to manufacture and offer high stiffness. Graphite-composite rackets are today&#x27;s industry standard in professional tennis.

For length, is normally the junior racket range, while is for stronger more physically-mature players. Some are also available at lengths of . The Gamma Big Bubba was produced with a length but it is no longer legal in that length. Gamma responded by changing the length of the grip portion of the racket, to continue sales. The length restriction was based on the concern that such long rackets would make the serve too dominant, but that concern has never been objectively supported with testing. Moreover, some players, such as John Isner, are much taller and have longer arms than average professionals (and especially low stature ones), giving them a much larger advantage in terms of height for the service than is possible with several inches of racket length. This makes the length restriction more questionable. Finally, the professionals who nearly always choose to use the longest rackets typically choose them because they use two-handed groundstrokes for both forehand and backhand, using the extra length to improve their reach. An example is Marion Bartoli. As this type of player is not dominant in the sport, or even close to being average in terms of per capita representation, the length restriction seems even more unnecessary. Despite Prince&#x27;s attempt to market longer length &quot;longbody&quot; rackets in the 1990s, standard length remains the overwhelming choice of players, further negating the argument in favor of the length restriction. When most players who choose to use a longer racket than choose one, they typically only use a model, rather than one approaching . Longer rackets were introduced by Dunlop

Weights of a racket also vary between unstrung and strung. Until the 1980s, rackets weighted at &quot;medium&quot; were produced. &quot;Heavy&quot; rackets were produced during the height of the wood era (e.g. the 1960s), very sparingly. The &quot;medium&quot; weight is heavier than any of the rackets produced since it was discontinued by companies. Many professionals added weight to their rackets to improve stability. Many continue to do so. Pete Sampras added lead tape to make his racket have a weight and Venus Williams is known for using a frame modified to be quite heavy, in terms of the recent times average. By contrast, Andy Roddick surprised many when he said he used a stock Pro Drive series model, series of racket which was light when compared with the rackets used by most top professionals. In both recreational and professional tennis, the trend has been away from heavy rackets and toward lighter rackets, despite the drawbacks from light rackets, such as increased twisting. Lawn tennis rackets originally flared outward at the bottom of the handle to prevent slippage. The rounded bottom was called a bark bottom after its inventor Matthew Barker. But by 1947, this style became superfluous. More mass gives rackets &quot;plow through&quot;, momentum that continues once the player has managed to get the racket into motion and which is more resistant to stoppage from the ball&#x27;s momentum. This can give the perception that the racket produces shots with more power, although this is complicated by the typically slower stroke production. Higher mass typically involves a slower swing but more energy to execute the swing. More mass also provides more cushioning against ball impact shock, a source of injuries such as tennis elbow. However, high racket mass can cause fatigue in the shoulder area. Typically, it is safer for the body to have higher mass. More mass, additionally, provides more stability. It makes the racket more resistant to twisting forces and pushback. The drawbacks are that heavier rackets have lower maneuverability (reducing reaction time) and require more energy to move. As a racket gets heavier, the player finds it increasingly difficult to do fast reaction shots such as quick volleys and returns of serve. However, the additional mass can help with return of serve, in particular, by making the racket much more resistant to twist from a high-powered service. Light rackets have the additional drawback of making it easier for beginning players to use inappropriate wrist-dominant strokes, which often leads to injury. This is because poor stroke mechanics can be much easier to produce with a lightweight racket, such as in using one&#x27;s wrist to mostly swing the racket. An extremely typical mistake beginning players make is to choke up heavily on the racket (to try to compensate for twist from a light racket, as well as too high racket angle upon impact) and use the wrist too much. The only professional well-known player to have had success with a strongly choked-up grip is Zina Garrison.

Head size plays a very key role in a racket&#x27;s performance characteristics. A larger head size very generally means more power and a larger &quot;sweet spot&quot;. This is an area in the string bed that is partially more forgiving on off-center hits and which produces more ball-reflective power from string deformation, known as the trampoline effect. However, large head sizes can increase twisting, which makes off-center hits more difficult to control and can reduce a player&#x27;s overall power production due to the playing compensating for the extra inherent power, typically with stiffer strings to reduce the increased string deformation of large heads. A smaller head size generally offers more control for many shots, particularly the service and groundstrokes aimed near the lines, but can lead to more shanks (wild misses, from hitting the frame or missing the sweet spot). This drawback is most common for professional players using single-handed topspin backhands, as well as for recreational and aged players at net. Shanking due to small racket head size is typically exacerbated by racket weight, which slows the reaction time, as well as, to a lesser degree, the racket&#x27;s balance point. In professional tennis, currently-used racket head sizes vary between , with most players adopting one from . Rackets with smaller and larger head sizes, , are still produced but are not used by professionals currently. A very small number of professionals, such as Monica Seles, used rackets during some point in their careers. Rackets with smaller heads than have not been in production since the 1980s and rackets with larger head sizes than are not currently legal for the sport, even though only elderly players typically choose to use rackets beyond and it is nearly unheard-of for a serious player who is not elderly to choose a racket over . The WEED company, founded by Tad Weed, specializes in producing very large rackets, primarily for the elderly market. Rackets that are moderately higher in power production, moderately lower in weight, moderately larger in size, and which typically possess a slightly head-heavy balance are often called &quot;tweener rackets.&quot; Rackets that have the smallest heads in current use, the highest weights in current use, and headlight or even balance are referred to as &quot;players&#x27; rackets&quot;. Oversize rackets, typically in size, were once pejoratively referred to as &quot;granny sticks&quot; but resistance to them being seen as illegitimate rackets for younger players decreased dramatically with the successful use of these rackets by a small number professionals such as Andre Agassi and Pam Shriver. Originally, even midsize frames () were considered jumbo, and some top players, such as Martina Navratilova and Rod Laver said they should be banned for making the sport too easy. Later, these same professionals, including John McEnroe, signed a letter supporting a switch back to wood frames, or a limitation to the original standard size of approximately . Perhaps the last professional to use a standard-size racket in professional tennis was Aaron Krickstein, known for the strongly-contested match against Connors at the 1991 US Open. He used a Wilson Ultra-II standard-size graphite racket also used in the 1980s by the hard-hitting teen Andrea Jaeger. The first oversize, the fiberglass Bentley Fortissimo from Germany, was praised by racket designers but was considered too large to be taken seriously by the small number of players who were exposed to it.
The head-light balance point is rarer in professional tennis than it once was, as the sport has converted to larger-headed rackets, stiffer rackets, stiffer strings, more western grips and accompanying stroke production, and more topspin. The head-light balance point is most optimal for the serve and volley style with a continental grip. Serve and volley is no longer a viable option for nearly all professionals as the mode of playing for most points in a match. Head-heavy rackets became popular, mainly with recreational players, primarily with the introduction of the Wilson ProFile widebody racket. The head-light balance makes volleys and serves easier to produce, while groundstrokes are less stable. The head-heavy balance makes groundstrokes more stable, which typically increases the player&#x27;s comfort for swinging harder to add power, but makes serves and volleys more cumbersome. A head-heavy balance also puts more stress on the elbow and shoulder.

Vibration dampeners (also sometimes known as &quot;gummies&quot;) may be interlaced in the proximal part of the string array, to reduce the percussive sound of the ball hitting the strings and/or to reduce perceived vibration. They do not, however, reduce impact shock significantly, so they are of no safety value. Some professionals, such as Andre Agassi, used rubber bands instead of specialized dampeners. Dampeners come in two main types. The first uses the two central main strings to hold it in place. The second is sometimes called a &quot;worm&quot; and it is woven between many of the main strings. Dampeners are nearly always placed very near the bottom of the racket string bed.

As rackets have become lighter, stiffer, and larger-headed, the professional game has moved, basically completely, from softer and more flexible string materials to stiff materials. This is, in large part, to tone down the additional power potential of the &quot;modern&quot; rackets. However, it also is related to the tendency for different string materials to move out of place when subjected to heavy topspin strokes. Polyester is the string of choice today because of that resistance, despite its increased stiffness (harsher feel and more aggravating for the joints) and reduced tension-holding ability (versus a string like natural gut, which excels at that). The top professionals of the 1970s and earlier, despite having access to stiffer materials such as nylon, nearly always chose to use the very flexible natural gut instead. String bed stiffness can be increased by using stiffer materials, such as kevlar and polyester, by increasing the density of the string pattern, and by stringing with a higher tension. Racket makers and players have experimented with very dense string patterns and very &quot;open&quot; patterns, beginning with the Snauwaert Hi Ten, which had a pattern with as few as 12 mains and 13 crosses. Doubles great Mark Woodforde used one of them. More recently, Grigor Dimitrov is known for having played with a very open-patterned racket during part of his career. String choice, both in thickness and material, string tension, string pattern, and string pattern density can have a very large effect on how a racket performs.

Throughout most of lawn tennis&#x27; history, most rackets were made of laminated wood, with heads of around . A small number of them were made of metal, such as a 1920s racket by Dayton. Some, rarely, also had metal strings. In the late 1960s, Wilson popularized the T-2000 steel racket with wire wound around the frame to make string loops, after having purchased the design from René Lacoste, who produced the racket first in a more limited run. It was popularized by the top American player Jimmy Connors and was also, prior to Connors using it, by Billie Jean King in her early career. Many players said it lacked control but had more power, when compared with wood frames of the period. Connors used the rarer &quot;firm&quot; model that had additional throat welds to increase its stiffness. In 1968 Spalding launched an aluminum racket, called The Smasher. Aluminum, though lighter and more flexible than steel, was sometimes less accurate than wood. The biggest complaint, however, was that metal rackets caused strong cases of tennis elbow, especially the kind that had holes for the strings directly in the frame, rather than using an external wire wrapper, as in the T-2000. Because of that drawback in particular, most of the top players still preferred to use wooden frames.

By 1975, aluminum construction improvements allowed for the introduction of the first American &quot;oversized&quot; racket, which was manufactured by Weed. Prince popularized the oversize racket, which had a head size of approximately . Howard Head was able to obtain a broad patent for Prince, despite the prior art of the Bentley Fortissimo (the first oversize, made in Germany of fiberglass) and the Weed. The patent was rejected by Germany but approved in the USA. The popularity of the Prince aluminum oversize had the side effect of popularizing rackets having other non-standard head sizes such as mid-size and mid-plus sizes . Fairly quickly, midsize frames began to become the most-used frames in the pro tours. Martina Navratilova popularized the midsize graphite racket, with her wins using the Yonex R-7, the first midsize graphite racket made by Yonex. Nearly at the same time, however, she said the &quot;jumbo&quot; rackets (midsize included) should be removed from the sport for making it easier. She said she would use them only because other players could, as they were tournament-legal. Fewer players chose to use oversize rackets, and some switched to midplus frames after their earliest career for more control. Fiberglass frames also had a brief period of limited popularity, making fewer inroads among top players than aluminum. Also, the earliest composites, such as the Head Competition series, used by Arthur Ashe, were made without graphite. These were more flexible than a typical early graphite composite but stiffer than wood, fiberglass, and aluminum.

In the early 1980s, &quot;graphite&quot; (carbon fibre) composites were introduced, and other materials were added to the composite, including ceramics, glass fibre, boron, and titanium. Some of the earliest models typically had 20% or more fiberglass, to make them more flexible. Stiff rackets were typically not preferred by most players because of their familiarity with the comfortable softness of wood. These early models tended to be very flexible and not very powerful, although they were a power upgrade over wood and metal rackets. Wilson created the Jack Kramer Pro Staff, the graphite version of the wood racket of the same name extremely popular in the late 70s and early 80s. This was the origin of the extremely influential Wilson Pro Staff 85. Chris Evert&#x27;s first graphite racket was this Jack Kramer version, which had 20% fiberglass. It was not a market success and she, along with everyone else, quickly replaced it with the stiffer Pro Staff 85, which had 20% kevlar. It used the same mold and had the same braided graphite, but offered a very noticeable improvement in power. The very popular Prince original graphite, an oversize in its most popular form, was also quite influential and used by many pros, especially as juniors. Jennifer Capriati and Monica Seles, for instance, used the Prince graphite to contest their influential Wimbledon match in 1991 that has often been hailed as the beginning of the power baselining game in the WTA, although that claim is somewhat hyperbolic and is, in large part, due to the mistaken impression that the players were hitting much harder when, in fact, the rackets were more powerful. However, the very large head size, when compared with the midsize and, especially, the old &quot;standard&quot; size, made it easier to produce power. The racket also had an open string pattern. The Prince &quot;original&quot; graphite name is rather a misnomer, as it went through some significant design adjustments over its lifetime. For instance, the truly original model had a reverse teardrop head shape, something no subsequent versions had. Stiffer composite rackets, when compared with the first and second generations of graphite composites, are the contemporary standard. The last wooden racket used at Wimbledon appeared in 1987, long after they were abandoned by practically all professionals. Borg tried to stage a comeback with his standard wood racket, after his premature retirement, but it quickly ended in failure, as the standard wood was no match when placed against a stiff midplus graphite. It is also commonly argued that Chris Evert would have been able to beat Martina Navratilova during the latter&#x27;s most dominant period if she had switched from her wood racket years sooner. Additionally, the last influential wooden racket, the Prince Woodie, had layers of graphite to increase its stiffness and was an oversize. It was used by Tommy Haas, Gabriela Sabatini, and quite a few others. It offered very little power but did offer much more surface area than a standard-size wooden frame. Sabatini found it helpful, as compared with smaller rackets, due to her production of heavy topspin. The only woman to beat Martina Navratilova in 1984, Kathleen Horvath, used the Prince Woodie, one of only six losses Navratilova suffered in a three-year stretch involving 260 matches.
A denser pattern is often considered to deliver more control, at the expense of spin potential. A more open pattern is often believed to offer greater potential for power and spin. However, how much power is produced by a player can be strongly influenced by how a player adapts to the characteristics of the racket. Some players may hit harder with a dense string pattern, producing faster shots because of the added control from the dense pattern. Rackets, including those of much of the wood era, are marked with a recommended string tension range. The basic rule is that a lower tension creates more power (from the trampoline effect) and a higher string tension creates more control (less string deformation which results in a more predictable the power and angle of the departure from the string bed.) Some professionals used small-headed rackets with flexible-material strings (natural gut) strung at very high tension. Examples include Pete Sampras and Björn Borg. Some used large-headed rackets with very inflexible-material strings (kevlar). Andre Agassi is an example. Many professionals during the standard wood era strung at relatively low tension and used natural gut string; both decisions were to increase the trampoline effect for more power. By contrast, almost every professional player today uses the much stiffer polyester string in their much stiffer rackets which also have larger heads and which tend to be lighter. Madeline Hauptman sold a line of rackets, called the MAD RAQ, which featured a Star of David pattern (a six-pointed figure consisting of two interlaced equilateral triangles), as it used three strings instead of two for stringing the racket. This pattern is used in snowshoes. This stringing pattern was said to feature less string notching, improving string lifespan. It was even claimed that many pro shops refused to carry the racket because less string breakage would reduce string and stringing service sales. It has also been claimed that the racket is more difficult to string than a two string racket. However, the Wilson T-2000-type requires a great deal more time for stringing than a typical racket and rackets of that series were very popular. Whatever the cause of the failure of the MAD RAQ in the marketplace, it was the only time a snowshoe pattern was used in tennis. Hauptman switched her racket line to a two string diamond pattern (PowerAngle). This pattern had already been used in much earlier rackets but had not had much popularity. It is said to be easier to string than the MAD RAQ but does not have the benefit of reduced string notching, at least not to the same degree. The claim is that this diagonal pattern offers more comfort than a traditional square pattern.

The stiffest graphite racket that has been sold is the Prince More Game MP, which is rated at 80 RA on the industry-standard Babolat measuring equipment. The Prince More series used two pieces (a top side and bottom side of the racket, or a left side and a right side) and no grommet strip. Prince had briefly used a design without a grommet strip in an early version of its &quot;original&quot; graphite oversize. The most famous user of a More series racket was Martina Navratilova, who returned to play doubles in her 40s, using a Prince More Control DB (a midplus) for her initial wins in the mixed doubles at Wimbledon and the Australian Open with Leander Paes. She had used the stiffer More Game MP prior. Navratilova later switched to a design by Warren Bosworth (the founder of Bosworth Tennis) which had a customized asymmetric grip and an unusual geometric head shape. Stiffer rackets typically offer more power and control at the expense of increased ball shock, which can lead to injury or tennis elbow aggravation. Typically, power and control are at odds. However, in the case of stiff rackets, less energy is dissipated by the racket deforming, transmitting it back to the ball. Control is improved because there is less deformation. However, a player&#x27;s overall power level may decrease due to the need to moderate ball striking effort to reduce discomfort and even injury. Although known as a hard hitter in her younger years, in her 40s she was known more as a precision player who used finesse (and especially tactics) more than power. In fact, the last doubles partner she won a major with in mixed, Bob Bryan, remarked on how slow her serve was, despite how effective she was on the court. Navratilova also used string that was much softer than what anyone else on tour used (thick uncoated natural gut), to help compensate for the stiffness of her racket. The vastly higher injury rate in tennis (when compared with the wood era) is, in part, due to the increase in stiffness, both of the racket and of the strings.

Real tennis uses wooden rackets and cork-filled balls. It is a very different sport from today&#x27;s lawn tennis.

==See also==
* Tennis racket theorem
* List of racket sports

==References==
==External links==
*Tennis racket design by Howard Head; (1974) Smithsonian Institution Libraries
*The History of Tennis Racquets — Evolution of the Modern Racquet 
* Gelberg, J. Nadine, &quot;The Big Technological Tennis Upset&quot;, &quot;Invention &amp; Technology&quot; magazine, 1997
* A Brief Look on the History of Table Tennis Rackets</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q240502" start="2" end="8" title="Racket (sports equipment)" label="racket"/>
<link wikidata="Q240502" start="12" end="19" title="Racket (sports equipment)" label="racquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q768186" start="34" end="52" title="sporting equipment" label="sporting equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545" start="70" end="74" title="ball" label="ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q874669" start="78" end="89" title="shuttlecock" label="shuttlecock"/>
<link wikidata="Q200266" start="224" end="230" title="handle" label="handle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24503377" start="611" end="615" title="mesh" label="mesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11064354" start="659" end="665" title="string (structure)" label="string"/>
<link wikidata="Q193410" start="679" end="684" title="ovoid" label="ovoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="767" end="773" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291" start="775" end="784" title="badminton" label="badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q754586" start="790" end="801" title="racquetball" label="racquetball"/>
<link wikidata="Q240502" start="937" end="943" title="Racket (sports equipment)" label="paddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q240502" start="947" end="950" title="Racket (sports equipment)" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="983" end="995" title="table tennis" label="table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q866224" start="997" end="1007" title="pickleball" label="pickleball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582389" start="1012" end="1017" title="padel" label="padel"/>
<link wikidata="Q118145884" start="1091" end="1104" title="racket sports" label="racket sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317763" start="1275" end="1289" title="engineered wood" label="laminated wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147086" start="1336" end="1342" title="catgut" label="catgut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360406" start="1730" end="1741" title="real tennis" label="real tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457676" start="1743" end="1750" title="rackets (sport)" label="rackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q212845" start="1756" end="1760" title="xare" label="xare"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="1821" end="1833" title="carbon fiber" label="carbon fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="1837" end="1847" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="1864" end="1872" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="1884" end="1891" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q177941" start="1963" end="1968" title="nylon" label="nylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q145273" start="1970" end="1979" title="polyamide" label="polyamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="2429" end="2435" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q133201" start="2437" end="2443" title="Squash (sport)" label="squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q754586" start="2445" end="2456" title="racquetball" label="racquetball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291" start="2462" end="2471" title="badminton" label="badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q223041" start="2515" end="2546" title="International Tennis Federation" label="International Tennis Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34147" start="2833" end="2840" title="Flemish dialects" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473289" start="2896" end="2909" title="Middle French" label="Middle French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291" start="2997" end="3006" title="Badminton" label="Badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="3147" end="3174" title="Carbon fiber reinforced polymer" label="graphite reinforced plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="3313" end="3327" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q773924" start="3808" end="3813" title="Yonex" label="Yonex"/>
<link wikidata="Q10901384" start="3827" end="3833" title="Victor (sports company)" label="Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457676" start="4152" end="4159" title="rackets (sport)" label="rackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q754586" start="4337" end="4348" title="racquetball" label="racquetball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360406" start="4704" end="4715" title="real tennis" label="real tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q133201" start="4978" end="4984" title="Squash (sport)" label="squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="5092" end="5095" title="ash tree" label="Ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="5275" end="5283" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q207344" start="5285" end="5291" title="Kevlar" label="Kevlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="5293" end="5301" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="5310" end="5315" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="5526" end="5538" title="Table tennis" label="Table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q337695" start="5546" end="5565" title="table tennis racket" label="table tennis racket"/>
<link wikidata="Q661379" start="5943" end="5947" title="International Table Tennis Federation" label="ITTF"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="6113" end="6119" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q239686" start="6861" end="6874" title="Mirjana Lučić" label="Mirjana Lučić"/>
<link wikidata="Q53566" start="7679" end="7689" title="John Isner" label="John Isner"/>
<link wikidata="Q105838" start="8205" end="8219" title="Marion Bartoli" label="Marion Bartoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q558635" start="8317" end="8327" title="per capita" label="per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315461" start="8785" end="8791" title="Dunlop Sport" label="Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q9446" start="9240" end="9252" title="Pete Sampras" label="Pete Sampras"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="9259" end="9263" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q11578" start="9306" end="9320" title="Venus Williams" label="Venus Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q54584" start="9427" end="9439" title="Andy Roddick" label="Andy Roddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="10059" end="10067" title="momentum" label="momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q736776" start="10541" end="10553" title="tennis elbow" label="tennis elbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q53546" start="11839" end="11852" title="Zina Garrison" label="Zina Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q356812" start="12005" end="12015" title="Sweet spot (sports)" label="sweet spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q173633" start="13337" end="13349" title="Monica Seles" label="Monica Seles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674255" start="13750" end="13758" title="Tad Weed" label="Tad Weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="14510" end="14522" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q54654" start="14527" end="14538" title="Pam Shriver" label="Pam Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q54545" start="14628" end="14647" title="Martina Navratilova" label="Martina Navratilova"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="14652" end="14661" title="Rod Laver" label="Rod Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q16474" start="14763" end="14775" title="John McEnroe" label="John McEnroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q302217" start="14986" end="15002" title="Aaron Krickstein" label="Aaron Krickstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q236648" start="15184" end="15197" title="Andrea Jaeger" label="Andrea Jaeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984131" start="15234" end="15252" title="Bentley Fortissimo" label="Bentley Fortissimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="16718" end="16730" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q177941" start="17832" end="17837" title="nylon" label="nylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207344" start="17979" end="17985" title="kevlar" label="kevlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188245" start="17990" end="17999" title="polyester" label="polyester"/>
<link wikidata="Q23039449" start="18221" end="18230" title="Snauwaert" label="Snauwaert"/>
<link wikidata="Q360630" start="18313" end="18327" title="Mark Woodforde" label="Mark Woodforde"/>
<link wikidata="Q337681" start="18361" end="18376" title="Grigor Dimitrov" label="Grigor Dimitrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329777" start="18872" end="18878" title="Wilson Sporting Goods" label="Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q221454" start="19009" end="19021" title="René Lacoste" label="René Lacoste"/>
<link wikidata="Q53393" start="19122" end="19135" title="Jimmy Connors" label="Jimmy Connors"/>
<link wikidata="Q54527" start="19180" end="19196" title="Billie Jean King" label="Billie Jean King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550716" start="20074" end="20080" title="Prince Sports" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794673" start="20155" end="20166" title="Howard Head" label="Howard Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q12139145" start="20225" end="20234" title="prior art" label="prior art"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984131" start="20242" end="20260" title="Bentley Fortissimo" label="Bentley Fortissimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q773924" start="20724" end="20729" title="Yonex" label="Yonex"/>
<link wikidata="Q53325" start="21346" end="21357" title="Arthur Ashe" label="Arthur Ashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="21544" end="21556" title="carbon fibre" label="carbon fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="21558" end="21567" title="Composite material" label="composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q54529" start="22062" end="22073" title="Jack Kramer" label="Jack Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14286" start="22261" end="22272" title="Chris Evert" label="Chris Evert"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016713" start="22620" end="22644" title="Prince original graphite" label="Prince original graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680" start="22757" end="22774" title="Jennifer Capriati" label="Jennifer Capriati"/>
<link wikidata="Q173633" start="22779" end="22791" title="Monica Seles" label="Monica Seles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875856" start="23409" end="23417" title="misnomer" label="misnomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q53560" start="24418" end="24428" title="Tommy Haas" label="Tommy Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q105868" start="24430" end="24447" title="Gabriela Sabatini" label="Gabriela Sabatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194072" start="24727" end="24743" title="Kathleen Horvath" label="Kathleen Horvath"/>
<link wikidata="Q9446" start="25804" end="25816" title="Pete Sampras" label="Pete Sampras"/>
<link wikidata="Q104506" start="25821" end="25831" title="Björn Borg" label="Björn Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="25912" end="25924" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q161396" start="26379" end="26392" title="Star of David" label="Star of David"/>
<link wikidata="Q214724" start="26566" end="26574" title="snowshoe" label="snowshoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q797750" start="27720" end="27727" title="Babolat" label="Babolat"/>
<link wikidata="Q296282" start="28248" end="28260" title="Leander Paes" label="Leander Paes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984949" start="28381" end="28396" title="Bosworth Tennis" label="Bosworth Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q53340" start="29219" end="29228" title="Bob Bryan" label="Bob Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360406" start="29638" end="29649" title="Real tennis" label="Real tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q944604" start="29769" end="29790" title="Tennis racket theorem" label="Tennis racket theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q118145884" start="29793" end="29814" title="List of racket sports" label="List of racket sports"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52665" wikidata="Q57278" url="?curid=52665" title="Newcastle, New South Wales">
<text>Newcastle, also commonly referred to as Greater Newcastle ( ; ) is a large metropolitan area and the second-most-populous such area of New South Wales, Australia. It includes the cities of Newcastle and Lake Macquarie and it is the hub of the Lower Hunter region, which includes most parts of the cities of Newcastle, Lake Macquarie, Maitland, Cessnock, and Port Stephens Council. Newcastle is also known by its colloquial nickname, Newy.

Located at the mouth of the Hunter River, it is the predominant city within the Hunter Region. Famous for its coal, Newcastle is the largest coal exporting harbour in the world, exporting 143 million tonnes of coal in 2022. Beyond the city, the Hunter Region possesses large coal deposits. Geologically, the area is located in the central-eastern part of the Sydney Basin.

==History==

===Aboriginal history===
Newcastle and the lower Hunter Region were traditionally occupied by the Awabakal and Worimi Aboriginal people, who called the area Malubimba.

Based on Aboriginal-language references documented in maps, sketches and geological descriptions, eight landmarks have been officially dual-named by the NSW Geographic Names Board with their traditional Aboriginal names. They include Nobbys Head also known as Whibayganba; Flagstaff Hill also known as Tahlbihn; Pirate Point also known as Burrabihngarn; Port Hunter also known as Yohaaba; Hunter River (South Channel) also known as Coquun;
Shepherds Hill also known as Khanterin; Ironbark Creek also known as Toohrnbing and Hexham Swamp also known as Burraghihnbihng.

===European settlement===

In September 1797, Lieutenant John Shortland became the first European to explore the area. His discovery of the area was largely accidental; as he had been sent in search of a number of convicts who had seized a locally built vessel called &quot;Cumberland&quot; as she was sailing from Sydney Cove. While returning, Lt. Shortland entered what he later described as &quot;a very fine river&quot;, which he named after New South Wales&#x27; Governor John Hunter. He returned with reports of the deep-water port and the area&#x27;s abundant coal. Over the next two years, coal mined from the area was the New South Wales colony&#x27;s first export.

Newcastle gained a reputation as a &quot;hellhole&quot; as it was a place where the most dangerous convicts were sent to dig in the coal mines as harsh punishment for their crimes. By the start of the 19th century, the mouth of the Hunter River was being visited by diverse groups of men, including coal diggers, timber-cutters, and more escaped convicts. Philip Gidley King, the Governor of New South Wales from 1800, decided on a more positive approach to exploit the now obvious natural resources of the Hunter Valley. In 1801, a convict camp called King&#x27;s Town (named after the governor) was established to mine coal and cut timber. In the same year, the first shipment of coal was dispatched to Sydney. This settlement closed less than a year later.

A settlement was again attempted in 1804, as a place of secondary punishment for unruly convicts. The settlement was named Coal River, also Kingstown and then renamed Newcastle, after the English city. The name first appeared by the commission issued by Governor King on 15 March 1804 to Lieutenant Charles Menzies of the marine detachment on , then at Port Jackson, appointing him superintendent of the new settlement. The new settlement, comprising convicts and a military guard, arrived at the Hunter River on 27 March 1804 in three ships: , the &quot;Resource&quot; and the &quot;James&quot;. The convicts were rebels from the 1804 Castle Hill convict rebellion. The link with Newcastle upon Tyne, England (its namesake) and also whence many of the 19th-century coal miners came, is still obvious in some of the place-names—such as Jesmond, Hexham, Wickham, Wallsend and Gateshead. Morpeth, New South Wales is a similar distance north of Newcastle as Morpeth, Northumberland is north of Newcastle upon Tyne.

Under Captain James Wallis, commandant from 1815 to 1818, the convicts&#x27; conditions improved, and a building boom began. Captain Wallis laid out the streets of the town, built the first church of the site of the present Christ Church Cathedral, erected the old gaol on the seashore, and began work on the breakwater which now joins Nobbys Head to the mainland. The quality of these first buildings was poor, and only the (much reinforced) breakwater survives. During this period, in 1816, the first school was built in Newcastle.

Newcastle remained a penal settlement until 1822, when the settlement was opened up to farming. As a penal colony, the military rule was harsh, especially at Limeburners&#x27; Bay, on the inner side of Stockton peninsula. There, convicts were sent to burn oyster shells for making lime. Military rule in Newcastle ended in 1823. Prisoner numbers were reduced to 100 (most of these were employed on the building of the breakwater), and the remaining 900 were sent to Port Macquarie.

===Civilian government and onwards===

After removal of the last convicts in 1823, the town was freed from the infamous influence of the penal law. It began to acquire the aspect of a typical Australian pioneer settlement, and a steady flow of free settlers poured into the hinterland.

During the nineteenth century the formation of the Newcastle &amp; Hunter River Steamship Company saw the establishment of regular steamship services from Morpeth and Newcastle with Sydney. The company had a fleet of freighters as well as several fast passenger vessels, including the PS &quot;Newcastle&quot; and the PS &quot;Namoi&quot;. The &quot;Namoi&quot; had first-class cabins with the latest facilities.

Because of the coal supply, small ships plied between Newcastle and Sydney, Brisbane, Melbourne and Adelaide, carrying coal to gas works and bunkers for shipping, and railways. These were commonly known as sixty-milers, referring to the nautical journey between Newcastle and Sydney. These ships continued in service until recent times.

===1920s to present===

During World War II, Newcastle was an important industrial centre for the Australian war effort. In 1942, the Japanese planned to attack Sydney Harbour. On the early hours of 8 June, the Japanese submarine briefly shelled Newcastle. Among the areas hit within the city were dockyards, the Newcastle Steelworks, Parnell Place in the city&#x27;s East End, the breakwall and Art Deco Ocean baths. There were no casualties in the attack and damage was minimal.The Port of Newcastle remains the economic and trade centre for the resource-rich Hunter Valley and for much of the north and north-west of New South Wales. Newcastle is the world&#x27;s largest coal export port and Australia&#x27;s oldest and second-largest tonnage throughput port, with over 3,000 shipping movements handling cargo of 95.8 Mt per annum, of which coal exports represented 90.8 Mt in 2008–09. The volume of coal exported, and attempts to increase coal exports, are opposed by environmental groups including Newcastle-based Rising Tide Australia. These have undertaken various protests targeting the export of coal from the city, such as in 2023 when 3000 people took part in a water based blockade and 109 were arrested.
Newcastle had a shipbuilding industry with the Walsh Island Dockyard &amp; Engineering Works, State Dockyard and Forgacs Shipyard. In recent years the only major ship-construction contract awarded to the area was the construction of the &quot;Huon&quot;-class minehunters. The era of extensive heavy industry passed when the steel works closed in 1999. Many of the remaining manufacturing industries have located themselves well away from the city itself.
Newcastle has one of the oldest theatre districts in Australia. Victoria Theatre on Perkins Street is the oldest purpose-built theatre in the country. The theatre district that occupied the area around what is now the Hunter Street Mall vanished during the 1940s. The old city centre has seen some new apartments and hotels built in recent years, but the rate of commercial and retail occupation remains low while alternate suburban centres have become more important. The CBD itself is shifting to the west, towards the major urban renewal area known as &quot;Honeysuckle&quot;. This renewal, to run for another 10 years, is a major part of arresting the shift of business and residents to the suburbs. Commercial renewal has been accompanied by cultural renaissance. There is a vibrant arts scene in the city including a highly regarded art gallery, and an active Hunter Writers&#x27; Centre. Recent fictional representations (for example Antoinette Eklund&#x27;s &#x27;Steel River&#x27;) present a new vision of the city, using the city&#x27;s historic past as a backdrop for contemporary fiction.

The old central business district, located at Newcastle&#x27;s eastern end, still has a considerable number of historic buildings, dominated by Christ Church Cathedral, seat of the Anglican Bishop of Newcastle. Other noteworthy buildings include Fort Scratchley, the Ocean Baths, the old Customs House, the 1920s City Hall, the 1890s Longworth Institute (once regarded as the finest building in the colony) and the 1930s art deco University House (formerly NESCA House, seen in the film &quot;Superman Returns&quot;).

==Geography==
Newcastle is on the southern bank of the Hunter River mouth. The northern side is dominated by sand dunes, swamps and multiple river channels. A &quot;green belt&quot; protecting plant and wildlife flanks the city from the west (Watagan mountains) around to the north where it meets the coast just north of Stockton. Urban development is mainly restricted to the hilly southern bank. The small town of Stockton sits opposite central Newcastle at the river mouth and is linked by ferry. Road access between Stockton and central Newcastle is via the Stockton Bridge, a distance of . Much of the city is undercut by the coal measures of the Sydney sedimentary basin, and what were once numerous coal-mining villages located in the hills and valleys around the port have merged into a single urban area extending southwards to Lake Macquarie. The Greater Newcastle area is situated right between the Central Coast and Mid North Coast regions, with the Central Coast bordering in the south and the Mid North Coast bordering in the north as well as other Hunter local government areas (outside of Newcastle) bordering in the west and north-west.

===Parks===
Newcastle has several public parks including King Edward Park, which was designated in 1863. Features of the park include coastal views, a sunken garden and a Victorian rotunda.
Another noteworthy park of Newcastle is Starrett Park in New Lambton, known for its playground and lush grass.

===Climate===
Newcastle has a humid subtropical climate (&quot;Cfa&quot;) that is typical of the Australian east coast. Precipitation is heaviest in late autumn and early winter, while the second half of the year is slightly drier on average. The climate is generally moderated by the Pacific Ocean to the east. Summers are mostly warm and humid with periods of very dry and hot weather occasionally due to hot west to north-westerly winds, which can bring temperatures in excess of . The highest recorded temperature was on 18 January 2013 at the Nobbys Head weather station.

Winters are generally mild with drier conditions than summer on average. Cold fronts affect the area and sometimes bring strong westerly winds behind them, but due to the foehn effect they generally provide clear conditions as the region lies leeward of the Great Dividing Range. The lowest recorded temperature was on 27 July 1986. East coast lows also impact Newcastle, sometimes delivering winds well above and torrential rainfall, usually lasting a couple of days. The east coast low in May 1974, the 2007 New South Wales storms and April 2015 are extreme examples of this type of weather.


==Demographics==

The metropolitan area of Newcastle is the second-most-populous area in New South Wales to Sydney.

What is generally labelled as the &#x27;Greater Newcastle Area&#x27; includes the LGAs of Newcastle, Lake Macquarie, Maitland, Cessnock and Port Stephens. In 2021 this region had a total population of 682,465.

Of people in the Newcastle metropolitan area, 83.6 per cent were born in Australia. The next most common countries of birth were England 2.3%, New Zealand 1.0%, China 0.7%, India 0.5% and Philippines 0.4%. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people made up 3.8% of the population. 88.2% of people spoke only English at home. Other languages spoken at home included Mandarin 0.7%, Macedonian 0.5%, Italian 0.4%, Greek 0.3% and Cantonese 0.3%. The most common responses for religion in Newcastle were No Religion 31.1%, Catholic 21.7% and Anglican 19.2%.

Newcastle is often quoted as being the seventh-largest city in Australia. This is misleading as the area represented extends well beyond both the City of Newcastle and the Newcastle metropolitan area. The area, officially the Newcastle Statistical District, is referred to as Greater Newcastle or the Lower Hunter Region, which includes most parts of the Newcastle, Lake Macquarie, Cessnock, Maitland and Port Stephens local government areas and, as of 30 June 2009, has an estimated population of 540,796. Despite their proximity, all of the LGAs in the region maintain their own individual identities, separate from Newcastle.

The population of the suburb of Newcastle is 3,852 as of the 2021 census.

The demonym for the people of Newcastle is &quot;Novocastrian&quot;, derived from Latin &quot;novus&quot; (new) and &quot;castra&quot; (castle or fort).

==Economy==
Newcastle as a traditional area of heavy industry was not immune from the effects of economic downturns that plagued New South Wales and wider Australia since the 1970s. These downturns were particularly hard hitting for heavy industry which was particularly prevalent in Newcastle. The early 1990s recession caused significant job losses across Australia and the Newcastle region experienced a peak unemployment rate of 17% in February 1993, compared to 12.1% in New South Wales and 11.9% across Australia.

In 1999, the steelworks closed after 84 years&#x27; operation and had employed about 50,000 during its existence, many for decades. The closure of the BHP steelworks occurred at a time of strong economic expansion in Australia. At the time of the closure and since the closure Newcastle experienced a significant amount of economic diversification which has strengthened the local economy.

Since 2003, Australia experienced the effects of the 2000s commodities boom as commodities prices for major export good such as coal and iron ore rose significantly. This provided a large incentive for investment in the Newcastle and Hunter region due to its status as a major coal mining and export hub to Asian markets. Large projects related to the coal industry helped to propel the Newcastle unemployment rate to 20 year lows and allow the Newcastle region to weather the effects of the late 2000s recession better than NSW as a whole. As of 2009, the two largest single employers are the Hunter New England Area Health Service and the University of Newcastle. The National Stock Exchange of Australia (formerly Newcastle Stock Exchange) was formerly based in the city.

===19th and early 20th centuries===

====Coal====
Coal mining began in earnest on 3 May 1833 when the Australian Agricultural Company received land grants at Newcastle plus a 31-year monopoly on that town&#x27;s coal traffic. Other collieries were within a radius of the town. Principal coal mines were located at Stockton, Tighes Hill, Carrington and the Newcastle Coal and Copper Company&#x27;s collieries at Merewether (includes the Glebe), Wallsend and the Waratah collieries. All operations had closed by the early 1960s.

On 10 December 1831, the Australian Agricultural Company officially opened Australia&#x27;s first railway, at the intersection of Brown &amp; Church Streets, Newcastle. Privately owned and operated to service the &quot;A Pit&quot; coal mine, it was a cast-iron fishbelly rail on an inclined plane as a gravitational railway.

====Copper====
In the 1850s, a major copper smelting works was established at Burwood, near Merewether. An engraving of this appeared in &quot;The Illustrated London News&quot; on 11 February 1854. The English and Australian Copper Company built another substantial works at Broadmeadow circa 1890, and in that decade the Cockle Creek Smelter was built.
====Soap====
The largest factory of its kind in the Southern Hemisphere was constructed in 1885, on an site between the suburbs of Tighes Hill and Port Waratah, by Charles Upfold, from London, for his Sydney Soap and Candle Company, to replace a smaller factory in Wickham. Their soap products won 17 medals at International Exhibitions. At the Sydney International Exhibition, they won a bronze medal &quot;against all-comers from every part of the world&quot;, the only first prize awarded for soap and candles. Following World War I, the company was sold to Messrs Lever &amp; Kitchen (today Unilever), and the factory closed in the mid-1930s.

====Steel====
In 1911, BHP chose the city as the site for its steelworks due to the abundance of coal. The land put aside was prime real estate, on the southern edge of the harbour. In 1915, the Newcastle Steelworks opened, beginning a period of some 80 years dominating the steel works and heavy industry. As Mayfield and the suburbs surrounding the steelworks declined in popularity because of pollution, the steelworks thrived, becoming the region&#x27;s largest employer.

==Government and politics==
With its history as a traditionally working-class area, Newcastle has been a stronghold for the centre-left Labor Party at all levels of politics since Federation. Labor currently holds every federal and state seat that overlaps at least partially with Newcastle.

The only area of Greater Newcastle where the centre-right Liberal Party has ever been consistently competitive is the Port Stephens region in the north of the Newcastle metropolitan area, as well as in some beachside, middle-class suburbs near the Newcastle CBD such as Bar Beach and Merewether. The Port Stephens area is traditionally marginal and while historically was dominated by Labor, has been won by the Liberals.

One time the Liberals did win seats in Newcastle was at the 2011 state election. At this election, the incumbent Labor government, led by then-Premier Kristina Keneally, was defeated by the Liberal-National Coalition, led by then-Opposition Leader Barry O&#x27;Farrell, in a landslide, suffering the worst ever defeat of a sitting government in New South Wales history and (at the time) the worst defeat of a sitting government anywhere in Australia since World War II. Labor won just 20 seats in the New South Wales Legislative Assembly; of these, only two (Cessnock and Wallsend) were in the Hunter Region. Before the election, the Liberal Party only held one seat in the entire Hunter Region (the seat of Port Stephens, which the party narrowly gained from Labor in 2007). However, at the subsequent state election in 2015, although the Coalition retained majority government (and subsequently retained government again in 2019 before Labor formed a minority government in 2023), the party lost all of its Hunter-based seats.There are three federal electoral divisions that are mostly or entirely within Greater Newcastle: Newcastle (covering the inner-city suburbs; this seat has only ever elected Labor MPs since it was created in 1901), Paterson (covering the Port Stephens area as well as the nearby city of Maitland and the town of Kurri Kurri; this seat is currently a marginal Labor seat that the Liberals have won previously, though it historically included more rural areas and did not include Maitland or Kurri Kurri) and Shortland (a fairly safe Labor seat that includes the eastern suburbs of the Lake Macquarie region in southern Newcastle, and extends to the far northeastern suburbs of the Central Coast). The traditionally Labor-held seat of Hunter (now a marginal Labor seat) is based around the western portion of the Hunter, but includes some western and Southern suburbs of Newcastle.

On the state level, there are five electoral districts that are located entirely within Greater Newcastle; of these, four (Charlestown, Newcastle, Port Stephens and Swansea) are Labor seats while the remaining seat (Lake Macquarie) is held by an independent.

Greater Newcastle also includes five local government areas (LGAs): the City of Newcastle, the City of Lake Macquarie, the City of Cessnock, the City of Maitland and the Port Stephens Council.

==Education==

===Primary and secondary schools===
Newcastle High School, which was formed by the merger of three schools, traces its lineage to a secondary school section initially founded on the grounds of Newcastle East Public School.

There are three selective state schools in the area:
*Hunter School of the Performing Arts, a fully selective Years 3–12 school, taking students only by audition
*Merewether High School, a fully selective high school in the suburb of Broadmeadow
*Hunter Sports High School, a partially selective sporting high school, accepting around half its students from the local area and around half by audition

The two main independent schools in Newcastle are Newcastle Grammar School and St Philip&#x27;s Christian College, both coeducational K–12 schools.

The local area is also home to two Steiner schools: the Newcastle Waldorf School at Glendale in Lake Macquarie, and the Linuwel Steiner School in East Maitland.
===Tertiary and further education===
The city&#x27;s main provider of tertiary education is the University of Newcastle. It was established in 1951 as a satellite campus of the University of New South Wales and obtained autonomy in 1965. The university now offers over 150 undergraduate and graduate courses to a student population of more than 38,000, including 7,000 international students from more than 113 countries. The main campus is in the suburb of Callaghan about from the CBD.

There are three campuses of the Hunter Institute of TAFE, one located in the Newcastle CBD, one in the suburb of Hamilton East and the other located in the suburb of Tighes Hill. The Tighes Hill campus is the network&#x27;s largest campus and offers courses in business, hospitality and various trades.

==Culture==
===Festivals===
Newcastle holds a variety of cultural events and festivals.

The Newcastle Regional Show is held in the Newcastle Showground annually. There are a mixture of typical regional show elements such as woodchopping displays, showbags, rides and stalls and usually fireworks to complement the events in the main arena.

The Mattara festival, founded in 1961, is the official festival of Newcastle with a more traditional &quot;country fair&quot; type program that combines a parade, rides, sporting events, band competitions and portrait and landscape painting exhibitions. Mattara means &quot;hand of friendship&quot; in the local Awabakal language. Originally held at Civic Park and then moved to Newcastle foreshore in 2006 In 2017 the festival was moved to Wallsend Park.

The Newcastle Jazz Festival is held across three days in August, and attracts performers and audiences from all over Australia. The first festival was held in September 1988 as part the NSW Bicentenital Festival of Music which was organised by the Newcastle Jazz Action Society.

The Shoot Out 24 Hour Filmmaking Festival, first started in Newcastle in 1999. This is the film festival where film-makers come together in one place to make a short film in 24 hours. It is run annually in July.

This Is Not Art is a national festival of new media and arts held in Newcastle each year over the October long weekend. Since its humble beginnings in 1998, it has become one of the leading arts festivals in Australia dedicated to the work and ideas of communities not included in other major Australian arts festivals. The umbrella program includes the independent festivals Electrofringe, the National Young Writers&#x27; Festival, Critical Animals, Sound Summit, Crack Theatre Festival and other projects that vary from year to year.

The Newcastle Entertainment Centre, located inside the Newcastle Showground is a popular venue for regular events including wrestling, concerts and monster truck shows.

===Music===
Newcastle has an active youth music culture, as well as a Conservatorium of Music which is part of the University of Newcastle. It continues to support local bands and has a large underground music scene. The members of Silverchair, the highly successful Australian band, hail from Newcastle, as do the Australian bands The Screaming Jets and Vacations (band). It has a fertile punk rock and hardcore scene, which has spawned successful local acts and national acts. Newcastle was also home to the short-lived band Velvet Underground (no relation to the famous American band The Velvet Underground) which featured future AC/DC guitarist Malcolm Young. The region also has its own youth marching band, the Marching Koalas, in which Silverchair drummer Ben Gillies began his drumming career. Danielle Marsh, a member of the world-famous South Korean K-pop girl group NewJeans, as well has her older sister and singer Olivia Marsh, also hails from Newcastle.

===Visual arts and galleries===
Notable modernist artists associated with Newcastle are seascape sketcher Shay Docking (1928–1998), the cubist-influenced abstract painter William Rose (1929–1999), landscape painter John Olsen, who was born in Newcastle in 1928, still-life painter Margaret Olley, portraitist William Dobell and figurative painter John Montefiore lived at Lake Macquarie to the south of the city. Art collector William Bowmore resided in Newcastle and collected Brett Whiteley paintings as well as owning a large collection of international art and artefacts. The Von Bertouch Galleries was a commercial gallery founded by Anne Von Bertouch and for more than forty years from 1963 exhibited nationally and locally known artists.

The Newcastle Art Gallery is home to one of Australia&#x27;s most substantial public art collections outside a major capital city, and its extensive collection of works by contemporary and historical Australian visual artists presents an overview of Australian art. Due to an ongoing space issue, the gallery is planning a major redevelopment. The Lock Up is a multidisciplinary contemporary art space located in the inner city and hosts local, national and international artists to exhibit in the historic former Newcastle Police station.

===Theatre===
Newcastle has a variety of smaller theatres, but the main theatre in the CBD is now the &quot;Civic&quot;, at Wheeler Place, (seating capacity about 1,500), one of Australia&#x27;s great historic theatres built during 1929 in Art Deco style. It hosts a wide range of musicals, plays, concerts, dance and other events each year. Newcastle previously boasted several large theatres, among them the oldest purpose-built theatre in Australia, the Victoria Theatre on Perkins Street (built 1876, capacity 1,750), saw touring international opera companies such as the D&#x27;Oyly Carte Opera Company, and other troupes, and played host to some of the greatest stars of the age, such as Dame Nellie Melba, Gladys Moncrieff and Richard Tauber (it is now closed and derelict); the &quot;Century&quot;, Nineways, Broadmeadow (built 1941, capacity 1,800)—although largely used as a cinema—was a popular Symphony orchestra venue (demolished 1990 after being severely damaged by the 1989 earthquake); the &quot;Hunter&quot; (capacity 1,000) at The Junction, had advanced modern stage facilities, but was eventually sold and demolished to make way for a motel that was destroyed by the 1989 earthquake. The decline in theatres and cinemas from the 1960s onwards was blamed on television.

Newcastle has also been home to noted Australian actors, comedians and entertainers, including Sarah Wynter, John Doyle (part of comic act Roy &amp; HG), Susie Porter, Celia Ireland, Yahoo Serious and Jonathan Biggins. The cast of the Tap Dogs show also come from Newcastle.

===Media arts===
Newcastle is home to the Octapod Association, a New Media Arts collective established in 1996. Octapod presents the annual This Is Not Art Festival and is also home to the Podspace Gallery.
===Museums===
The Newcastle Museum was founded in 1988 in the former headquarters of the Great Northern Railway and stewards local history, culture, industry and science. It features permanent exhibitions relating to coal mining and steel production, Aboriginal history and the area&#x27;s history, as well as a hands-on science centre.

=== Libraries ===
Newcastle has a public library system, Newcastle Libraries. The main branch is in the Newcastle War Memorial and Cultural Centre, and opened in 1957. There are eleven branches: Adamstown, Beresfield, The Digital Library (Newcastle West), Hamilton, Lambton, The Local History Library, Mayfield, New Lambton (with the Newcastle Toy Library), Stockton, and Wallsend. The library has a collaborative collection with the libraries at Dungog and Port Stephens. Though Newcastle Libraries are lending libraries, The stack (City Library basement) has over 100,000 non-lending items which include old Newcastle Morning Heralds, NBN film reels, land title documents, maps, and limited edition books.

The Auchmuty Library at the University of Newcastle is also open to the public, though only students may borrow items.

==Transport==

Like most major cities, the Newcastle metropolitan area has an extensive system of both road links and road based public transport services (bus, taxi etc.) which cover most areas of both Newcastle and Lake Macquarie and which extend beyond the metropolitan area itself. Rail transport, however, is accessible to only a relatively small percentage of the population along the major rail transport routes and ferry services are restricted to those commuting between Newcastle and Stockton. Within the metropolitan area the car remains the dominant form of transportation. Newcastle, like all major Australian urban centres, had a tram system, but it was closed in 1950. In February 2019, trams returned to the city with the opening of the Newcastle Light Rail.

===Road===
Newcastle is connected to surrounding cities by the Pacific Motorway (south), Hunter Expressway (west), New England Highway (west) and the Pacific Highway (north and south). Hunter Street is the main shopping street in the Newcastle CBD and, along with King Street, is one of the major links to the Pacific Highway from the CBD. King Street provides direct access to the Newcastle Link Road and then the Pacific Motorway and Hunter Expressway.

===Bus===

Bus services within Newcastle are operated by Newcastle Transport. Prior to July 2017, these were operated by Newcastle Buses &amp; Ferries. Hunter Valley Buses, Port Stephens Coaches and Rover Coaches also operate services into the CBD from other parts of the Hunter Region.

The network radiates from a bus terminal at Newcastle Interchange. Major interchanges are located at the University of Newcastle, Wallsend, Glendale, Warners Bay, Belmont, Charlestown Square and Westfield Kotara.

Greyhound Australia, Premier Motor Service and Sid Fogg&#x27;s long-distance services serve Newcastle.

===Rail===
The Newcastle area is serviced by two NSW TrainLink intercity lines providing local and regional commuter services terminating at Newcastle Interchange along the Newcastle line. The Central Coast &amp; Newcastle Line has twice-hourly train services to Sydney and the Central Coast. The Hunter Line has twice-hourly services to Maitland and less frequently to Scone and Dungog. Two long-distance lines operate through the Newcastle area using Broadmeadow station. These provide services to Moree, Armidale, Brisbane and Sydney.

Newcastle once had rail passenger services to Belmont and Toronto, on Lake Macquarie, Wallsend, Kurri Kurri and several towns and villages between Maitland and Cessnock on the South Maitland Railway, but these lines have been closed. In the late-1990s there was intense debate about the future of the rail line into central Newcastle.

In December 2014, the Newcastle line was curtailed to Hamilton. A new Newcastle Interchange opened on 15 October 2017. The Newcastle Light Rail line also operates from here.

From 1924 until 1994, Broadmeadow Locomotive Depot was the main railway centre for the Hunter region. Cardiff Locomotive Workshops opened in 1928, primarily as a major repair centre for New South Wales Government Railways locomotives, although it did build twelve 38 class and two 58 class locomotives. Today it is operated by Downer Rail and along with UGL Rail&#x27;s Broadmeadow plant, remains active as a locomotive and rolling stock manufacturer and repairer.

===Water===

The Port of Newcastle is crucial to the economic life of Newcastle and the Hunter Valley region beyond. Over 90 million tonnes of coal is shipped through the facility each year—making it the largest coal exporting port in the world. The Port of Newcastle claims to be Australia&#x27;s first port. Coal was first exported from the harbour in 1799.

Newcastle Transport operates a ferry service across the Hunter River between Newcastle&#x27;s CBD and Stockton.

===Airport===
Newcastle Airport is located north of the Newcastle CBD ( by road). The airport, which is a joint venture between Newcastle City Council and Port Stephens Council, has experienced rapid growth since 2000 as a result of an increase in low-cost airline operations. The airport is located at RAAF Base Williamtown, a Royal Australian Air Force base on land leased from the Department of Defence.

Newcastle Heliport operates alongside the lower section of Newcastle Harbour.

The suburb of Broadmeadow is home to the base of the Westpac Life Saver Rescue Helicopter Service. The Helicopter service is one of the longest running services of this type in the world. Two helicopters operate out of this base and operate 24 hours a day.

The closure of Belmont Airport, commonly referred to as Aeropelican, in the Lake Macquarie suburb of Marks Point has caused Williamtown to become Newcastle&#x27;s only major airport and residents in the south of the Newcastle metropolitan area must commute up to by car to reach Williamtown.

==Sport==

===Rugby league===
Rugby league is the most popular sport in Newcastle, with the Newcastle Knights representing the city in the National Rugby League. The Knights play at the 33,000-capacity McDonald Jones Stadium, situated in the suburb of .

The Newcastle Rugby League holds local club competition and has done so since the early 1900s. Touring domestic and international teams would play against Newcastle&#x27;s representative team which was made up of players from this league. The Newcastle &amp; Hunter Rugby League is a community competition also based in the region which was created from a merger in 2007 of leagues which ran under various names since the mid-20th century, and is the largest community rugby league competition anywhere in the world. It generally features smaller teams compared to the Newcastle Rugby League.

McDonald Jones Stadium hosted the 2016 Anzac Test between Australia and New Zealand.

=== Soccer ===

The Newcastle Jets Football Club, which plays in Australia&#x27;s highest-level soccer competition, the A-League, also play at McDonald Jones Stadium. The Newcastle Jets won the A-League competition in their third season, defeating local rivals the Central Coast Mariners in the grand final.

The city also played host to four games of the 2015 AFC Asian Cup, including the semi-final between Australia and the United Arab Emirates, as well as the third-place playoff between the United Arab Emirates and Iraq.

===Basketball===
Newcastle has had two teams in the top tier of Australian Men&#x27;s basketball, the National Basketball League. They were the Newcastle Falcons (NBL) and later the Hunter Pirates. Both teams folded due to financial difficulties. Newcastle is still represented in the 2nd tier, the NBL1. The Newcastle Basketball club field Men&#x27;s and Women&#x27;s teams, using the Newcastle Falcons (NBL1) name again.

The city co-hosted the 1985 FIBA Oceania Championship where Australia&#x27;s national basketball team won its seventh straight title.

===Cricket===
A bid for Newcastle to establish a 2012 team in the national Twenty20 competition the Big Bash League, with games played at either Hunter Stadium or No.1 Sports Ground was unsuccessful.

===Australian rules===
The sport of Australian rules is played in Newcastle and administered by AFL Hunter Central Coast. Australian Football League (AFL) pre-season matches have been held at the No.1 Sports Ground.

===Rugby union===
Rugby union is a football code that has been played in Newcastle since at least 1869, with the Newcastle Football Club formed in 1877. Newcastle and Hunter Rugby Union is the main body overseeing the sport in the region. In 2019, the New South Wales Waratahs of the professional Super Rugby competition played a competition match in Newcastle at Hunter Stadium for the first time.

===Horse racing===
Broadmeadow Racecourse is in the suburb of Broadmeadow. It is home to the Newcastle Jockey Club, established in 1907, which () races 35 times annually at the spacious turf track with a home straight. It is the venue for three Group 3 races: in March is the Newcastle Newmarket Handicap; and in September the 1,400-metre Cameron Handicap, and the Newcastle Gold Cup. In 2015 work an inner track, known as the Beaumont Track, was added.

Aboriginal jockey Merv Maynard commenced his career at Newcastle Racecourse, under Keith Tinson. Maynard enjoyed his first success in the 1948–49 season there, and went on to have a career spanning 50 years, winning the Newcastle Premiership twice, along with 1,500 winning rides in four countries.

===Ice hockey and skating===
The Newcastle North Stars are Newcastle&#x27;s representatives in the Australian Ice Hockey League championships. Originally based in Newcastle West in the 1970 and &#x27;80s, the North Stars now play out of the Hunter Ice Skating Stadium in Warners Bay.

===Motorsport===

Newcastle hosted the final round of the Supercars Championship in 2017. The Newcastle 500 is held on the Newcastle Street Circuit in the East End of the city. The city previously hosted the Mattara Hillclimb which was held in King Edward Park, and has hosted the F1 Offshore Powerboats in the harbour.

===Netball===

The Hunter Jaegers (Commonwealth Bank Trophy – Netball) were based at the Newcastle Entertainment Centre. They became defunct in 2007 after merging with the Sydney Swifts to become the New South Wales Swifts. Officially opened in June 1992, the Entertainment Centre offers 5,000 square metres of clear-span floor space and is capable of catering for capacities from 2,000 to 6,500 for entertainment-style events. The Centre was built to house the now-defunct Newcastle Falcons National Basketball League team and was also home to the Hunter Pirates before a lack of sponsorship forced them to close after the 2005–06 season, with the licence sold to the Singapore Slingers. The Slingers played one home game at the Centre during the 2006–07 season.

===Water sports===

Newcastle has an abundance of beaches and surf breaks for which the city is internationally well known. Newcastle hosts the annual surfing contest Surfest on the world professional surfing tour. Four-time world champion surfer Mark Richards grew up surfing at Newcastle&#x27;s Merewether Beach, and is a local icon, appearing at many local functions, and supporting local charities. Nobbys Beach is a very popular kitesurfing spot, especially during the warm summer months when there are north-easterly sea breezes.

==Media==
Newcastle is served by a daily tabloid, &quot;The Herald&quot; (formerly &quot;The Newcastle Morning Herald and Miners&#x27; Advocate&quot; and then &quot;The Newcastle Herald&quot;), several weeklies including the &quot;Newcastle Star&quot;, &quot;The Post&quot; and the bi-monthly &quot;The Hunter Advocate&quot;.

Other alternative media in the city include the university&#x27;s student publications &quot;Opus&quot; and &quot;Yak&quot; magazine, &quot;Newcastle Mirage&quot; (a local arts and culture zine) and &quot;Urchin&quot; (a zine published by the media and arts organisation Octapod).

The city is also served by several local radio stations, including those owned by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and SBS.
*AM stations
** 2HD (commercial) 1143 AM – Australia&#x27;s second oldest existing radio station.
** Radio 1629 Newcastle (off band commercial) 1629 AM
*FM stations
**Triple M Newcastle (commercial) 102.9 FM
** hit106.9 Newcastle (commercial) 106.9 FM
** New FM (commercial) 105.3 FM
** 2NUR (community) 103.7 FM
** Rhema FM Newcastle (Christian) 99.7 FM
*Government broadcasters
** Australian Broadcasting Corporation
*** ABC Newcastle local radio 1233 AM
*** ABC Radio National 1512 AM
*** ABC NewsRadio (News and Parliament) 1458 AM
*** Triple J (youth station) 102.1 FM
*** ABC Classic FM (classical music) 106.1 FM
** Special Broadcasting Service
*** SBS Radio (foreign-language service) 1413 AM
*Narrowcast stations
** Sky Sports Radio (as part of statewide network) 1341 AM
** Newy 87.8 FM
** Raw FM 88.0 FM
Newcastle is also served by five television networks, three commercial and two national services:

* Nine Northern NSW – Nine Network owned and operated. Pre-aggregation, NBN Television was the incumbent commercial station in the Newcastle region.
* 10 Northern NSW – Network 10 owned and operated
* Seven Northern NSW – Seven Network owned and operated
* ABC Television
* SBS Television
Nine airs NBN News live from their Honeysuckle studios each night at six. The bulletin is a mix of its own locally produced stories mixed in with national and international stories sourced from the Nine Network. Local news updates are aired by the Seven, Nine (as NBN News) and WIN Television throughout the day to fulfil local content quotas.

==Disasters==

===1989 earthquake===
On 28 December 1989, Newcastle experienced an earthquake measuring 5.6 on the Richter scale, which killed 13 people, injured 162 and destroyed or severely damaged a number of prominent buildings. Some had to be demolished, including the large George Hotel in Scott Street (city), the Century Theatre at Broadmeadow, the Hunter Theatre (formerly &#x27;The Star&#x27;) and the majority of The Junction school at Merewether. Part of the Newcastle Workers&#x27; Club, a popular venue, was destroyed and later replaced by a new structure. The following economic recession of the early 1990s meant that the city took several years to recover. However, Beaumont Street, Hamilton, where many buildings sustained major damage, became a thriving cosmopolitan restaurant strip after the earthquake and is still going strong today. The earthquake helped to rekindle business in this suburban strip.

===June 2007 Hunter Region and Central Coast storms===

On 8 June 2007 the Hunter and Central Coast regions were battered by the worst series of storms to hit New South Wales in 30 years. This resulted in extensive flooding and nine deaths. Thousands of homes were flooded, and many were destroyed. The Hunter and Central Coast regions were declared natural disaster areas by the State Premier, Morris Iemma, on 8 June 2007. Further flooding was predicted by the Bureau of Meteorology but was less severe than predicted.

During the early stages of the storms, the bulk carrier ship &quot;Pasha Bulker&quot; ran aground at Nobbys Beach after failing to heed warnings to move offshore. After the first few attempts failed, the &quot;Pasha Bulker&quot; was refloated on the third salvage attempt on 2 July 2007 despite earlier fears that the ship would break up. After initially entering the port for minor repairs, it departed under tow on 26 July 2007 for major repairs in Asia.

===Maritime===
On 12 July 1866, a paddle steamer the , on its way to Brisbane from Newcastle carrying 60 passengers, was caught in a storm as it made its way out of the harbour. Sixty people died; coincidentally, one survivor, Frederick Hedges, was plucked from the water by the sole survivor of the &quot;Dunbar&quot; that had sunk in Sydney Harbour nine years earlier.

The most tragic maritime accident of the 20th century in Newcastle occurred on 9 August 1934 when the Stockton-bound ferry &quot;Bluebell&quot; collided with the coastal freighter, &quot;Waraneen&quot;, and sank in the middle of the Hunter River. The Bluebell Collision claimed three lives and fifteen passengers were admitted to the Newcastle Hospital, with two suffering severely from the effects of immersion. It was later found that the ferry captain was at fault.

These are only two events in Newcastle&#x27;s very long history of shipwrecks including the 1974 beaching of the , and the 2007 beaching of the &quot;Pasha Bulker&quot;.

===Aviation===
On 16 August 1966, an RAAF CAC Sabre crashed into the inner-city suburb of The Junction. The pilot, Flying Officer Warren William Goddard, experienced engine troubles and unsuccessfully tried to get the plane over the Pacific Ocean. The Junction is a highly populated suburb of Newcastle and most of the plane wreckage landed in the shopping area of the suburb. In 2007 a memorial plaque was unveiled for the killed pilot.

==Residential architecture==
==Heritage listings==
Newcastle has a number of heritage-listed sites, including:

* Argyle Street: Argyle House
* 48–50 Bolton Street: David Cohen &amp; Co. Warehouse
* 58 Bolton Street: Old Newcastle East Public School
* Bond Street: Coutt&#x27;s Sailors Home
* 1 Bond Street: Newcastle Customs House
* 51 Brown Street: Newcastle Reservoirs
* Church Street: Church and Watt Street Terrace Group
* 9 Church Street: Newcastle Court House
* Great Northern railway: Honeysuckle Point Railway Workshops
* Great Northern railway: Newcastle railway station
* 21 Hillcrest Road: The Ridge
* 45 Hunter Street: T &amp; G Mutual Life Assurance Building
* 96 Hunter Street: Newcastle Post Office
* 359–361 Hunter Street: Frederick Ash Building
* 289 King Street: Newcastle City Hall
* 300 King Street: Nesca House
* 434 King Street, Newcastle West: Miss Porter&#x27;s House
* Nobby&#x27;s Road: Coal River Precinct
* Pacific Street: Old Newcastle Club Building
* 8–10 Perkins Street: Victoria Theatre
* 89 Scott Street: Great Northern Hotel
* 98 Scott Street: Convict Lumber Yard
* Shortland Esplande: Bogey Hole
* 41 The Terrace: Shepherds Hill military installations
* 35–37 Watt Street: Manufacturers House
* 72 Watt Street: Newcastle Government House

==Twin towns – sister cities==
* Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom
* Pohang, North Gyeongsang, South Korea
* Ube, Yamaguchi, Japan
* Arcadia, California, United States

==See also==
*List of suburbs in Greater Newcastle, New South Wales

==References==
==Further reading==

* Docherty, James Cairns, &quot;Newcastle – The Making of an Australian City&quot;, Sydney, 1983, 
* Susan Marsden, &quot;Coals to Newcastle: a History of Coal Loading at the Port of Newcastle New South Wales 1977–1997 &quot; 2002
* Marsden, Susan, &quot;Newcastle: a Brief History&quot; Newcastle, 2004 
* Marsden, Susan, &#x27;Waterfront alive: life on the waterfront&#x27;, in C Hunter, ed, &quot;River Change: six new histories of the Hunter&quot;, Newcastle, 1998 
* Morrison James, Ron, &quot;Newcastle – Times Past&quot;, Newcastle, 2005 (P/B), 
* Greater Newcastle City Council, &quot;Newcastle 150 Years&quot;, 1947.
* Thorne, Ross, &quot;Picture Palace Architecture in Australia&quot;, Melbourne, Victoria, 1976 (P/B), 
* Turner, Dr. John W., &quot;Manufacturing in Newcastle&quot;, Newcastle, 1980, 
==External links==

* Newcastle City Council
* Newcastle Visitor Centre
* Newcastle Region Art Gallery
* VisitNSW.com – Newcastle</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57278" start="0" end="9" title="Newcastle, New South Wales" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q57278" start="40" end="57" title="Newcastle, New South Wales" label="Greater Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="75" end="87" title="Metropolitan area" label="metropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="135" end="150" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q820325" start="189" end="198" title="City of Newcastle" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q606193" start="203" end="217" title="City of Lake Macquarie" label="Lake Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641735" start="243" end="255" title="List of suburbs in Greater Newcastle, New South Wales" label="Lower Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q820325" start="307" end="316" title="City of Newcastle" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q606193" start="318" end="332" title="City of Lake Macquarie" label="Lake Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q820280" start="334" end="342" title="City of Maitland" label="Maitland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057393" start="344" end="352" title="City of Cessnock" label="Cessnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q820318" start="358" end="379" title="Port Stephens Council" label="Port Stephens Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q57278" start="433" end="437" title="Newcastle, New South Wales" label="Newy"/>
<link wikidata="Q765836" start="468" end="480" title="Hunter River (New South Wales)" label="Hunter River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638164" start="520" end="533" title="Hunter Region" label="Hunter Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944583" start="550" end="554" title="Hunter Valley Coal Chain" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373806" start="799" end="811" title="Sydney Basin" label="Sydney Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874654" start="925" end="933" title="Awabakal" label="Awabakal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034515" start="938" end="944" title="Worimi" label="Worimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045612" start="1230" end="1241" title="Nobbys Head" label="Nobbys Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018147" start="1622" end="1636" title="John Shortland" label="John Shortland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756937" start="1880" end="1891" title="Sydney Cove" label="Sydney Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353724" start="2042" end="2053" title="John Hunter (Royal Navy officer)" label="John Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="2196" end="2211" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q725880" start="2597" end="2615" title="Philip Gidley King" label="Philip Gidley King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528895" start="2621" end="2648" title="Governor of New South Wales" label="Governor of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638164" start="2748" end="2761" title="Hunter Valley" label="Hunter Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="3186" end="3202" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="the English city"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080903" start="3301" end="3316" title="Charles Menzies (Royal Marines officer)" label="Charles Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="3324" end="3341" title="Royal Marines" label="marine detachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q54504" start="3355" end="3367" title="Port Jackson" label="Port Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q989174" start="3453" end="3460" title="convict" label="convict"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151898" start="3586" end="3591" title="James (ship)" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353495" start="3638" end="3667" title="Castle Hill convict rebellion" label="Castle Hill convict rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="3683" end="3702" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q14934848" start="3838" end="3845" title="Jesmond, New South Wales" label="Jesmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q9291876" start="3847" end="3853" title="Hexham, New South Wales" label="Hexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998371" start="3855" end="3862" title="Wickham, New South Wales" label="Wickham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963243" start="3864" end="3872" title="Wallsend, New South Wales" label="Wallsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099255" start="3877" end="3886" title="Gateshead, New South Wales" label="Gateshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913331" start="3888" end="3912" title="Morpeth, New South Wales" label="Morpeth, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q736785" start="3957" end="3980" title="Morpeth, Northumberland" label="Morpeth, Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21539686" start="4029" end="4041" title="James Wallis (British Army officer)" label="James Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108773" start="4239" end="4262" title="Christ Church Cathedral, Newcastle" label="Christ Church Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045612" start="4351" end="4362" title="Nobbys Head" label="Nobbys Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q122828167" start="4512" end="4524" title="Christ Church School (Colony of NSW)" label="first school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618206" start="4752" end="4760" title="Stockton, New South Wales" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q606153" start="5016" end="5030" title="Port Macquarie" label="Port Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818899" start="5282" end="5289" title="settler" label="settler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017527" start="5371" end="5417" title="Newcastle &amp;amp; Hunter River Steamship Company" label="Newcastle &amp;amp; Hunter River Steamship Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913331" start="5475" end="5482" title="Morpeth, New South Wales" label="Morpeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="5810" end="5818" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="5820" end="5829" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="5834" end="5842" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741241" start="5940" end="5951" title="sixty-miler" label="sixty-miler"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6103" end="6115" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659473" start="6226" end="6247" title="attack on Sydney Harbour" label="attack Sydney Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q122698523" start="6385" end="6405" title="Newcastle Steelworks" label="Newcastle Steelworks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7092" end="7113" title="Rising Tide Australia" label="Rising Tide Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963831" start="7337" end="7382" title="Walsh Island Dockyard &amp;amp; Engineering Works" label="Walsh Island Dockyard &amp;amp; Engineering Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603186" start="7384" end="7398" title="State Dockyard" label="State Dockyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469569" start="7403" end="7419" title="Forgacs Shipyard" label="Forgacs Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495323" start="7527" end="7560" title="Huon-class minehunter" label="&amp;quot;Huon&amp;quot;-class minehunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q622662" start="7584" end="7598" title="heavy industry" label="heavy industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927086" start="7810" end="7826" title="Victoria Theatre (Newcastle)" label="Victoria Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q14934837" start="7964" end="7982" title="Hunter Street, Newcastle" label="Hunter Street Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917930" start="9029" end="9057" title="Anglican Bishop of Newcastle (Australia)" label="Anglican Bishop of Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472006" start="9094" end="9109" title="Fort Scratchley" label="Fort Scratchley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017397" start="9136" end="9149" title="Newcastle Customs House" label="Customs House"/>
<link wikidata="Q14934944" start="9161" end="9170" title="Newcastle City Hall (Australia)" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="9269" end="9277" title="art deco" label="art deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894786" start="9278" end="9294" title="University House (Newcastle)" label="University House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618206" start="9783" end="9791" title="Stockton, New South Wales" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q24901034" start="9929" end="9944" title="Stockton Bridge" label="Stockton Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215030" start="10204" end="10218" title="Lake Macquarie (New South Wales)" label="Lake Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944411" start="10277" end="10290" title="Central Coast (New South Wales)" label="Central Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083808" start="10295" end="10310" title="Mid North Coast" label="Mid North Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638164" start="10430" end="10436" title="Hunter Region" label="Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="10854" end="10879" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="11109" end="11122" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045612" start="11372" end="11383" title="Nobbys Head" label="Nobbys Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q210316" start="11475" end="11485" title="Cold front" label="Cold front"/>
<link wikidata="Q108919970" start="11573" end="11585" title="southeast Australian foehn" label="foehn effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="11601" end="11625" title="rain shadow" label="provide clear conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q192583" start="11660" end="11680" title="Great Dividing Range" label="Great Dividing Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000924" start="11735" end="11750" title="Australian east coast low" label="East coast lows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312086" start="11907" end="11934" title="2007 New South Wales storms" label="2007 New South Wales storms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="12106" end="12112" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250404" start="12921" end="12954" title="List of cities in Australia by population" label="seventh-largest city in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641735" start="13158" end="13175" title="List of suburbs in Greater Newcastle, New South Wales" label="Greater Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q217438" start="13591" end="13598" title="demonym" label="demonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q60967345" start="14706" end="14728" title="2000s commodities boom" label="2000s commodities boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="14761" end="14772" title="export good" label="export good"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="15145" end="15165" title="late 2000s recession" label="late 2000s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q531285" start="15294" end="15317" title="University of Newcastle, Australia" label="University of Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978710" start="15323" end="15359" title="National Stock Exchange of Australia" label="National Stock Exchange of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823789" start="15531" end="15562" title="Australian Agricultural Company" label="Australian Agricultural Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618206" start="15743" end="15751" title="Stockton, New South Wales" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935021" start="15753" end="15764" title="Tighes Hill" label="Tighes Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046427" start="15766" end="15776" title="Carrington, New South Wales" label="Carrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819071" start="15840" end="15850" title="Merewether" label="Merewether"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963243" start="15873" end="15881" title="Wallsend, New South Wales" label="Wallsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="16208" end="16217" title="cast-iron" label="cast-iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q633423" start="16218" end="16232" title="fishbelly rail" label="fishbelly rail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16259" end="16280" title="Cable railway#Gravity balance" label="gravitational railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q856192" start="16426" end="16453" title="The Illustrated London News" label="The Illustrated London News"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972221" start="16558" end="16569" title="Broadmeadow" label="Broadmeadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139630" start="16605" end="16625" title="Cockle Creek Smelter" label="Cockle Creek Smelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083076" start="16801" end="16815" title="Charles Upfold" label="Charles Upfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q157062" start="17232" end="17240" title="Unilever" label="Unilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q625713" start="17308" end="17311" title="BHP" label="BHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q122698523" start="17480" end="17500" title="Newcastle Steelworks" label="Newcastle Steelworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="17886" end="17897" title="centre-left" label="centre-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="17898" end="17909" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310872" start="17942" end="17952" title="Federation (Australia)" label="Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="18100" end="18112" title="centre-right" label="centre-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="18113" end="18126" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q479030" start="18173" end="18186" title="Port Stephens (New South Wales)" label="Port Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857913" start="18325" end="18334" title="Bar Beach, New South Wales" label="Bar Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819071" start="18339" end="18349" title="Merewether, New South Wales" label="Merewether"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011890" start="18538" end="18557" title="2011 New South Wales state election" label="2011 state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q42841" start="18581" end="18590" title="incumbent" label="incumbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508513" start="18591" end="18596" title="New South Wales Labor Party" label="Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527950" start="18621" end="18628" title="Premier of New South Wales" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q442238" start="18629" end="18646" title="Kristina Keneally" label="Kristina Keneally"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625187" start="18668" end="18675" title="New South Wales Liberal Party" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="18676" end="18684" title="National Party of Australia" label="National"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065320" start="18685" end="18694" title="Coalition (Australia)" label="Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508546" start="18708" end="18725" title="Leader of the Opposition (New South Wales)" label="Opposition Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803998" start="18726" end="18746" title="Barry O&amp;#x27;Farrell" label="Barry O&amp;#x27;Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q642590" start="18753" end="18762" title="landslide victory" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18934" end="18946" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390783" start="18979" end="19015" title="New South Wales Legislative Assembly" label="New South Wales Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355228" start="19037" end="19045" title="Electoral district of Cessnock" label="Cessnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356066" start="19050" end="19058" title="Electoral district of Wallsend" label="Wallsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638164" start="19072" end="19085" title="Hunter Region" label="Hunter Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355870" start="19186" end="19199" title="Electoral district of Port Stephens" label="Port Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011892" start="19247" end="19251" title="2007 New South Wales state election" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016340" start="19299" end="19303" title="2015 New South Wales state election" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455328" start="19337" end="19356" title="majority government" label="majority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876212" start="19404" end="19408" title="2019 New South Wales state election" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="19431" end="19450" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q65085986" start="19454" end="19458" title="2023 New South Wales state election" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713747" start="19522" end="19549" title="Divisions of the Australian House of Representatives" label="federal electoral divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q966318" start="19604" end="19613" title="Division of Newcastle" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562790" start="19714" end="19718" title="List of Australian electorates contested at every election" label="1901"/>
<link wikidata="Q577770" start="19721" end="19729" title="Division of Paterson" label="Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q606900" start="19793" end="19801" title="Maitland, New South Wales" label="Maitland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1793195" start="19818" end="19829" title="Kurri Kurri" label="Kurri Kurri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973851" start="20013" end="20022" title="Division of Shortland" label="Shortland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215030" start="20090" end="20104" title="Lake Macquarie (New South Wales)" label="Lake Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944411" start="20186" end="20199" title="Central Coast (New South Wales)" label="Central Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074124" start="20239" end="20245" title="Division of Hunter" label="Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638164" start="20317" end="20323" title="Hunter Region" label="Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032154" start="20422" end="20441" title="Electoral districts of New South Wales" label="electoral districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355230" start="20510" end="20521" title="Electoral district of Charlestown" label="Charlestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355770" start="20523" end="20532" title="Electoral district of Newcastle" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355870" start="20534" end="20547" title="Electoral district of Port Stephens" label="Port Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355999" start="20552" end="20559" title="Electoral district of Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355585" start="20603" end="20617" title="Electoral district of Lake Macquarie" label="Lake Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874560" start="20633" end="20644" title="Independent politicians in Australia" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q648607" start="20684" end="20705" title="Local government areas of New South Wales" label="local government area"/>
<link wikidata="Q820325" start="20719" end="20736" title="City of Newcastle" label="City of Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q606193" start="20742" end="20764" title="City of Lake Macquarie" label="City of Lake Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057393" start="20770" end="20786" title="City of Cessnock" label="City of Cessnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q820280" start="20792" end="20808" title="City of Maitland" label="City of Maitland"/>
<link wikidata="Q820318" start="20817" end="20838" title="Port Stephens Council" label="Port Stephens Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q14934947" start="20892" end="20913" title="Newcastle High School (Australia)" label="Newcastle High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944541" start="21134" end="21170" title="Hunter School of the Performing Arts" label="Hunter School of the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819072" start="21243" end="21265" title="Merewether High School" label="Merewether High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972221" start="21314" end="21325" title="Broadmeadow" label="Broadmeadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017424" start="21532" end="21556" title="Newcastle Grammar School, New South Wales" label="Newcastle Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591510" start="21561" end="21595" title="St Philip&amp;#x27;s Christian College" label="St Philip&amp;#x27;s Christian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q216690" start="21666" end="21680" title="Steiner school" label="Steiner school"/>
<link wikidata="Q606193" start="21727" end="21741" title="Lake Macquarie" label="Lake Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328922" start="21777" end="21790" title="East Maitland" label="East Maitland"/>
<link wikidata="Q531285" start="21888" end="21911" title="University of Newcastle, Australia" label="University of Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q734764" start="21969" end="21998" title="University of New South Wales" label="University of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021706" start="22250" end="22259" title="Callaghan, New South Wales" label="Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q738570" start="22275" end="22278" title="Central business district" label="CBD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669247" start="22313" end="22337" title="TAFE NSW" label="Hunter Institute of TAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644916" start="22394" end="22407" title="Hamilton East, New South Wales" label="Hamilton East"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935021" start="22447" end="22458" title="Tighes Hill" label="Tighes Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017467" start="22678" end="22701" title="Newcastle Regional Show" label="Newcastle Regional Show"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22931" end="22947" title="Mattara festival" label="Mattara festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449138" start="23239" end="23256" title="Awabakal language" label="Awabakal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963243" start="23368" end="23376" title="Wallsend, New South Wales" label="Wallsend"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23388" end="23411" title="Newcastle Jazz Festival" label="Newcastle Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23668" end="23705" title="Shoot Out 24 Hour Filmmaking Festival" label="Shoot Out 24 Hour Filmmaking Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785908" start="23877" end="23892" title="This Is Not Art" label="This Is Not Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979473" start="24272" end="24309" title="National Young Writers&amp;#x27; Festival" label="National Young Writers&amp;#x27; Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564721" start="24329" end="24341" title="Sound Summit" label="Sound Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q531285" start="24700" end="24723" title="University of Newcastle, Australia" label="University of Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q157327" start="24817" end="24828" title="Silverchair" label="Silverchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989156" start="24917" end="24935" title="The Screaming Jets" label="The Screaming Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q115804318" start="24940" end="24956" title="Vacations (band)" label="Vacations (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="24975" end="24984" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="25172" end="25194" title="The Velvet Underground" label="The Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="25218" end="25223" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q44653" start="25234" end="25247" title="Malcolm Young" label="Malcolm Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529599" start="25348" end="25359" title="Ben Gillies" label="Ben Gillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q113455624" start="25387" end="25401" title="Danielle Marsh" label="Danielle Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q213665" start="25445" end="25450" title="K-pop" label="K-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q113189277" start="25462" end="25470" title="New Jeans" label="NewJeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="25594" end="25607" title="modernist art" label="modernist art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441810" start="25642" end="25650" title="seascape" label="seascape"/>
<link wikidata="Q20859323" start="25660" end="25672" title="Shay Docking" label="Shay Docking"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="25690" end="25696" title="cubist" label="cubist"/>
<link wikidata="Q128115" start="25708" end="25724" title="abstract painter" label="abstract painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809521" start="25769" end="25779" title="John Olsen (Australian artist)" label="John Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170571" start="25816" end="25826" title="still-life" label="still-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298751" start="25835" end="25849" title="Margaret Olley" label="Margaret Olley"/>
<link wikidata="Q134307" start="25851" end="25862" title="portraitist" label="portraitist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354357" start="25863" end="25877" title="William Dobell" label="William Dobell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622217" start="25882" end="25900" title="figurative painter" label="figurative painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q176409" start="26032" end="26046" title="Brett Whiteley" label="Brett Whiteley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768864" start="26193" end="26210" title="Anne Von Bertouch" label="Anne Von Bertouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190689" start="26304" end="26325" title="Newcastle Art Gallery" label="Newcastle Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q14934946" start="26949" end="26954" title="Newcastle Civic Theatre" label="Civic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="27081" end="27089" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927086" start="27298" end="27314" title="Victoria Theatre (Newcastle)" label="Victoria Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700153" start="27417" end="27448" title="D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte Opera Company" label="D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte Opera Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q237607" start="27535" end="27552" title="Dame Nellie Melba" label="Dame Nellie Melba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566439" start="27554" end="27570" title="Gladys Moncrieff" label="Gladys Moncrieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q78632" start="27575" end="27589" title="Richard Tauber" label="Richard Tauber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972221" start="27658" end="27669" title="Broadmeadow" label="Broadmeadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q255490" start="28225" end="28237" title="Sarah Wynter" label="Sarah Wynter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15524998" start="28239" end="28249" title="John Doyle (comedian)" label="John Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373546" start="28269" end="28281" title="Roy &amp;amp; HG" label="Roy &amp;amp; HG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505686" start="28284" end="28296" title="Susie Porter" label="Susie Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058001" start="28298" end="28311" title="Celia Ireland" label="Celia Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q267138" start="28313" end="28326" title="Yahoo Serious" label="Yahoo Serious"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272585" start="28331" end="28347" title="Jonathan Biggins" label="Jonathan Biggins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28365" end="28373" title="Tap Dogs" label="Tap Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076755" start="28448" end="28455" title="Octapod" label="Octapod"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785908" start="28546" end="28561" title="This Is Not Art" label="This Is Not Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q14934949" start="28631" end="28647" title="Newcastle Museum" label="Newcastle Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q28564" start="28985" end="28999" title="public library" label="public library"/>
<link wikidata="Q66790047" start="29008" end="29027" title="Newcastle Libraries" label="Newcastle Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753305" start="29351" end="29375" title="collective collection" label="collaborative collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q753131" start="29398" end="29404" title="Dungog Shire" label="Dungog"/>
<link wikidata="Q820318" start="29409" end="29422" title="Port Stephens Council" label="Port Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q779419" start="29455" end="29472" title="lending libraries" label="lending libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753866" start="29561" end="29586" title="Newcastle Herald" label="Newcastle Morning Heralds"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015310" start="29588" end="29591" title="NBN (TV station)" label="NBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q820325" start="29983" end="29992" title="City of Newcastle" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q606193" start="29997" end="30011" title="City of Lake Macquarie" label="Lake Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618206" start="30274" end="30282" title="Stockton, New South Wales" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4328361" start="30424" end="30435" title="Trams in Newcastle, New South Wales" label="tram system"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016515" start="30533" end="30553" title="Newcastle Light Rail" label="Newcastle Light Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373637" start="30619" end="30635" title="Pacific Motorway (Sydney-Newcastle)" label="Pacific Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944312" start="30645" end="30662" title="Hunter Expressway" label="Hunter Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538677" start="30671" end="30690" title="New England Highway" label="New England Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540426" start="30706" end="30721" title="Pacific Highway, Australia" label="Pacific Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q14934837" start="30741" end="30754" title="Hunter Street, Newcastle" label="Hunter Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927355" start="30938" end="30957" title="Newcastle Link Road" label="Newcastle Link Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q28128502" start="31069" end="31088" title="Newcastle Transport" label="Newcastle Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017373" start="31133" end="31162" title="Newcastle Buses &amp;amp; Ferries" label="Newcastle Buses &amp;amp; Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q96381449" start="31164" end="31183" title="Hunter Valley Buses" label="Hunter Valley Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754832" start="31185" end="31206" title="Port Stephens Coaches" label="Port Stephens Coaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754812" start="31211" end="31224" title="Rover Coaches" label="Rover Coaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741265" start="31344" end="31365" title="Newcastle Interchange" label="Newcastle Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q531285" start="31405" end="31428" title="University of Newcastle, Australia" label="University of Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963243" start="31430" end="31438" title="Wallsend, New South Wales" label="Wallsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q14934809" start="31440" end="31448" title="Glendale, New South Wales" label="Glendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969790" start="31450" end="31461" title="Warners Bay" label="Warners Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q14206190" start="31463" end="31470" title="Belmont, New South Wales" label="Belmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084226" start="31472" end="31490" title="Charlestown Square" label="Charlestown Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988702" start="31495" end="31511" title="Westfield Kotara" label="Westfield Kotara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546185" start="31514" end="31533" title="Greyhound Australia" label="Greyhound Australia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31535" end="31556" title="Premier Transport Group#Premier Motor Service" label="Premier Motor Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927463" start="31561" end="31576" title="Sid Fogg&amp;#x27;s" label="Sid Fogg&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955406" start="31667" end="31680" title="NSW TrainLink" label="NSW TrainLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741265" start="31759" end="31780" title="Newcastle Interchange" label="Newcastle Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017543" start="31791" end="31805" title="Newcastle railway line" label="Newcastle line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428218" start="31811" end="31845" title="Central Coast &amp;amp; Newcastle Line" label="Central Coast &amp;amp; Newcastle Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944411" start="31896" end="31909" title="Central Coast (New South Wales)" label="Central Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944651" start="31915" end="31926" title="Hunter Line" label="Hunter Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737185" start="31956" end="31964" title="Maitland railway station" label="Maitland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434344" start="31988" end="31993" title="Scone railway station" label="Scone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315219" start="31998" end="32004" title="Dungog railway station" label="Dungog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972229" start="32071" end="32090" title="Broadmeadow railway station" label="Broadmeadow station"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875738" start="32118" end="32123" title="Moree railway station" label="Moree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793432" start="32125" end="32133" title="Armidale railway station" label="Armidale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361491" start="32135" end="32143" title="Roma Street railway station" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q14206190" start="32203" end="32210" title="Belmont, New South Wales" label="Belmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249475" start="32215" end="32222" title="Toronto, New South Wales" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215030" start="32227" end="32241" title="Lake Macquarie (New South Wales)" label="Lake Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963243" start="32243" end="32251" title="Wallsend, New South Wales" label="Wallsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1793195" start="32253" end="32264" title="Kurri Kurri" label="Kurri Kurri"/>
<link wikidata="Q606357" start="32317" end="32325" title="Cessnock, New South Wales" label="Cessnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567894" start="32333" end="32355" title="South Maitland Railway" label="South Maitland Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645275" start="32547" end="32555" title="Hamilton railway station, New South Wales" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741265" start="32563" end="32584" title="Newcastle Interchange" label="Newcastle Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016515" start="32616" end="32636" title="Newcastle Light Rail" label="Newcastle Light Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053637" start="32690" end="32718" title="Broadmeadow Locomotive Depot" label="Broadmeadow Locomotive Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038495" start="32770" end="32798" title="Cardiff Locomotive Workshops" label="Cardiff Locomotive Workshops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982888" start="32854" end="32889" title="New South Wales Government Railways" label="New South Wales Government Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011682" start="32932" end="32940" title="New South Wales C38 class locomotive" label="38 class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011703" start="32949" end="32957" title="New South Wales D58 class locomotive" label="58 class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303118" start="32995" end="33006" title="Downer Rail" label="Downer Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864623" start="33022" end="33030" title="UGL Rail" label="UGL Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q56599008" start="33151" end="33168" title="Port of Newcastle" label="Port of Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053638" start="33526" end="33539" title="Stockton ferry service" label="ferry service"/>
<link wikidata="Q17570" start="33622" end="33639" title="Newcastle Airport, New South Wales" label="Newcastle Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q820325" start="33736" end="33758" title="City of Newcastle" label="Newcastle City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q820318" start="33763" end="33784" title="Port Stephens Council" label="Port Stephens Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q190915" start="33856" end="33872" title="low-cost airline" label="low-cost airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q955268" start="33911" end="33932" title="RAAF Base Williamtown" label="RAAF Base Williamtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="33936" end="33962" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981744" start="33992" end="34013" title="Department of Defence (Australia)" label="Department of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972221" start="34109" end="34120" title="Broadmeadow" label="Broadmeadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989540" start="34148" end="34192" title="Westpac Life Saver Rescue Helicopter Service" label="Westpac Life Saver Rescue Helicopter Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656734" start="34368" end="34383" title="Belmont Airport" label="Belmont Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q606193" start="34429" end="34443" title="City of Lake Macquarie" label="Lake Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771387" start="34454" end="34465" title="Marks Point, New South Wales" label="Marks Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339101" start="34738" end="34755" title="Newcastle Knights" label="Newcastle Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140630" start="34785" end="34806" title="National Rugby League" label="National Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188325" start="34848" end="34870" title="McDonald Jones Stadium" label="McDonald Jones Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017474" start="34905" end="34927" title="Newcastle Rugby League" label="Newcastle Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q30641384" start="35144" end="35179" title="Newcastle &amp;amp; Hunter Rugby League" label="Newcastle &amp;amp; Hunter Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q23019583" start="35529" end="35544" title="2016 Anzac Test" label="2016 Anzac Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589757" start="35553" end="35562" title="Australia national rugby league team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590290" start="35567" end="35578" title="New Zealand national rugby league team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q732929" start="35601" end="35629" title="Newcastle Jets FC" label="Newcastle Jets Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478113" start="35677" end="35683" title="Soccer in Australia" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q219586" start="35701" end="35709" title="A-League" label="A-League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188325" start="35724" end="35746" title="McDonald Jones Stadium" label="McDonald Jones Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q762294" start="35846" end="35868" title="Central Coast Mariners FC" label="Central Coast Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q876301" start="35937" end="35955" title="2015 AFC Asian Cup" label="2015 AFC Asian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q427823" start="36211" end="36237" title="National Basketball League (Australia)" label="National Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017414" start="36253" end="36276" title="Newcastle Falcons (basketball)" label="Newcastle Falcons (NBL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944503" start="36291" end="36305" title="Hunter Pirates" label="Hunter Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968814" start="36408" end="36412" title="NBL1 East" label="NBL1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972226" start="36418" end="36438" title="Broadmeadow Basketball Stadium" label="Newcastle Basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q109621215" start="36495" end="36519" title="Newcastle Falcons (NBL1 East)" label="Newcastle Falcons (NBL1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444946" start="36556" end="36586" title="1985 FIBA Oceania Championship" label="1985 FIBA Oceania Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q782856" start="36593" end="36634" title="Australia&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Australia&amp;#x27;s national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905035" start="36768" end="36783" title="Big Bash League" label="Big Bash League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188325" start="36813" end="36827" title="Hunter Stadium" label="Hunter Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="36905" end="36921" title="Australian rules" label="Australian rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920647" start="36965" end="36989" title="AFL Hunter Central Coast" label="AFL Hunter Central Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="36991" end="37017" title="Australian Football League" label="Australian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="37104" end="37115" title="Rugby union" label="Rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017530" start="37239" end="37271" title="Newcastle and Hunter Rugby Union" label="Newcastle and Hunter Rugby Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q534417" start="37338" end="37362" title="New South Wales Waratahs" label="New South Wales Waratahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q855988" start="37383" end="37394" title="Super Rugby" label="Super Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188325" start="37450" end="37464" title="Hunter Stadium" label="Hunter Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q113022764" start="37505" end="37527" title="Broadmeadow Racecourse" label="Broadmeadow Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972221" start="37548" end="37559" title="Broadmeadow" label="Broadmeadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834913" start="37731" end="37738" title="Group races" label="Group 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017449" start="37762" end="37790" title="Newcastle Newmarket Handicap" label="Newcastle Newmarket Handicap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026260" start="37825" end="37841" title="Cameron Handicap" label="Cameron Handicap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017423" start="37851" end="37869" title="Newcastle Gold Cup" label="Newcastle Gold Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="37941" end="37951" title="Aboriginal Australian" label="Aboriginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q114722832" start="37959" end="37971" title="Merv Maynard" label="Merv Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q931815" start="38274" end="38295" title="Newcastle North Stars" label="Newcastle North Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q781457" start="38340" end="38368" title="Australian Ice Hockey League" label="Australian Ice Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017516" start="38404" end="38418" title="Newcastle West, New South Wales" label="Newcastle West"/>
<link wikidata="Q12632756" start="38482" end="38508" title="Hunter Ice Skating Stadium" label="Hunter Ice Skating Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969790" start="38512" end="38523" title="Warners Bay" label="Warners Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q647527" start="38584" end="38606" title="Supercars Championship" label="Supercars Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q28128142" start="38620" end="38633" title="Newcastle 500" label="Newcastle 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q28128139" start="38649" end="38673" title="Newcastle Street Circuit" label="Newcastle Street Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38734" end="38751" title="Mattara Hillclimb" label="Mattara Hillclimb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38807" end="38829" title="F1 Offshore Powerboats" label="F1 Offshore Powerboats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944411" start="38866" end="38880" title="Hunter Jaegers" label="Hunter Jaegers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153694" start="38882" end="38906" title="Commonwealth Bank Trophy" label="Commonwealth Bank Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q231200" start="38909" end="38916" title="Netball" label="Netball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011800" start="39047" end="39069" title="New South Wales Swifts" label="New South Wales Swifts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017414" start="39321" end="39338" title="Newcastle Falcons (basketball)" label="Newcastle Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q427823" start="39339" end="39365" title="National Basketball League (Australia)" label="National Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944503" start="39396" end="39410" title="Hunter Pirates" label="Hunter Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q866638" start="39516" end="39534" title="Singapore Slingers" label="Singapore Slingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646111" start="39779" end="39786" title="Surfest" label="Surfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470097" start="39859" end="39872" title="Mark Richards (surfer)" label="Mark Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q219554" start="40046" end="40057" title="kitesurfing" label="kitesurfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449648" start="40190" end="40197" title="Tabloid (newspaper format)" label="tabloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753866" start="40205" end="40215" title="The Newcastle Herald" label="The Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017485" start="40380" end="40394" title="Newcastle Star" label="Newcastle Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099096" start="40569" end="40573" title="Opus (University of Newcastle magazine)" label="Opus"/>
<link wikidata="Q549638" start="40697" end="40701" title="zine" label="zine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076755" start="40747" end="40754" title="Octapod" label="Octapod"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="40844" end="40879" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Australian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633123" start="40905" end="40908" title="2HD" label="2HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009142" start="41056" end="41074" title="Triple M Newcastle" label="Triple M Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955999" start="41100" end="41118" title="hit106.9 Newcastle" label="hit106.9 Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015876" start="41144" end="41150" title="New FM" label="New FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633182" start="41176" end="41180" title="2NUR" label="2NUR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320379" start="41205" end="41223" title="Rhema FM Newcastle" label="Rhema FM Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="41272" end="41307" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Australian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548278" start="41312" end="41325" title="ABC Newcastle" label="ABC Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280922" start="41350" end="41368" title="ABC Radio National" label="ABC Radio National"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650194" start="41381" end="41394" title="ABC NewsRadio" label="ABC NewsRadio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522899" start="41429" end="41437" title="Triple J" label="Triple J"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818999" start="41467" end="41481" title="ABC Classic FM" label="ABC Classic FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075994" start="41512" end="41540" title="Special Broadcasting Service" label="Special Broadcasting Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3671633" start="41545" end="41554" title="SBS Radio" label="SBS Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633131" start="41614" end="41630" title="Sky Sports Radio" label="Sky Sports Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053208" start="41673" end="41685" title="Newy 87.8 FM" label="Newy 87.8 FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296865" start="41689" end="41695" title="Raw FM (Australian radio network)" label="Raw FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015310" start="41805" end="41822" title="NBN (TV station)" label="Nine Northern NSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="41825" end="41837" title="Nine Network" label="Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41858" end="41873" title="Regional television in Australia#Aggregation" label="Pre-aggregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015310" start="41875" end="41889" title="NBN Television" label="NBN Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955175" start="41954" end="41969" title="NRN" label="10 Northern NSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q767920" start="41972" end="41982" title="Network 10" label="Network 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953494" start="42004" end="42022" title="NEN (TV station)" label="Seven Northern NSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q908659" start="42025" end="42038" title="Seven Network" label="Seven Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q966055" start="42060" end="42074" title="ABC Television (Australian TV network)" label="ABC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075994" start="42077" end="42091" title="SBS Television" label="SBS Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="42290" end="42302" title="Nine Network" label="Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q908659" start="42340" end="42345" title="Seven Network" label="Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015310" start="42347" end="42351" title="NBN (TV station)" label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564691" start="42370" end="42384" title="WIN Television" label="WIN Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q38768" start="42552" end="42565" title="Richter magnitude scale" label="Richter scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972221" start="42777" end="42788" title="Broadmeadow" label="Broadmeadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="43031" end="43040" title="recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877599" start="43120" end="43135" title="Beaumont Street, Newcastle" label="Beaumont Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644763" start="43137" end="43145" title="Hamilton, New South Wales" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944411" start="43448" end="43461" title="Central Coast (New South Wales)" label="Central Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="43521" end="43536" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191545" start="43757" end="43769" title="Morris Iemma" label="Morris Iemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q923429" start="43825" end="43846" title="Bureau of Meteorology" label="Bureau of Meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273344" start="43951" end="43963" title="Pasha Bulker" label="Pasha Bulker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017401" start="43985" end="43997" title="Nobbys Beach" label="Nobbys Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q820382" start="44140" end="44147" title="Marine salvage" label="salvage"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="44411" end="44419" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265298" start="44648" end="44654" title="Dunbar (ship)" label="Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718865" start="44961" end="44983" title="The Bluebell Collision" label="The Bluebell Collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374592" start="45048" end="45066" title="Royal Newcastle Hospital" label="Newcastle Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273344" start="45334" end="45346" title="Pasha Bulker" label="Pasha Bulker"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="45392" end="45396" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606561" start="45397" end="45406" title="CAC Sabre" label="CAC Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743820" start="45445" end="45457" title="The Junction, New South Wales" label="The Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="45588" end="45601" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604177" start="45923" end="45935" title="Argyle House, Newcastle" label="Argyle House"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609088" start="45959" end="45990" title="David Cohen &amp;amp; Co. Warehouse" label="David Cohen &amp;amp; Co. Warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q55627453" start="46011" end="46043" title="Old Newcastle East Public School" label="Old Newcastle East Public School"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608503" start="46059" end="46084" title="Coutt&amp;#x27;s Sailors Home" label="Coutt&amp;#x27;s Sailors Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017397" start="46102" end="46125" title="Newcastle Customs House" label="Newcastle Customs House"/>
<link wikidata="Q96395428" start="46145" end="46165" title="Newcastle Reservoirs" label="Newcastle Reservoirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q55607624" start="46183" end="46219" title="Church and Watt Street Terrace Group" label="Church and Watt Street Terrace Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q43148487" start="46239" end="46260" title="Newcastle Court House" label="Newcastle Court House"/>
<link wikidata="Q30102941" start="46287" end="46322" title="Honeysuckle Point Railway Workshops" label="Honeysuckle Point Railway Workshops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017544" start="46349" end="46374" title="Newcastle railway station, New South Wales" label="Newcastle railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635509" start="46396" end="46405" title="The Ridge, Newcastle" label="The Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q55634572" start="46426" end="46466" title="T &amp;amp; G Mutual Life Assurance Building" label="T &amp;amp; G Mutual Life Assurance Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q43371275" start="46487" end="46508" title="Newcastle Post Office" label="Newcastle Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612020" start="46534" end="46556" title="Frederick Ash Building" label="Frederick Ash Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q14934944" start="46576" end="46595" title="Newcastle City Hall (Australia)" label="Newcastle City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894786" start="46615" end="46626" title="Nesca House" label="Nesca House"/>
<link wikidata="Q55623422" start="46662" end="46686" title="Miss Porter&amp;#x27;s House" label="Miss Porter&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q55607817" start="46708" end="46727" title="Coal River Precinct" label="Coal River Precinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q55627451" start="46746" end="46773" title="Old Newcastle Club Building" label="Old Newcastle Club Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927086" start="46797" end="46813" title="Victoria Theatre (Newcastle)" label="Victoria Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612953" start="46833" end="46853" title="Great Northern Hotel, Newcastle" label="Great Northern Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608379" start="46873" end="46892" title="Convict Lumber Yard" label="Convict Lumber Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937568" start="46915" end="46925" title="Bogey Hole" label="Bogey Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633057" start="46944" end="46981" title="Shepherds Hill military installations" label="Shepherds Hill military installations"/>
<link wikidata="Q55622107" start="47003" end="47022" title="Manufacturers House" label="Manufacturers House"/>
<link wikidata="Q60233196" start="47041" end="47067" title="Newcastle Government House" label="Newcastle Government House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="47102" end="47121" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="47123" end="47137" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q42157" start="47140" end="47146" title="Pohang" label="Pohang"/>
<link wikidata="Q41154" start="47148" end="47164" title="North Gyeongsang Province" label="North Gyeongsang"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="47166" end="47177" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q468765" start="47180" end="47183" title="Ube, Yamaguchi" label="Ube"/>
<link wikidata="Q127264" start="47185" end="47194" title="Yamaguchi prefecture" label="Yamaguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="47196" end="47201" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q534536" start="47204" end="47223" title="Arcadia, California" label="Arcadia, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="47225" end="47238" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641735" start="47254" end="47307" title="List of suburbs in Greater Newcastle, New South Wales" label="List of suburbs in Greater Newcastle, New South Wales"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52666" wikidata="Q370966" url="?curid=52666" title="Joseph Lyons">
<text>Joseph Aloysius Lyons (15 September 1879 – 7 April 1939) was an Australian politician who served as the tenth prime minister of Australia, from 1932 until his death in 1939. He held office as the inaugural leader of the United Australia Party (UAP), having previously led the Tasmanian branch of the Australian Labor Party (ALP) before the Australian Labor Party split of 1931. He served as the 26th premier of Tasmania from 1923 to 1928.

Lyons was born in Stanley, Tasmania, and before entering politics worked as a schoolteacher. He was active in the Labor Party from a young age and won election to the Tasmanian House of Assembly in 1909. He was Treasurer of Tasmania (1914–1916) under John Earle, before replacing Earle as party leader in 1916. After two elections that ended in hung parliaments, Lyons was appointed premier in 1923 at the head of a minority government. He pursued moderate reforms and successfully negotiated a constitutional crisis over the powers of the Legislative Council. At the 1925 election he led Labor to its first majority government in Tasmania, but the party lost office three years later.

In 1929, Lyons resigned from state parliament to enter federal politics, winning the seat of Wilmot in Labor&#x27;s landslide victory at the 1929 election. He was immediately appointed to cabinet by the new prime minister James Scullin, becoming Postmaster-General of Australia and Minister for Works and Railways. In 1930, he was acting treasurer while Scullin was overseas, and came into conflict with the Labor caucus over the government&#x27;s response to the Great Depression; he preferred orthodox financial policies. In early 1931, Lyons and his followers left Labor to sit as independents. His exact motivations for leaving the party have been subject to debate. A few months later his group merged with other opposition parties to form the United Australia Party; he was elected Leader of the Opposition.

Lyons led the UAP to a landslide victory at the 1931 election. Nicknamed &quot;Honest Joe&quot;, he was known as a masterful political campaigner and became popular with the general public. His personal popularity was a major factor in the government&#x27;s re-election in 1934 and 1937; he was the first prime minister to win three federal elections. The UAP initially governed alone but after 1934 formed a coalition with the Country Party. Lyons was his own treasurer until 1935 and oversaw Australia&#x27;s recovery from the Great Depression. He faced a number of foreign-policy challenges, but accelerated Australia&#x27;s transition towards an independent foreign policy. In the lead-up to World War II his government pursued a policy of appeasement and rearmament.

Lyons died of a heart attack in April 1939, becoming the first Australian prime minister to die in office. He is the only prime minister from Tasmania and one of two state premiers who have become prime minister, along with George Reid. Several years after his death, his widow Enid Lyons became the first woman elected to the House of Representatives.

==Early life==
===Birth and family background===
Lyons was born in Stanley, Tasmania, on 15 September 1879. He was the fifth of eight children born to Ellen (née Carroll) and Michael Henry Lyons, both of Irish descent. His mother was born in County Kildare and arrived in Australia in 1857, aged eleven, while his father was born in Tasmania to immigrants from County Galway. Lyons was the first prime minister to have an Australian-born parent. His paternal grandfather, Michael Lyons Sr., had arrived in Tasmania in 1843 with his wife and an infant daughter. Initially an indentured labourer, he became a tenant farmer after completing his term of service, and eventually saved enough to purchase land at Stanley, on the north-west coast. He had a reputation as a shrewd businessman, frequently buying and selling tracts of land and also dabbling in the hotel trade for a period. His sons followed him into farming, and the Lyons family was prominent in the small local community.

===Childhood===
When Lyons was four years old, his father moved the family from Stanley to Ulverstone, where he opened a combined bakery and butcher&#x27;s shop. In 1887, he lost the family&#x27;s savings betting on the Melbourne Cup, driving them into poverty. He had to sell the shop and resort to working as an unskilled labourer; his oldest children took part-time jobs to support the family. Lyons began working at the age of nine, as a printer&#x27;s messenger boy. By the age of twelve, he was &quot;cutting scrub&quot; (clearing land) for local farmers. Lyons had begun his education at the Ulverstone State School in 1885, before switching to the local Catholic school in 1887. His early years of schooling were interrupted by his family&#x27;s financial difficulties, and his attendance was sometimes irregular, though this was not uncommon in small rural schools at the time. In 1891, he moved back to Stanley to live with his aunts, Etty and Mary Carroll, and was enrolled at the Stanley State School.

===Teaching career===
In 1895, aged fifteen, Lyons began working as a pupil-teacher under the monitorial system. This allowed him to continue his own education while being paid to teach younger students, and eventually qualify as a full-time teacher himself. Apart from a three-month stint as a relief teacher at Irishtown, he remained at Stanley until early 1901, when he was given charge of two small &quot;half-time&quot; schools on the east coast, Apslawn and Apsley Meadows. During that period, he lived at &quot;Apsley House&quot;, the family estate of Sir William Lyne, Premier of New South Wales. In March 1902, Lyons transferred to the Midlands, taking charge of the schools at Conara and Llewellyn. He was transferred again in July 1905 to Tullah, then a few months later to Smithton, and then in April 1906 to Pioneer. In 1907, Lyons moved to Hobart to attend the newly opened Hobart Teachers&#x27; College for a year. He was then posted to Launceston, teaching at the Glen Dhu and Wellington Square State Schools, as well as briefly acting as headmaster at Perth. He came into conflict with the Department of Education on a number of occasions, often complaining about poor working conditions. His superiors also disapproved of his political activities, which together with his complaints probably contributed to his frequent transfers and failure to win desirable postings.

==State politics==

Lyons came from a family that was broadly sympathetic to the Australian labour movement, but without any formal political involvement. Though widely read, he did not actively participate in politics until after leaving Stanley. Lyons helped found a branch of the Workers&#x27; Political League during his time in Smithton, but was forced to resign his membership due to restrictions on the involvement of public servants in political activities. Those rules were later relaxed, and by 1908 he was spending most of his free time campaigning for the Labor Party; he had a reputation as a first-rate orator. Lyons was elected to the Tasmanian House of Assembly at the 1909 state election, standing in the six-member Division of Wilmot. This required him to resign from the Education Department and give up his teaching career, which reduced his annual salary from £125 to £100. He was comfortably re-elected in 1912, although he was attacked with a horsewhip during one of his campaign speeches. The son of one of his political opponents was convicted of assault, and the incident received widespread media attention.

Labor came to power in Tasmania in 1914, after the existing Liberal government of Albert Solomon was defeated on a confidence motion. The new premier was John Earle, who had previously held office for one week in October 1909. In the new government, Lyons was made Treasurer, Minister for Education, and Minister for Railways; it was common for ministers to hold more than one portfolio. He was somewhat inexperienced with economic matters, and often turned to his friend and colleague Lyndhurst Giblin for advice; they eventually renewed their relationship at federal level during the 1930s. Less than a month after taking office, Lyons announced that the government was moving its accounts from the Commercial Bank of Tasmania to the Commonwealth Bank, which had only been established a few years earlier. In return he was able to secure a substantial loan and an overdraft of £100,000. The government faced a number of challenges during its two years in office, including a statewide drought, a series of bushfires in early 1915, and labour shortages due to the ongoing war. As Labor was in minority, many of its legislative initiatives were thwarted by the opposition. The party lost the 1916 state election by two seats, despite increasing its share of the vote.

When the ALP split over conscription during the First World War in 1916, Earle, a pro-conscriptionist, followed Prime Minister Billy Hughes out of the Labor party. Like most Australians of Irish Catholic background, Lyons was an anti-conscriptionist and stayed in the Labor Party, becoming its new leader in Tasmania.

===Premier of Tasmania===
Lyons led the Labor opposition in the Tasmanian Parliament until 1923 when he became Premier of Tasmania, leading a minority ALP government. He held office until 1928, also serving as Treasurer during the whole period of his premiership. Lyons&#x27;s government was cautious and pragmatic, establishing good relations with business and the conservative government in Canberra, but attracting some criticism from unionists within his own party. Labor narrowly lost the 1928 state election to the Nationalist Party.

As premier, Lyons faced a constitutional crisis relating to the powers of the Tasmanian Legislative Council (the parliament&#x27;s upper house). The Legislative Council had a limited franchise and was occupied mostly by conservative landowners, and was consequently opposed to much of the government&#x27;s platform. Historically, it had claimed for itself the power to amend money bills, despite having no express constitutional authority to do so. In November 1924, the council returned the government&#x27;s budget to the Legislative Assembly with a series of proposed reductions in spending. Lyons chose to ignore the amendments, instead sending the bill directly to the Administrator, Herbert Nicholls, who approved it. In 1926, the government amended the state constitution to codify the Legislative Council&#x27;s powers over money bills, bringing them into line with the other states.

On 15 July 1926, Lyons suffered severe leg injuries when his car—driven by a chauffeur—collided with a goods train near Perth. He came close to death, and stood down from public duties for four months to recover; Allan Guy was acting premier in his absence. Michael O&#x27;Keefe, the Speaker of the Tasmanian House of Assembly, was also a passenger in the car, and lingered for several months before dying of his injuries.

==Federal politics==
At the 1929 Australian federal election Lyons ran for the federal seat of Wilmot, covering the same territory as his state seat. He was swept into office in Labor&#x27;s landslide victory under James Scullin. He was appointed Postmaster-General and Minister for Works and Railways.

When the Great Depression struck in 1930, the Scullin government split over its response. Lyons became the leading advocate within the government of orthodox finance and deflationary economic policies, and an opponent of the inflationary, proto-Keynesian policies of Treasurer Ted Theodore. Theodore was forced to resign over accusations of corruption in June 1930, and Scullin took over the Treasury portfolio in addition to the Prime Ministership. Lyons was acting Treasurer from August 1930 to January 1931, whilst Scullin was in Britain for the Imperial Conference. Lyons announced his plan for recovery in October 1930, insisting on the need to maintain a balanced budget and cut public spending and salaries, although also advising lower interest rates and the provision of greater credit for industry.

His conservative economic approach won him support among business, but angered many in the Labor caucus, who wanted to expand the deficit to stimulate the economy, and were horrified at the prospect of cuts in salaries and government spending. Alienated by their attacks, Lyons began to consider suggestions from a group of his new business supporters, including influential members of the Melbourne Establishment, that he leave the government to take over the leadership of the conservative opposition.

==Resignation from the Labor Party==
When Scullin returned in January 1931, he reappointed Theodore (as it had become clear Theodore would not be charged with corruption) to the Cabinet as Treasurer, which Lyons took as a rejection of his own policies. Lyons immediately resigned from the Cabinet, and then in mid–March from the Labor Party. Accompanied by another senior minister in the Scullin government, James Fenton, and four other right-wing Labor MPs, he crossed the floor to sit on the opposition benches. Soon afterward, Lyons and his supporters joined with the opposition Nationalist Party and the Australian Party, a small party led by Billy Hughes, to form a new party, the United Australia Party (UAP).

Although the UAP was essentially an enlarged Nationalist Party, Lyons was chosen as leader of the party. He thus became Leader of the Opposition, with former Nationalist leader John Latham as his deputy. The UAP realised that Lyons, an affable family man with the common touch, was a far more electorally appealing figure than the aloof Latham. Additionally, his Labor background and his Catholicism would allow him to win traditional Labor constituencies (working-class voters and Irish Catholics) over to what was essentially an upper- and middle-class conservative party.

In March, at about the same time as Lyons led his group of defectors from the right of the Labor Party across the floor, five left-wing NSW Labor MPs, supporters of New South Wales Premier Jack Lang, also split from the official Labor Party over the government&#x27;s economic policies (for Lyons official Labor had been too radical, for the Langites they were not radical enough), forming a &quot;Lang Labor&quot; group on the cross-benches and costing the government its majority in the House of Representatives. Late in the year, the Langite MPs supported a UAP motion of no confidence and brought the government down, forcing an early election.

==Prime minister==

===Elections and government formation===
At the 1931 election Lyons and the UAP offered stable, orthodox financial policies in response to what they branded as Scullin&#x27;s poor stewardship of the economy. While Labor remained split between the official party and the Langites, the UAP projected an image of putting national unity above class conflict. The result was a huge victory for the UAP, which took 34 seats against 18 seats for the two wings of the Labor Party combined.

At the outset, the UAP did not renew the traditional non-Labor Coalition with the Country Party, then led by Sir Earle Page. While the two parties ran separate House campaigns, they presented a joint ticket for the Senate. The massive swing to the UAP left it only four seats short of a majority in its own right. The five MPs elected for the Emergency Committee of South Australia, which stood for the UAP and Country Party in South Australia, joined the UAP party room, giving the UAP a bare majority of two seats. While Lyons was still willing to take the Country Party into his government (which would have commanded over 70 percent of the seats), negotiations stalled, and Lyons decided to govern alone. The new government was sworn in January 1932. Lyons became the third former federal or state Labor leader (after Hughes and Joseph Cook) to become a non-Labor Prime Minister.

After the UAP suffered an eight-seat swing in the 1934 election, Lyons was forced to invite the Country Party into his government in a full coalition, with Earle Page as Deputy Prime Minister. The government won a third term at the 1937 election, with 44 of 74 seats and 50.6 percent of the two-party-preferred vote against a reunited Labor Party led by John Curtin.

While campaigning, Lyons made extensive use of the new technologies of radio, film, and air travel. He held frequent press conferences and personally briefed journalists, editors, and newspaper proprietors to gain favourable publicity.

===Domestic policy===

Lyons adhered to the principles of &quot;sound finance&quot;, opposing inflation and government debt and stressing the importance of balanced budgets and orderly loan repayments. Although he had been state treasurer for seven years, he portrayed himself as a relative outsider to economic policy who would take the advice of experts. Lyons appointed himself Treasurer of Australia, the first non-Labor prime minister to do so and the first incoming prime minister to do so since Andrew Fisher in 1914. He had earlier offered the treasurership to Ben Chifley as an inducement to leave the Labor Party, but Chifley declined. He appointed experienced assistant treasurers, initially Stanley Bruce and later Walter Massy-Greene and Richard Casey, who eventually succeeded as Treasurer in 1935.

The Lyons government&#x27;s plan for recovery was a reprise of the Premiers&#x27; Plan which had split the Labor Party. It called for devaluation of the Australian pound, cuts to public servants&#x27; wages, reductions in tariffs, reductions in budget deficits, and greater spending on work-relief programmes. Lyons&#x27;s first budget in 1932 restricted maternity allowances, cut pensions, and cut public servants&#x27; wages. His second budget reversed wage cuts and offered tax cuts, which were followed by further tax cuts in the 1934 budget. By some measures Australia recovered from the Great Depression more rapidly than other similar countries, but the effect of the government&#x27;s policies have been subject to debate, with some arguing they either slowed or had little effect on Australia&#x27;s recovery.

In April 1933, Western Australia voted overwhelmingly to secede from the rest of the country. Lyons spent two weeks campaigning for the &quot;No&quot; vote with George Pearce and Tom Brennan. The state&#x27;s isolation at the time was such that he had to appoint John Latham as acting prime minister for the duration of the trip. Despite the result of vote, the federal government viewed secession as unconstitutional and refused to allow Western Australia to leave the federation. The state&#x27;s appeal to the British government to intervene was also unsuccessful. In July 1933, Lyons established the Commonwealth Grants Commission to provide impartial advice about the distribution of federal government grants to the states; it remains in existence.

Other legislative accomplishments of the Lyons government include the creation of the Australian Broadcasting Commission (ABC) in 1932 and the &quot;Income Tax Assessment Act 1936&quot;. The government&#x27;s landmark national insurance scheme proved politically controversial and was never enacted. Political controversies included the Egon Kisch affair of 1934 and the Dalfram dispute of 1938. In 1937, two simultaneous referendums were held, relating to aviation and the marketing of agricultural products; both failed.

===Foreign policy===

Lyons had no previous experience in international relations or diplomacy, but as prime minister took a keen interest in foreign relations and exerted significant influence over the government&#x27;s foreign policy. His government pursued what has been called a policy of &quot;appeasement and rearmament&quot;. Increases in Australia&#x27;s defence budget in the years before World War II made him &quot;the greatest peace-time rearmer in Australian history&quot;, and saw the military rebuilt after severe funding cuts during the Great Depression. Lyons had pacifist leanings and was keen to avoid a repeat of the First World War. These were rooted in his religious convictions, but also influenced by visits to the battlefields of Europe in which he viewed the graves of Australian soldiers. The appeasement aspect of his foreign policy was primarily directed at Italy and Japan, as it was likely that war between those countries and other major powers would affect the important trade routes in the Mediterranean and the Pacific upon which Australia relied. He was particularly concerned with Anglo-Italian and Anglo-Japanese relations, where his goal was to &quot;influence British policy in a manner conducive to Australian interests&quot;.

According to David Bird, whose book &quot;The Tame Tasmanian&quot; examined the Lyons government&#x27;s foreign policy, there was a growing realisation in the 1930s that Australian interests would not be aligned with British interests in all cases. In order to differentiate the two, Lyons authorised three &quot;Pacific initiatives&quot;. The first was the Australian Eastern Mission of 1934 led by Deputy Prime Minister John Latham, which visited seven Asian countries. The second was the 1935 appointment of Australian government representatives in China, the Dutch East Indies, Japan, and United States – albeit below the rank of ambassador – where previously Australia&#x27;s interests had been represented solely by British officials. The third was Lyons&#x27;s &quot;Pacific Pact&quot; proposal, which envisioned a non-aggression pact between the major powers in the Pacific. Although he championed the pact at the 1937 Imperial Conference, discussions failed to progress. In Bird&#x27;s opinion, &quot;the Lyons years should thus be seen as a part of the evolution of Australian external policy from dependency towards autonomy […] it is perhaps the continuation and acceleration of the process of transition for which Lyons as Prime Minister ought to be best remembered&quot;.
Lyons was prime minister during the Edward VIII abdication crisis of 1936. He and the other Dominion leaders were only officially informed of the king&#x27;s intention to abdicate a few weeks before it occurred, although he had found out about the situation earlier through unofficial channels. Lyons strongly opposed the proposed marriage to Wallis Simpson, a view shared by his cabinet; it is unclear if he was initially aware how deep the king&#x27;s feelings were. He later telegraphed the king asking him not to abdicate, and after the event gave a speech in parliament announcing his regret at the king&#x27;s decision. Lyons is the only Australian prime minister to have held office during the reigns of three monarchs, and the only prime minister to serve throughout a monarch&#x27;s entire reign.

===Retirement plans===

It was initially assumed Lyons would be succeeded by his deputy John Latham, but Latham left parliament at the 1934 election and the following year was appointed Chief Justice of Australia. His replacement in the Division of Kooyong was Robert Menzies, a prominent figure in Victorian politics and an ally of Lyons. In April 1936, Lyons hand-wrote a letter to Menzies endorsing him as his successor. For various reasons, Menzies did not enjoy universal support within the UAP, and several other were seen as potential successors to Lyons. Within the parliamentary UAP, Richard Casey, Charles Hawker, Billy Hughes, and Archdale Parkhill all had supporters. There was also support for figures outside parliament, including former prime minister Stanley Bruce and Bertram Stevens, premier of New South Wales.

By 1938, Lyons was making concrete plans to retire, renovating his house in Devonport and moving his youngest children away from Canberra to attend local schools. According to his wife, they discussed his future two weeks before his death and agreed that he would retire as soon as possible. However, UAP officials repeatedly pressured him to stay on until the most suitable successor could be found.

==Death==

On 5 April 1939, Lyons suffered a heart attack while being driven from Melbourne to Sydney. It occurred shortly after he had stopped in at Goulburn to collect his son Kevin from St Patrick&#x27;s College for the Easter holidays. Lyons was rushed to St Vincent&#x27;s Hospital, Darlinghurst, in a critical condition. By the following day, he was unable to speak and was drifting in and out of consciousness. He soon fell into a coma, and died on the morning of 7 April, which was Good Friday. Lyons&#x27;s body lay in state at St Mary&#x27;s Cathedral until 10 April (Easter Monday). A requiem service was held the following day, and then a procession bearing his coffin proceeded from the cathedral to Circular Quay. Lyons&#x27;s body was transported to his home town of Devonport aboard HMAS &quot;Vendetta&quot;. His funeral was held at the Church of Our Lady of Lourdes on 13 April, and he was buried in the church grounds. He was re-interred in the new Mersey Vale Memorial Park in 1969, where he was joined by his wife in 1981.

Lyons was the first Australian prime minister to die in office. There was no constitutional precedent as to who should be appointed as his successor, and the situation was further complicated by the UAP&#x27;s lack of a deputy leader. When the seriousness of Lyons&#x27;s condition became apparent, Earle Page—the leader of the Country Party and &quot;de facto&quot; deputy prime minister—called a cabinet meeting, where it was agreed that he should serve as prime minister on an interim basis while the UAP elected a new leader. He was sworn in by Governor-General Lord Gowrie a few hours after Lyons&#x27;s death. The 1939 United Australia Party leadership election was held on 18 April and won by Robert Menzies, who replaced Page as prime minister on 26 April. According to Laurie Fitzhardinge, Lyons&#x27;s death &quot;removed the only force that had held in check the smouldering animosities and barely suppressed rivalries which divided [the UAP&#x27;s] members&quot;.

==Personal life==

On 28 April 1915, Lyons married Enid Burnell, the daughter of a family friend; she was almost 18 years his junior. He had begun courting her in 1912, when she was 15. The couple had twelve children together:
# Gerald Desmond (1916–2000)
# Sheila Mary Norma (1918–2000)
# Enid Veronica (1919–1988) – married army officer Maurice Austin
# Kathleen Patricia (1920–2012)
# Moira Rose (1922–1991)
# Kevin Orchard (1923–2000)
# Garnet Philip Burnell (1924–1925)
# Brendan Aloysius (1927–2010)
# Barry Joseph (1928–2015)
# Rosemary Josephine (1929–1999)
# Peter Julian (1931–2021)
# Janice Mary (1933–2020)

Several years after Lyons&#x27;s death, his widow Enid also embarked on a political career, becoming the first woman elected to the House of Representatives and serving in cabinet in the post-war Menzies Government. Their sons Kevin and Brendan entered Tasmanian politics, becoming state government ministers several decades after their father&#x27;s death. Their grandchildren include Libby Lyons, director of the Workplace Gender Equality Agency, and Kevin Lyons Jr., who was appointed to the Supreme Court of Victoria in 2018.

Before his marriage, Lyons had briefly been engaged to Pearl &quot;Pib&quot; Bailey, whom he met while teaching at Conara in about 1902. He broke off their relationship for reasons unknown, but they remained firm friends; Bailey never married and kept the love letters they exchanged for the rest of her life.

In 2018, a Jim Starkey who is married to Wendy Starkey, a great-granddaughter of another former prime minister Billy Hughes, claimed to be the great-grandson of Lyons.

However, Starkey&#x27;s claim of familial relations with Lyons has been disputed by the Lyons family and Lyons biographer Anne Henderson.

==Legacy==

Lyons was one of the most genuinely popular men to hold the office of prime minister, and his death caused widespread grief. His genial, laid-back appearance often led to his portrayal in cartoons as a sleepy koala. A devout Catholic, he was the second Catholic to become prime minister, after his immediate predecessor Scullin, and the only non-Labor Catholic prime minister until Tony Abbott.

Lyons is the only person in Australian history to have been prime minister, premier of a state, treasurer and leader of the opposition in both the Federal Parliament and a state parliament (although George Reid had been premier of a colony before Federation). Lyons is also the only prime minister to have come from Tasmania. At the time of his death, he was the second-longest serving prime minister in Australia&#x27;s history, behind only Hughes.

==Honours==

Lyons was appointed to the Privy Council of the United Kingdom in June 1932, a traditional honour for Australian prime ministers. He was formally sworn of the council when he visited London in March 1935. In the 1936 Birthday Honours, he was appointed as a Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour (CH), one of only four such appointments made by Edward VIII before his abdication.

After Lyons&#x27;s death, the Canberra suburb of Lyons was named in his honour, located in the Woden Valley adjacent to Curtin and Chifley. In 1975 he was honoured on a postage stamp bearing his portrait issued by Australia Post. His old seat of Wilmot was renamed the Division of Lyons in 1984, in joint honour of him and his wife Enid. The state seat of Wilmot was also renamed Lyons for the same reason. Lyons&#x27;s birthplace in Stanley (&quot;Joe Lyons Cottage&quot;) and family home in Devonport (&quot;Home Hill&quot;) are operated as heritage sites, the latter by the National Trust of Australia.

==See also==

*First Lyons Ministry
*Second Lyons Ministry
*Third Lyons Ministry
*Fourth Lyons Ministry
*List of prime ministers of Australia

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
===Biographical works===
*
*
*

===In compilations===
*

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q370966" start="0" end="21" title="Joseph Lyons" label="Joseph Aloysius Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="110" end="137" title="prime minister of Australia" label="prime minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728956" start="220" end="242" title="United Australia Party" label="United Australia Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604513" start="276" end="292" title="Tasmanian Labor Party" label="Tasmanian branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="300" end="322" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020026" start="340" end="376" title="Australian Labor Party split of 1931" label="Australian Labor Party split of 1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527933" start="400" end="419" title="premier of Tasmania" label="premier of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q187313" start="458" end="465" title="Stanley, Tasmania" label="Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="467" end="475" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867120" start="607" end="634" title="Tasmanian House of Assembly" label="Tasmanian House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836760" start="651" end="672" title="Treasurer of Tasmania" label="Treasurer of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16029310" start="691" end="701" title="John Earle (Australian politician)" label="John Earle"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="856" end="875" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994121" start="980" end="999" title="Tasmanian Legislative Council" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687511" start="1008" end="1021" title="1925 Tasmanian state election" label="1925 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973900" start="1220" end="1226" title="Division of Wilmot" label="Wilmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586885" start="1268" end="1281" title="1929 Australian federal election" label="1929 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q23362" start="1349" end="1362" title="James Scullin" label="James Scullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11796917" start="1373" end="1404" title="Postmaster-General of Australia" label="Postmaster-General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865888" start="1409" end="1440" title="Minister for Works and Railways (Australia)" label="Minister for Works and Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824362" start="1535" end="1547" title="Australian Labor Party Caucus" label="Labor caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599048" start="1591" end="1607" title="Great Depression in Australia" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460433" start="1915" end="1939" title="Leader of the Opposition (Australia)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q776380" start="1990" end="2003" title="1931 Australian federal election" label="1931 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586888" start="2215" end="2219" title="1934 Australian federal election" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586887" start="2224" end="2228" title="1937 Australian federal election" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="2370" end="2383" title="National Party of Australia" label="Country Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390270" start="2403" end="2412" title="Treasurer of Australia" label="treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23352" start="2939" end="2950" title="George Reid" label="George Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054376" start="2993" end="3003" title="Enid Lyons" label="Enid Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q187313" start="3136" end="3153" title="Stanley, Tasmania" label="Stanley, Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q173332" start="3311" end="3325" title="County Kildare" label="County Kildare"/>
<link wikidata="Q169923" start="3430" end="3443" title="County Galway" label="County Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="3643" end="3662" title="indentured servant" label="indentured labourer"/>
<link wikidata="Q54639972" start="3676" end="3689" title="tenant farmer" label="tenant farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5713437" start="3792" end="3808" title="North West Tasmania" label="north-west coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169513" start="4144" end="4154" title="Ulverstone, Tasmania" label="Ulverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311060" start="4273" end="4286" title="Melbourne Cup" label="Melbourne Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089041" start="5138" end="5151" title="pupil-teacher" label="pupil-teacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178921" start="5162" end="5179" title="monitorial system" label="monitorial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q31411453" start="5381" end="5390" title="Irishtown, Tasmania" label="Irishtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158950" start="5631" end="5643" title="William Lyne" label="William Lyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527950" start="5645" end="5671" title="Premier of New South Wales" label="Premier of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935610" start="5755" end="5761" title="Conara, Tasmania" label="Conara"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198758" start="5766" end="5775" title="Llewellyn, Tasmania" label="Llewellyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852135" start="5818" end="5824" title="Tullah, Tasmania" label="Tullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001465" start="5853" end="5861" title="Smithton, Tasmania" label="Smithton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196624" start="5889" end="5896" title="Pioneer, Tasmania" label="Pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q40191" start="5922" end="5928" title="Hobart" label="Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q339527" start="6020" end="6030" title="Launceston, Tasmania" label="Launceston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009433" start="6137" end="6142" title="Perth, Tasmania" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260266" start="6175" end="6198" title="Department of Education (Tasmania)" label="Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q279376" start="6537" end="6563" title="Australian labour movement" label="Australian labour movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604513" start="6739" end="6769" title="Australian Labor Party (Tasmanian Branch)" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Political League"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="7024" end="7035" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867120" start="7106" end="7133" title="Tasmanian House of Assembly" label="Tasmanian House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687504" start="7141" end="7160" title="1909 Tasmanian state election" label="1909 state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284547" start="7189" end="7207" title="Division of Wilmot (state)" label="Division of Wilmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687505" start="7381" end="7388" title="1912 Tasmanian state election" label="in 1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775926" start="7652" end="7659" title="Tasmanian Liberal League" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711244" start="7674" end="7688" title="Albert Solomon" label="Albert Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="7707" end="7724" title="confidence motion" label="confidence motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16029310" start="7746" end="7756" title="John Earle (Australian politician)" label="John Earle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836760" start="7857" end="7866" title="Treasurer of Tasmania" label="Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708659" start="8078" end="8094" title="Lyndhurst Giblin" label="Lyndhurst Giblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q94686699" start="8293" end="8320" title="Commercial Bank of Tasmania" label="Commercial Bank of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q285328" start="8328" end="8345" title="Commonwealth Bank" label="Commonwealth Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129100" start="8458" end="8467" title="overdraft" label="overdraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017324" start="8600" end="8609" title="bushfires in Australia" label="bushfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="8686" end="8694" title="minority government" label="minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687507" start="8784" end="8803" title="1916 Tasmanian state election" label="1916 state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q152666" start="8988" end="9000" title="Billy Hughes" label="Billy Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527933" start="9291" end="9310" title="Premier of Tasmania" label="Premier of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516976" start="9701" end="9718" title="Nationalist Party of Australia" label="Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q380552" start="9747" end="9768" title="constitutional crisis" label="constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994121" start="9799" end="9828" title="Tasmanian Legislative Council" label="Tasmanian Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857741" start="10097" end="10107" title="money bill" label="money bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983452" start="10411" end="10427" title="Herbert Nicholls" label="Herbert Nicholls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009433" start="10735" end="10740" title="Perth, Tasmania" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730654" start="10828" end="10837" title="Allan Guy" label="Allan Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030903" start="10873" end="10893" title="Michael O&amp;#x27;Keefe (Tasmanian politician)" label="Michael O&amp;#x27;Keefe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574308" start="10899" end="10941" title="Speaker of the Tasmanian House of Assembly" label="Speaker of the Tasmanian House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586885" start="11067" end="11099" title="1929 Australian federal election" label="1929 Australian federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973900" start="11134" end="11140" title="Division of Wilmot" label="Wilmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q23362" start="11254" end="11267" title="James Scullin" label="James Scullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11796917" start="11286" end="11304" title="Postmaster-General of Australia" label="Postmaster-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865888" start="11309" end="11340" title="Minister for Works and Railways (Australia)" label="Minister for Works and Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="11352" end="11368" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q83937" start="11588" end="11597" title="Keynesian economics" label="Keynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693792" start="11620" end="11632" title="Ted Theodore" label="Ted Theodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139567" start="11892" end="11911" title="Imperial Conference" label="Imperial Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133824" start="13066" end="13078" title="James Fenton (Australian politician)" label="James Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516976" start="13240" end="13257" title="Nationalist Party of Australia" label="Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q782691" start="13266" end="13282" title="Australian Party" label="Australian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728956" start="13344" end="13366" title="United Australia Party" label="United Australia Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460433" start="13495" end="13519" title="List of Australian Leaders of the Opposition" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q364253" start="13552" end="13563" title="John Latham (jurist)" label="John Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="13857" end="13872" title="Irish Catholics" label="Irish Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="14116" end="14131" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q933146" start="14140" end="14149" title="Jack Lang (Australian politician)" label="Jack Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="14516" end="14539" title="motion of no confidence" label="motion of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q776380" start="14669" end="14682" title="1931 Australian federal election" label="1931 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065320" start="15157" end="15176" title="Coalition (Australia)" label="non-Labor Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="15186" end="15199" title="National Party of Australia" label="Country Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q370926" start="15217" end="15227" title="Earle Page" label="Earle Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370581" start="15447" end="15485" title="Emergency Committee of South Australia" label="Emergency Committee of South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q356230" start="15937" end="15948" title="Joseph Cook" label="Joseph Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586888" start="16039" end="16052" title="1934 Australian federal election" label="1934 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586887" start="16221" end="16234" title="1937 Australian federal election" label="1937 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858737" start="16280" end="16304" title="two-party-preferred vote" label="two-party-preferred vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q23375" start="16343" end="16354" title="John Curtin" label="John Curtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390270" start="16975" end="16997" title="Treasurer of Australia" label="Treasurer of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q314016" start="17096" end="17109" title="Andrew Fisher" label="Andrew Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q23379" start="17163" end="17174" title="Ben Chifley" label="Ben Chifley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23358" start="17297" end="17310" title="Stanley Bruce" label="Stanley Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965561" start="17321" end="17340" title="Walter Massy-Greene" label="Walter Massy-Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q335310" start="17345" end="17358" title="Richard Casey, Baron Casey" label="Richard Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240387" start="17475" end="17494" title="Premiers&amp;#x27; Plan" label="Premiers&amp;#x27; Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q783373" start="17561" end="17577" title="Australian pound" label="Australian pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454865" start="18261" end="18281" title="1933 Western Australian secession referendum" label="voted overwhelmingly"/>
<link wikidata="Q364568" start="18389" end="18402" title="George Pearce" label="George Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815052" start="18407" end="18418" title="Tom Brennan (politician)" label="Tom Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676862" start="18506" end="18527" title="acting prime minister" label="acting prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153756" start="18832" end="18862" title="Commonwealth Grants Commission" label="Commonwealth Grants Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="19070" end="19104" title="Australian Broadcasting Commission" label="Australian Broadcasting Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051745" start="19133" end="19163" title="Income Tax Assessment Act 1936" label="Income Tax Assessment Act 1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q112030453" start="19193" end="19227" title="National Insurance (Australia)" label="landmark national insurance scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818165" start="19321" end="19346" title="Attempted exclusion of Egon Kisch from Australia" label="Egon Kisch affair of 1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q20064121" start="19355" end="19378" title="Dalfram dispute of 1938" label="Dalfram dispute of 1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825118" start="19389" end="19417" title="1937 Australian referendum" label="two simultaneous referendums"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093906" start="20626" end="20639" title="Italy–United Kingdom relations" label="Anglo-Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424246" start="20644" end="20668" title="Japan–United Kingdom relations" label="Anglo-Japanese relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q126488839" start="21135" end="21161" title="Australian Eastern Mission" label="Australian Eastern Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q364253" start="21199" end="21210" title="John Latham (judge)" label="John Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412901" start="21599" end="21618" title="non-aggression pact" label="non-aggression pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846847" start="21699" end="21723" title="1937 Imperial Conference" label="1937 Imperial Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q307716" start="22099" end="22128" title="Edward VIII abdication crisis" label="Edward VIII abdication crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q209417" start="22406" end="22420" title="Wallis Simpson" label="Wallis Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q364253" start="22958" end="22969" title="John Latham (judge)" label="John Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409185" start="23056" end="23082" title="Chief Justice of Australia" label="Chief Justice of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973706" start="23107" end="23126" title="Division of Kooyong" label="Division of Kooyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="23131" end="23145" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q335310" start="23463" end="23476" title="Richard Casey, Baron Casey" label="Richard Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078842" start="23478" end="23492" title="Charles Hawker" label="Charles Hawker"/>
<link wikidata="Q152666" start="23494" end="23506" title="Billy Hughes" label="Billy Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785718" start="23512" end="23529" title="Archdale Parkhill" label="Archdale Parkhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q23358" start="23637" end="23650" title="Stanley Bruce" label="Stanley Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899412" start="23655" end="23670" title="Bertram Stevens (politician)" label="Bertram Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q705705" start="23777" end="23786" title="Devonport, Tasmania" label="Devonport"/>
<link wikidata="Q605235" start="24253" end="24261" title="Goulburn, New South Wales" label="Goulburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396810" start="24281" end="24286" title="Kevin Lyons" label="Kevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595065" start="24292" end="24317" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Goulburn" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595607" start="24363" end="24403" title="St Vincent&amp;#x27;s Hospital, Sydney" label="St Vincent&amp;#x27;s Hospital, Darlinghurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q40317" start="24593" end="24604" title="Good Friday" label="Good Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q971514" start="24640" end="24664" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Sydney" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q209663" start="24681" end="24694" title="Easter Monday" label="Easter Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q51616" start="24699" end="24706" title="requiem" label="requiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092910" start="24816" end="24829" title="Circular Quay" label="Circular Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564123" start="24902" end="24927" title="HMAS Vendetta (D69)" label="HMAS &amp;quot;Vendetta&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q124365181" start="25071" end="25096" title="Mersey Vale Memorial Park" label="Mersey Vale Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q370926" start="25447" end="25457" title="Earle Page" label="Earle Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="25476" end="25489" title="National Party of Australia" label="Country Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261065" start="25515" end="25536" title="Deputy Prime Minister of Australia" label="deputy prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q336465" start="25714" end="25725" title="Alexander Hore-Ruthven, 1st Earl of Gowrie" label="Lord Gowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q42917074" start="25768" end="25815" title="1939 United Australia Party leadership election" label="1939 United Australia Party leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q32606975" start="25926" end="25945" title="Laurie Fitzhardinge" label="Laurie Fitzhardinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054376" start="26176" end="26188" title="Enid Lyons" label="Enid Burnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792844" start="26464" end="26478" title="Maurice Austin" label="Maurice Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396810" start="26538" end="26551" title="Kevin Lyons" label="Kevin Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960975" start="26602" end="26618" title="Brendan Lyons" label="Brendan Aloysius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817718" start="26941" end="26959" title="Menzies Government (1949–66)" label="Menzies Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q26703241" start="27131" end="27142" title="Libby Lyons" label="Libby Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040336" start="27160" end="27192" title="Workplace Gender Equality Agency" label="Workplace Gender Equality Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q61290457" start="27198" end="27213" title="Kevin Lyons (judge)" label="Kevin Lyons Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q14935610" start="27391" end="27397" title="Conara, Tasmania" label="Conara"/>
<link wikidata="Q36101" start="28116" end="28121" title="koala" label="koala"/>
<link wikidata="Q348577" start="28289" end="28300" title="Tony Abbott" label="Tony Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240389" start="28379" end="28386" title="Premiers of the Australian states" label="premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460433" start="28413" end="28437" title="List of Australian Leaders of the Opposition" label="leader of the opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q23352" start="28502" end="28513" title="George Reid" label="George Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="28794" end="28829" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949018" start="28979" end="29000" title="1936 Birthday Honours" label="1936 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137694" start="29024" end="29071" title="Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour" label="Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="29121" end="29132" title="Edward VIII" label="Edward VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160037" start="29206" end="29211" title="Lyons, Australian Capital Territory" label="Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075130" start="29252" end="29264" title="Woden Valley" label="Woden Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q538592" start="29277" end="29283" title="Curtin, Australian Capital Territory" label="Curtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q532284" start="29288" end="29295" title="Chifley, Australian Capital Territory" label="Chifley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142936" start="29371" end="29385" title="Australia Post" label="Australia Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878928" start="29426" end="29443" title="Division of Lyons" label="Division of Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284547" start="29537" end="29542" title="Division of Lyons (state)" label="Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q569207" start="29734" end="29761" title="National Trust of Australia" label="National Trust of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453242" start="29779" end="29799" title="First Lyons Ministry" label="First Lyons Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443406" start="29801" end="29822" title="Second Lyons Ministry" label="Second Lyons Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784890" start="29824" end="29844" title="Third Lyons Ministry" label="Third Lyons Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476137" start="29846" end="29867" title="Fourth Lyons Ministry" label="Fourth Lyons Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549251" start="29869" end="29905" title="List of prime ministers of Australia" label="List of prime ministers of Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52667" wikidata="Q23379" url="?curid=52667" title="Ben Chifley">
<text>Joseph Benedict Chifley (; 22 September 1885 – 13 June 1951) was an Australian politician and train driver who served as the 16th prime minister of Australia from 1945 to 1949. He held office as the leader of the Labor Party (ALP), and was notable for defining Australia&#x27;s post-war reconstruction efforts, enacting social and immigration reform and advancing the nationalisation of essential industries.

Chifley was born in Bathurst, New South Wales, and joined the New South Wales Government Railways after leaving school, eventually qualifying as an engine driver. He was prominent in the trade union movement before entering politics, and was also a director of &quot;The National Advocate&quot;. After several previous unsuccessful candidacies, Chifley was elected to parliament in the 1928 federal election. In 1931, he was appointed Minister for Defence in the government of James Scullin. He served in cabinet for less than a year before losing his seat at the 1931 federal election, which saw the government suffer an electoral wipeout.

After his electoral defeat, Chifley remained involved in politics as a party official, siding with the federal Labor leadership against the Lang Labor faction. He served on a royal commission into the banking system in 1935, and in 1940 became a senior public servant in the Department of Munitions. Chifley was re-elected to parliament later that year, on his third attempt since 1931. He was appointed Treasurer in the new Curtin government in 1941, as one of the few Labor MPs with previous ministerial experience. The following year Chifley was additionally made Minister for Postwar Reconstruction, making him one of the most powerful members of the government. He became prime minister following Curtin&#x27;s death in office in 1945, defeating caretaker prime minister Frank Forde in a leadership ballot.

At the 1946 Australian federal election, Chifley was re-elected with a slightly reduced majority – the first time that an incumbent Labor government had won re-election. The war had ended a month after he took office, and over the following three years his government embarked on an ambitious program of social reforms and nation-building schemes. These included the expansion of the welfare state, increased the post-war immigration to Australia, and the establishment of the Australian National University, the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (ASIO), and the Snowy Mountains Scheme. Some of the new legislation was successfully challenged in the High Court, and as a result the constitution was amended to give the federal government extended powers over social services.

Some of Chifley&#x27;s more interventionist economic policies were poorly received by Australian business, particularly an attempt to nationalise banks. His government was defeated at the 1949 Australian federal election, which brought Robert Menzies&#x27; Liberal Party to power for the first time. He stayed on as Leader of the Opposition until his death, which came a few months after the 1951 Australian federal election; Labor did not return to government until 1972. For his contributions to post-war prosperity, Chifley is often regarded as one of Australia&#x27;s greatest prime ministers. He is held in particularly high regard by the Labor Party, with his &quot;light on the hill&quot; speech seen as seminal in both the history of the party and the broader Australian labour movement.

==Early life==
Chifley was born at 29 Havannah Street, Bathurst, New South Wales, on 22 September 1885. He was the first of three sons born to Roman Catholic parents: Mary Anne (née Corrigan) and Patrick Chifley II. His father, a blacksmith, was born in Bathurst to Irish immigrants from County Tipperary, while his mother was born in County Fermanagh, in present-day Northern Ireland.

At the age of five, Chifley was sent to live with his widowed grandfather, Patrick Chifley I, who had a small farm at Limekilns, New South Wales, while his aunt, Mary Bridget Chifley, kept house for them. Chifley began his education at the local state school, which was known as a &quot;half-time school&quot; due to it being too small to offer daily classes; it shared a single teacher with a neighbouring community. He moved back to his parents&#x27; home at the age of 13, following his grandfather&#x27;s death in January 1899, and attended a Patrician Brothers school for about two years. He was a voracious reader from a young age, and would later supplement his limited formal education by attending classes at night schools or mechanics&#x27; institutes.

After leaving school, Chifley&#x27;s first job was as a cashier&#x27;s assistant at a local department store. He later worked at a tannery for a period, and then in September 1903 joined the New South Wales Government Railways as a &quot;shop boy&quot; at the Bathurst locomotive shed. Over the following decade, he was promoted through the ranks to engine-cleaner and fireman, and then finally in March 1914 to engine-driver. The position of driver was considered relatively prestigious, and Chifley had to sit various examinations before being certified. He developed an intimate technical understanding of his locomotives, and became a lecturer and instructor at the Bathurst Railway Institute. Chifley drove both goods trains and passenger trains. He was based in Bathurst and worked on the Main Western railway, except for a few months in 1914 when he drove on the Main Southern railway and worked out of Harden, New South Wales.

Chifley became involved with the labour movement as a member of the Locomotive Enginemen&#x27;s Association. He never held executive office, preferring to work as an organiser, but did serve as a divisional delegate to state and federal conferences. He developed a reputation for compromise, maintaining good relations with both the railway management and the more militant sections of the union. However, Chifley was one of the local leaders of the 1917 Australian general strike, and as a result was dismissed from the railway. He and most of the other strikers were eventually reinstated, but lost seniority and related privileges; Chifley was demoted from engine-driver to fireman. Despite repeated lobbying, their pre-1917 benefits were not restored until 1925. After the strike, the state government of William Holman also de-registered their union, placing it at a severe disadvantage against other railway unions. Chifley worked to secure its re-registration, which occurred in 1921, and was also involved in the formation of a national union – the Australian Federated Union of Locomotive Enginemen – in 1920. He appeared as an expert witness before the Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration in 1924, which subsequently implemented a new federal industrial award for the enginemen.

=== Early political involvement ===
Chifley joined the Australian Labor Party at a young age, and was involved in state and federal election campaigns as an organiser. In 1921, he replaced his father on the board of &quot;The National Advocate&quot;, a local newspaper that functioned as the mouthpiece of the labour movement. In 1922 and 1924, Chifley unsuccessfully contested Labor preselection for the NSW Electoral district of Bathurst. He was eventually chosen as the Labor candidate for the Division of Macquarie at the 1925 Australian federal election. Macquarie was a large and diverse electorate, covering an area from Bathurst east across the Blue Mountains to Penrith, on the outskirts of Sydney; it included industrial, agricultural, and mining districts in virtually equal measure. It was one of the most marginal seats in the country, and had last been won by Labor in 1919. Lacking name recognition, Chifley lost the election to the incumbent Nationalist MP, Arthur Manning. However, he reprised his candidacy in 1928, mounting a campaign that focused on the Bruce government&#x27;s unpopular labour policies. He accused the government of endangering the White Australia policy by allowing Southern European migrant workers into the country, claiming it had &quot;allowed so many dagoes and aliens in Australia that today they are all over the country taking work which rightly belongs to all Australians&quot;. The Labor Party recorded a 6.2-point swing in Macquarie, with Chifley becoming one of three candidates in New South Wales to win seats from the government.

== Early political career ==

At the 1929 election, Chifley was re-elected on a 10.7-point swing as Labor won a landslide victory. James Scullin became the new prime minister, the fourth member of his party to hold the office. As a backbencher with little parliamentary experience, Chifley did not stand for election to the Scullin Ministry, but did join the Public Accounts Committee. As the Great Depression worsened, he defended the government&#x27;s economic response against criticism from two factions within his own party – economic conservatives led by Joseph Lyons and left-wing populists led by Jack Lang. His loyalty paid off in March 1931, when the Labor caucus chose him to fill one of the vacancies in cabinet caused by the resignations of Lyons and James Fenton. Scullin appointed him Minister for Defence, a portfolio that had been disregarded somewhat in the face of more pressing concerns. There was little appetite for policy development, and Chifley instead concentrated on finding savings in his department that could be redirected to unemployment relief. He opened up unused military camps to the homeless, and also distributed surplus military clothing.

Chifley was somewhat reluctant in his support of the Premiers&#x27; Plan, but believed there was no better alternative and felt bound by the principle of cabinet solidarity. His endorsement of the plan, which required cuts to wages and pensions, was received poorly in his own constituency. Many in the local labour movement defected to Lang Labor, which opposed the plan, and his own union expelled him in August 1931. Joseph Lyons reportedly offered Chifley the treasurership as an inducement to join the new United Australia Party (UAP); Chifley declined and remained a member of the Labor Party. At the 1931 election, Chifley suffered a negative swing of 16.2 points in Macquarie, losing his seat to John Lawson, the UAP candidate, by just 456 votes on the final count. The Labor Party was reduced to 14 seats out of 75 in the House of Representatives, with five other ministers (including Treasurer Ted Theodore) and future prime minister John Curtin also losing their seats.

=== Wilderness years ===
During the Great Depression, with no parliamentary salary and no chance of returning to the railway, Chifley survived on his wife&#x27;s family&#x27;s money and his part-ownership of the Bathurst newspaper &quot;The National Advocate&quot;.

In 1938, Chifley and most other Labor supporters in Bathurst joined the Industrial Labor Party (ILP), a breakaway organisation formed by Bob Heffron and dedicated to thwarting the Lang Labor faction that controlled the ALP in New South Wales. He was a delegate to the party&#x27;s annual conference in Sydney in April 1939. After a unity conference in August 1939, the ILP members rejoined the ALP and ended Jack Lang&#x27;s dominance. Chifley was subsequently elected to the ALP state executive.

In 1935 the Lyons government appointed Chifley as a member of the Royal Commission on Banking, a subject on which he had become an expert. He submitted a minority report advocating that the private banks be nationalised. After an unsuccessful effort to win back Macquarie at the 1934 Australian federal election, Chifley finally won his seat back at the 1940 Australian federal election on a swing of ten percent.

=== Curtin government ===
Chifley was appointed Treasurer of Australia when the Labor leader, John Curtin, formed a mid-term Labor government in 1941 following the collapse of the first Menzies government. Although deputy Labor leader Frank Forde was nominally the deputy in the government, Chifley became the minister Curtin most relied on, controlling most domestic policy while Curtin was preoccupied with the Second World War. Of highest importance was war funding, followed by the strong desire to control inflation. In February 1942, he announced the pegging of wages and profits, the introduction of controls on production, trade and consumption to reduce private spending, and the transfer of surplus personal income to savings and war loans. On 15 April 1942, more price controls were introduced. On 23 July, a uniform income tax was attained when the States were defeated in the High Court of Australia.

The Australian Dictionary of Biography claims Chifley proved himself to be his country&#x27;s greatest treasurer – fiscally responsible, able to transmit the necessity for a reasonable equality of sacrifice, and capable of managing a wartime economy of complexity and difficulty. Financing the war by increased taxation, loans from the Australian public, and central bank credit, he ensured that the nation did not become burdened with overseas debt, as it had been after First World War. Every budget was accompanied by his strictures on &#x27;vigorous self-denial&#x27;, labour discipline and restriction of consumer demand with the aim of controlling a huge accumulation of purchasing power.

==Prime minister==
Following the death of Curtin in July 1945, Forde became prime minister since he was the ALP deputy leader. In the ensuing leadership ballot, Chifley defeated Forde to replace him as prime minister and Curtin as leader of the ALP. Once the war ended in September, normal political life resumed, and Chifley faced Robert Menzies and his new Liberal Party in the 1946 election, which Chifley won with 54 percent of the two-party-preferred vote. It marked the first time that an incumbent full-term federal Labor government was re-elected. In the post-war years, Chifley maintained wartime economic controls, including the highly unpopular petrol rationing. He did this partly to help Britain in its postwar economic difficulties.

Upon becoming prime minister, Chifley continued as Treasurer and remained so for the entirety of his prime ministership. To date, Chifley is the last prime minister to have been his own Treasurer for a period that was not transitionary, as happened in 1972 and 1991 with Gough Whitlam and Bob Hawke respectively.

Chifley was also the longest-serving Labor Treasurer until this record was broken by Paul Keating in 1991 and Keating, like Chifley, would become prime minister.

===Legislative achievements===
Feeling secure in an unprecedented position, Chifley looked toward the Labor platform objective of democratic socialism. According to a biographer of Chifley, his government embarked upon greater intervention in &quot;economic and social affairs&quot;, with policies directed towards better workplace conditions, full employment, and the &quot;equalisation of wealth, income and opportunity&quot;. Chifley was successful in steering the economy into peacetime, and undertook a number of social welfare initiatives, as characterised by fairer pensions and unemployment and sickness benefits, the construction of new universities, technical colleges, and 200,000 houses.

The amount of reforms undertaken was such that, between 1946 and 1949, the Parliament of Australia passed an at-the-time record 299 Acts of Parliament, which was well beyond the previous record of 113 Acts by the Second Fisher government. Among other measures, the Chifley government passed legislation to establish universal health care modelled on the British National Health Service, including a free formulary of essential medicines. This was successfully opposed as unconstitutional in the High Court of Australia by the Australian branches of the British Medical Association, who were the precursors of the Australian Medical Association, in the &quot;First Pharmaceutical Benefits case&quot;. One of the few successful referendums to modify the Australian Constitution, the 1946 Social Services referendum, made possible many of the Chifley government&#x27;s other legislative initiatives in social welfare and social provision and permitted federal legislation over pharmaceutical benefits and medical and dental services. It also authorised federal legislation with respect to pensions, benefits, and allowances.

Such as, in the same year as the referendum, when concessional rate radio licences were introduced for pensioners, and were later extended to widow pensioners and also to television licences. The following year, in 1947, specific racial disqualifications other than those referring to Aboriginal Australians were removed, while the Wife&#x27;s Allowance became payable to de facto wives who had lived with the pensioner for at least three years. The subsequent federal legislation in relation to pharmaceutical benefits was deemed constitutional by the High Court. This paved the way for the introduction of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS), an important component of Australia&#x27;s modern public health system.

From July 1947, a prepayment of Maternity Allowance could be made up to four weeks before the expected date of the birth of the child. Moreover, eligibility for maternity benefits was extended to mothers who were classified as an alien but had lived in Australia for 12 months residence. Then again that same year, eligibility for Child&#x27;s Allowance was extended to those wives whose husbands were in asylums and to single invalid pensioners who had the custody, care and control of a child. An additional benefit of five shillings per week for the first child became available to a beneficiary who had custody and spent an equivalent or more of the benefit on the child. Amendments were also made to legislation on Child Endowment to allow Australians temporarily absent from Australia and newly arrived migrants to receive the benefit. Furthermore, from July 1947, funeral benefits could be paid in respect of claimants for Age Pension or Invalid Pension who would have qualified had they lived. Under the Social Services Consolidation Act 1947, an additional benefit became payable in cases where a man with one or more dependent children had a female partner, where he was not receiving benefit for his wife; a partial additional benefit became payable for a partially dependent spouse; and wives legally separated or likely to be permanently living apart from their husbands became eligible for benefit.

Ben Chifley&#x27;s Government oversaw the creation of the Commonwealth Employment Service, the introduction of federal funds to the States for public housing construction and the Acoustic Laboratories Act 1948, which established the Commonwealth Acoustic Laboratories to undertake scientific investigations into hearing loss. Although it failed in its attempts to establish a national health service, the Chifley government was successful in making arrangements with the states to upgrade the quality and availability of hospital treatment. The Mental Institutions Benefits Act 1948 marked the entry of the Commonwealth into mental health funding, where, in return for free treatment, the states were paid a benefit equal to the charges upon the relatives of mental hospital patients. The achievements of the Labor governments of Chifley and Curtin in expanding Australia&#x27;s social welfare services were brought together under the Social Services Consolidation Act 1947, which consolidated the various social services benefits, liberalised some existing social security provisions, and increased the rates of various benefits.

Among the government&#x27;s other legislative achievements included the establishment of a separate Australian citizenship in 1948 and the founding of ASIO. Science and education was also expanded, with a reorganisation and enlargement of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), alongside passing the Australian National University Act which provided post-graduate facilities in Australia and augmented the supply of staff for universities. Tertiary education extensively benefitted through the establishment of the Australian National University and the Commonwealth Education Office. The establishment of the Commonwealth Reconstruction Training Scheme to provide ex-servicemen with the opportunity to undertake a university education, with an interim five-year scholarships established to encourage other able students to attend universities. This was alongside annual grants to universities to provide the necessary staff and accommodation for the influx of assisted students and ex-servicemen. In addition, returned soldiers were also provided with a war gratuity and entitlement to special unemployment allowances, loans, vocational training, and preference in employment for seven years.

In July 1948, the Dairy Industry Fund was created with the purpose of stabilising returns from exports, and further financial grants to the States were introduced to assist them in expanding their agricultural activities. The establishment of a Coal Industry Tribunal and a Joint Coal Board in 1946 also brought significant gains for miners; and life insurance came to be comprehensively regulated.

Among the Chifley government&#x27;s legislation was the post-war immigration scheme, the establishment of Australian citizenship, the beginning of construction of the Snowy Mountains Scheme, the establishment and nationalisation of Trans Australia Airlines and Qantas respectively, improvements in social services, the creation of the Commonwealth Employment Service, the introduction of federal funds to the States for public housing construction, the establishment of a Universities Commission for the expansion of university education, and free hospital treatment, the reorganisation and enlargement of the CSIRO, and the establishment of the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service. As noted by one historian, Chifley&#x27;s government &quot;balanced economic development and welfare support with restraint and regulation and provided the framework for Australia&#x27;s post-war economic prosperity.&quot;

===Later controversial actions===
In 1947, Chifley announced the government would initiate a nationalisation of the banks . This provoked massive opposition from the press, and middle-class opinion turned against Labor. The High Court found Chifley&#x27;s legislation to be unconstitutional. The government appealed the decision in the Privy Council, but it upheld the High Court&#x27;s decision.

However, Chifley&#x27;s government did succeed in passing the Banking Act 1945 and the Commonwealth Bank Act 1945 which gave the government control over monetary policy and established the Commonwealth Bank as Australia&#x27;s national bank.

During the 1948 Queensland railway strike, Chifley barred striking workers from being eligible for unemployment benefits. A prolonged and bitter strike in the coal industry began in June 1949 and caused unemployment and hardship. Chifley saw the strike as a move by the Communist Party to challenge Labor&#x27;s place as the party of the working class, and he sent in 13,000 army troops to break the strike. Early on in the strike, Chifley and H. V. Evatt froze Miner&#x27;s Federation funds and &quot;introduced legislation aimed at starving the workers back to work&quot;.

In 1949 in the House of Representatives, Chifley stated that the Labor Party was a &quot;bulwark against communism&quot;, and that the most effective way of weakening the strength of the Communist Party was &quot;improving the conditions of the people&quot;. Despite this, Menzies exploited the rising Cold War hysteria to portray Labor as soft on Communism. These events, together with a perception that Chifley and Labor had grown increasingly arrogant in office, led to the Liberal election victory at the 1949 election. While Labor won an additional four seats in a House of Representatives that had been expanded from 74 seats to 121 seats, Menzies and the Coalition won an additional 48. Labor retained a Senate majority however.

==Opposition==
Chifley was now aged 64 and in poor health (like Curtin, he was a lifelong smoker), but he refused to retire from politics. Though out of government, having retained a Senate majority, Chifley continued as Labor leader and became Leader of the Opposition. The opposition Senate majority would frequently ensure the passing of Labor amendments, or outright blocking, of Menzies Government legislation.

Menzies responded by introducing a bill to ban the Communist Party of Australia in 1950. He expected Chifley to reject it and give him an excuse to call a double dissolution election. Menzies apparently hoped to repeat his &quot;soft-on-Communism&quot; theme to win a majority in both chambers.

However, Chifley let the bill pass after a redraft (it was ultimately thrown out by the High Court). However, when Chifley rejected Menzies&#x27; Commonwealth Banking Bill a few months later, Menzies called a double dissolution election for April 1951. Although Chifley managed to lead Labor to a five-seat swing in the House, Labor lost six seats in the Senate, giving the Coalition control of both chambers.

==Death==

A few weeks later on 13 June 1951, Chifley suffered a heart attack in his room at the Hotel Kurrajong in Canberra.

Chifley at first made light of the sudden chest pains and attempted to dissuade his secretary and confidante, Phyllis Donnelly, who was making him a cup of tea, from calling a doctor. As his condition deteriorated, however, Donnelly called Dr. John Holt, who ordered Chifley&#x27;s immediate removal to hospital. Chifley died in an ambulance on the way to the Canberra Community Hospital. He was pronounced dead at 10:45 pm.

Menzies heard of Chifley&#x27;s demise while attending a parliamentary ball at King&#x27;s Hall in Parliament House to celebrate the 50th Jubilee of Federation (Chifley was invited but had declined to attend). Menzies was deeply distressed and abandoned his normally impassive demeanour to announce in a halting subdued voice:It is my very sorrowful duty during this celebration tonight to tell you that Mr Chifley has died. I don&#x27;t want to try to talk about him now because, although we were political opponents, he was a friend of mine and yours, and a fine Australian. You will all agree that in the circumstances the festivities should end. It doesn&#x27;t matter about party politics on an occasion such as this. Oddly enough, in Parliament we get on very well. We sometimes find we have the warmest friendships among people whose politics are not ours. Mr Chifley served this country magnificently for years.

Chifley was buried at the Bathurst cemetery on 18 June 1951.

==Personal life==

Chifley married Elizabeth McKenzie (known as &quot;Lizzie&quot;) on 6 June 1914. She was the daughter of a more senior railways employee, George McKenzie. The couple began courting in 1912, but had known each other since childhood. The McKenzies were Presbyterian, and Elizabeth did not want to convert to Chifley&#x27;s Catholic faith. Due to the Catholic Church&#x27;s opposition to mixed marriages, the couple chose to marry in a Presbyterian church in Glebe, Sydney. Their parents opposed the union and did not attend the ceremony, but they and their families were eventually reconciled. The McKenzies were relatively wealthy, and Chifley was seen as &quot;marrying into money, or as much money as he could hope to marry into in the context of the relatively class-bound society of Bathurst&quot;.

After their marriage, Chifley&#x27;s father-in-law gave the couple a house on Busby Street, Bathurst, which they would occupy for the rest of their respective lives. It is now listed on the New South Wales State Heritage Register as &quot;Ben Chifley&#x27;s House&quot;, and has operated as a house museum since 1973. Chifley and his wife had no children. She suffered a &quot;serious health problem&quot;, probably a miscarriage, in about 1915, and later developed chronic back pain that restricted her mobility. The couple lived mostly separate lives, initially because of her husband&#x27;s work on the railways and later because of his political career. She rarely travelled outside Bathurst and never lived in Canberra, even while her husband was prime minister. She usually visited the city for only special occasions. Her health prevented her from campaigning for her husband, and she was known to have little interest in politics. Nonetheless, the couple &quot;seemingly enjoyed a close and caring relationship throughout his life&quot;. She survived her husband by 11 years, dying in 1962.

According to his biographer David Day, Chifley engaged in a long-running extramarital affair with his private secretary Phyllis Donnelly. Day believed that their relationship began shortly after Chifley was elected in parliament in 1928, and continued more or less uninterrupted until his death in 1951; she was present in his room at the Hotel Kurrajong when he suffered his final heart attack. She stayed at the same hotel, and they were known to spend their free time with each other while in Canberra. She also accompanied him on many of his travels. According to Frank Slavin, Chifley&#x27;s campaign manager at the 1940 election, his wife was aware of the relationship and tolerated it. Day also speculated that Chifley may have had a similar relationship with Phyllis&#x27;s older sister Nell. He assisted her financially in the 1930s, including buying her a house in Bathurst. Day based his conclusions on interviews conducted with the Donnelly family and other Bathurst residents who had known Chifley. His claims have been disputed by members of the Chifley family, and some reviewers of his book felt there was insufficient evidence to conclude that Chifley&#x27;s relationship with either of the Donnelly sisters was sexual in nature.

==Legacy==

In 1987 the New South Wales Labor government decided to name the planned new university in Sydney&#x27;s western suburbs Chifley University. Controversy broke out when, in 1989, a new Liberal government renamed it the University of Western Sydney. According to a debate on the topic, held after the Labor Party had regained government, the decision to rename Chifley University reflected a desire to attach the name of Western Sydney to institutions of lasting significance, and that idea ultimately received the support of Bob Carr, later the Premier of New South Wales.

==Honours==

Places and institutions that have been named after Chifley include:
* the suburb of Chifley in Canberra
* the suburb of Chifley in Sydney
* the Division of Chifley, a federal electorate
* his former house in Bathurst, now the Chifley Home and Education Centre, listed on the NSW State Heritage Register
* Chifley Library, the main library of the Australian National University, Canberra
* Chifley Tower and Chifley Square in Sydney
* Chifley Cave (formerly the Left Imperial Cave), one of the Jenolan Caves in the Blue Mountains, New South Wales
* several public high schools in Western Sydney are now known as Chifley College.
* a grouping of dormitories at the Bathurst campus of Charles Sturt University are collectively named as Chifley Halls
* Chifley Research Centre the official think tank of the Australian Labor Party is named in honour of Ben Chifley
* Chifley dam About 17 km (11 mi) upstream of Bathurst.
In 1975 he was honoured on a postage stamp bearing his portrait issued by Australia Post.

One of the locomotives driven by Chifley, 5112, is preserved on a plinth at the eastern end of Bathurst railway station. In 1971 Commonwealth Railways named diesel locomotive NJ1 that was assembled at the Clyde Engineering factory in Kelso, &quot;Ben Chifley&quot;.

==In popular culture==
Chifley was portrayed by Bill Hunter in the 1984 TV miniseries &quot;The Last Bastion&quot;, by Ed Devereaux in the 1988 miniseries &quot;True Believers&quot;, and Geoff Morrell in the 2007 film &quot;Curtin&quot;.

==See also==
* Chifley government
* First Chifley Ministry
* Second Chifley Ministry
* 1949 Australian coal strike
* The light on the hill

==References==
=== Citations ===
=== Notes ===
==Bibliography==
* Duncan, Bruce, &quot;Crusade or conspiracy?: Catholics and the anti-communist struggle in Australia&quot;, UNSW Press, 2001, 
* Chifley, Ben (1952), &quot;Things Worth Fighting For&quot; (collected speeches), Melbourne University Press, Parkville, Victoria.
* 
* Hughes, Colin A (1976), &quot;Mr Prime Minister. Australian Prime Ministers 1901–1972&quot;, Oxford University Press, Melbourne, Victoria, Ch.17. 
* Makin, Norman (1961), &quot;Federal Labour Leaders&quot;, Union Printing, Sydney, New South Wales, Pages 122–131.
* Waterson, Duncan (1993), &quot;Australian Dictionary of Biography Vol. 13 A-D pp. 412–420&quot;, Melbourne University Press, Carlton, Victoria.

==External links==
*
* Chifley Research Centre
* National Museum of Australia Chifley memorabilia: Ben Chifley&#x27;s Akubra hat</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23379" start="0" end="23" title="Ben Chifley" label="Joseph Benedict Chifley"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="130" end="157" title="prime minister of Australia" label="prime minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="199" end="224" title="Leaders of the Australian Labor Party#Leader" label="leader of the Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q704978" start="430" end="455" title="Bathurst, New South Wales" label="Bathurst, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982888" start="472" end="507" title="New South Wales Government Railways" label="New South Wales Government Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2775569" start="558" end="571" title="engine driver" label="engine driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="597" end="617" title="trade union movement" label="trade union movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879927" start="677" end="698" title="The National Advocate" label="The National Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586884" start="796" end="817" title="1928 Australian federal election" label="1928 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315112" start="845" end="865" title="Minister for Defence (Australia)" label="Minister for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q23362" start="887" end="900" title="James Scullin" label="James Scullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q776380" start="974" end="995" title="1931 Australian federal election" label="1931 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026688" start="1032" end="1049" title="electoral wipeout" label="electoral wipeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282553" start="1192" end="1202" title="Lang Labor" label="Lang Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986735" start="1227" end="1243" title="royal commission" label="royal commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956248" start="1327" end="1350" title="Department of Munitions" label="Department of Munitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390270" start="1456" end="1465" title="Treasurer of Australia" label="Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195640" start="1477" end="1494" title="Curtin government" label="Curtin government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260449" start="1619" end="1654" title="Minister for Postwar Reconstruction" label="Minister for Postwar Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q459146" start="1828" end="1839" title="Frank Forde" label="Frank Forde"/>
<link wikidata="Q48698862" start="1843" end="1862" title="1945 Australian Labor Party leadership election" label="a leadership ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586890" start="1872" end="1904" title="1946 Australian federal election" label="1946 Australian federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q618979" start="2043" end="2052" title="Victory over Japan Day" label="had ended"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="2249" end="2262" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233604" start="2278" end="2311" title="post-war immigration to Australia" label="post-war immigration to Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q127990" start="2342" end="2372" title="Australian National University" label="Australian National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q782740" start="2378" end="2423" title="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation" label="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804312" start="2440" end="2462" title="Snowy Mountains Scheme" label="Snowy Mountains Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="2527" end="2537" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825127" start="2555" end="2583" title="Australian referendum, 1946 (Social Services)" label="the constitution was amended"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586891" start="2842" end="2874" title="1949 Australian federal election" label="1949 Australian federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="2890" end="2904" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="2911" end="2924" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460433" start="2970" end="2994" title="Leader of the Opposition (Australia)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586892" start="3046" end="3078" title="1951 Australian federal election" label="1951 Australian federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777057" start="3326" end="3343" title="light on the hill" label="light on the hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q279376" start="3422" end="3448" title="Australian labour movement" label="Australian labour movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q704978" start="3506" end="3531" title="Bathurst, New South Wales" label="Bathurst, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q184618" start="3739" end="3755" title="County Tipperary" label="County Tipperary"/>
<link wikidata="Q190678" start="3786" end="3802" title="County Fermanagh" label="County Fermanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="3819" end="3835" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48811267" start="3956" end="3982" title="Limekilns, New South Wales" label="Limekilns, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q352259" start="4385" end="4403" title="Patrician Brothers" label="Patrician Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804572" start="4573" end="4599" title="mechanics&amp;#x27; institutes" label="mechanics&amp;#x27; institutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10283556" start="4871" end="4886" title="locomotive shed" label="locomotive shed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147709" start="4971" end="4978" title="Fireman (steam engine)" label="fireman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278287" start="5397" end="5417" title="Main Western railway line, New South Wales" label="Main Western railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736056" start="5472" end="5493" title="Main Southern railway line, New South Wales" label="Main Southern railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127368" start="5512" end="5535" title="Harden, New South Wales" label="Harden, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q279376" start="5571" end="5586" title="Australian labour movement" label="labour movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886765" start="5704" end="5713" title="Union organizer" label="organiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q783226" start="5988" end="6018" title="1917 Australian general strike" label="1917 Australian general strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568707" start="6347" end="6361" title="William Holman" label="William Holman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054306" start="6438" end="6458" title="Railway trade unions in Australia" label="other railway unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815177" start="6595" end="6645" title="Australian Federated Union of Locomotive Enginemen" label="Australian Federated Union of Locomotive Enginemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116329" start="6701" end="6751" title="Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration" label="Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6027842" start="6806" end="6822" title="industrial award" label="industrial award"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="6898" end="6920" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879927" start="7065" end="7086" title="The National Advocate" label="The National Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240907" start="7227" end="7239" title="preselection" label="preselection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355093" start="7252" end="7282" title="Electoral district of Bathurst" label="Electoral district of Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074005" start="7340" end="7361" title="Division of Macquarie" label="Division of Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586883" start="7369" end="7401" title="1925 Australian federal election" label="1925 Australian federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q667529" start="7496" end="7510" title="Blue Mountains (New South Wales)" label="Blue Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q385155" start="7514" end="7521" title="Penrith, New South Wales" label="Penrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760429" start="7661" end="7674" title="marginal seat" label="marginal seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516976" start="7801" end="7812" title="Nationalist Party of Australia" label="Nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799635" start="7817" end="7831" title="Arthur Manning" label="Arthur Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q23358" start="7917" end="7933" title="Bruce government" label="Bruce government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077496" start="8013" end="8035" title="White Australia policy" label="White Australia policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586885" start="8464" end="8477" title="1929 Australian federal election" label="1929 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q23362" start="8558" end="8571" title="James Scullin" label="James Scullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q731591" start="8659" end="8668" title="backbench" label="backbench"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439423" start="8751" end="8767" title="Scullin Ministry" label="Scullin Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599048" start="8820" end="8836" title="Great Depression in Australia" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q370966" start="8988" end="9000" title="Joseph Lyons" label="Joseph Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q933146" start="9032" end="9041" title="Jack Lang (Australian politician)" label="Jack Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133824" start="9191" end="9203" title="James Fenton (Australian politician)" label="James Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240387" start="9658" end="9677" title="Premiers&amp;#x27; Plan" label="Premiers&amp;#x27; Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489446" start="9759" end="9777" title="cabinet solidarity" label="cabinet solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282553" start="9942" end="9952" title="Lang Labor" label="Lang Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728956" start="10116" end="10138" title="United Australia Party" label="United Australia Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q776380" start="10212" end="10225" title="1931 Australian federal election" label="1931 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244213" start="10309" end="10320" title="John Lawson (Australian politician)" label="John Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693792" start="10509" end="10521" title="Ted Theodore" label="Ted Theodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q23375" start="10549" end="10560" title="John Curtin" label="John Curtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879927" start="10824" end="10845" title="The National Advocate" label="The National Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6027660" start="10926" end="10948" title="Industrial Labor Party" label="Industrial Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367545" start="10991" end="11002" title="Bob Heffron" label="Bob Heffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282553" start="11034" end="11044" title="Lang Labor" label="Lang Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709791" start="11364" end="11380" title="Lyons government" label="Lyons government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586888" start="11631" end="11663" title="1934 Australian federal election" label="1934 Australian federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586886" start="11706" end="11738" title="1940 Australian federal election" label="1940 Australian federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390270" start="11815" end="11837" title="Treasurer of Australia" label="Treasurer of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817716" start="11947" end="11971" title="Menzies Government (1939–41)" label="first Menzies government"/>
<link wikidata="Q459146" start="12002" end="12013" title="Frank Forde" label="Frank Forde"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12180" end="12196" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="12656" end="12679" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q672680" start="12686" end="12720" title="Australian Dictionary of Biography" label="Australian Dictionary of Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="13154" end="13169" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="13710" end="13724" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="13737" end="13750" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586890" start="13758" end="13771" title="1946 Australian federal election" label="1946 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858737" start="13814" end="13838" title="two-party-preferred vote" label="two-party-preferred vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q23333" start="14397" end="14410" title="Gough Whitlam" label="Gough Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q269372" start="14415" end="14424" title="Bob Hawke" label="Bob Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q189280" start="14733" end="14753" title="democratic socialism" label="democratic socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="15379" end="15402" title="Parliament of Australia" label="Parliament of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="15436" end="15454" title="Acts of Parliament" label="Acts of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q314016" start="15517" end="15541" title="Andrew Fisher" label="Second Fisher government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="15620" end="15641" title="universal health care" label="universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="15666" end="15689" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="15799" end="15822" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q919715" start="15857" end="15884" title="British Medical Association" label="British Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824416" start="15917" end="15947" title="Australian Medical Association" label="Australian Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818601" start="15956" end="16002" title="Attorney-General (Vic) ex rel Dale v Commonwealth" label="&amp;quot;First Pharmaceutical Benefits case&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307166" start="16030" end="16041" title="referendums in Australia" label="referendums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144614" start="16056" end="16079" title="Australian Constitution" label="Australian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825127" start="16085" end="16116" title="Australian referendum, 1946 (Social Services)" label="1946 Social Services referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180724" start="17039" end="17069" title="Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme" label="Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887546" start="17555" end="17562" title="Benevolent Asylum" label="asylums"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153734" start="18622" end="18653" title="Commonwealth Employment Service" label="Commonwealth Employment Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824238" start="18797" end="18831" title="Commonwealth Acoustic Laboratories" label="Commonwealth Acoustic Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="18876" end="18888" title="hearing loss" label="hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825062" start="19796" end="19818" title="Australian citizenship" label="Australian citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q782740" start="19847" end="19851" title="ASIO" label="ASIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117048" start="19939" end="19999" title="Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation" label="Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q127990" start="20246" end="20276" title="Australian National University" label="Australian National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q104902937" start="20341" end="20384" title="Commonwealth Reconstruction Training Scheme" label="Commonwealth Reconstruction Training Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21382" end="21409" title="Post-war immigration to Australia#The Chifley years" label="post-war immigration scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825062" start="21432" end="21454" title="Australian citizenship" label="Australian citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804312" start="21493" end="21515" title="Snowy Mountains Scheme" label="Snowy Mountains Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448822" start="21558" end="21582" title="Trans Australia Airlines" label="Trans Australia Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="21587" end="21593" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933639" start="21972" end="22007" title="Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service" label="Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="22326" end="22341" title="nationalisation" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856161" start="22540" end="22582" title="Commonwealth v Bank of New South Wales" label="appealed the decision in the Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q285328" start="22820" end="22837" title="Commonwealth Bank of Australia" label="Commonwealth Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311609" start="22885" end="22915" title="1948 Queensland railway strike" label="1948 Queensland railway strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q783256" start="23019" end="23046" title="1949 Australian coal strike" label="strike in the coal industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120586" start="23144" end="23159" title="Communist Party of Australia" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388459" start="23318" end="23329" title="H. V. Evatt" label="H. V. Evatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q56275396" start="23336" end="23359" title="Australian Coal and Shale Employees&amp;#x27; Federation" label="Miner&amp;#x27;s Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="23465" end="23489" title="House of Representatives (Australia)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="23752" end="23760" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="24161" end="24167" title="Australian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460433" start="24432" end="24456" title="Leader of the Opposition (Australia)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817718" start="24571" end="24589" title="Menzies Government (1949–66)" label="Menzies Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300018" start="24759" end="24777" title="double dissolution" label="double dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824025" start="24970" end="24980" title="Australian Communist Party v Commonwealth" label="thrown out"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586892" start="25107" end="25151" title="1951 Australian federal election" label="a double dissolution election for April 1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q18165792" start="25408" end="25423" title="Hotel Kurrajong" label="Hotel Kurrajong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="25427" end="25435" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373917" start="25798" end="25825" title="Royal Canberra Hospital" label="Canberra Community Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q478515" start="25935" end="25939" title="ball (dance)" label="ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000192" start="26882" end="26900" title="Elizabeth Chifley" label="Elizabeth McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955397" start="27859" end="27898" title="New South Wales State Heritage Register" label="New South Wales State Heritage Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605184" start="27908" end="27932" title="Ben Chifley&amp;#x27;s House" label="Ben Chifley&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087181" start="27962" end="27974" title="house museum" label="house museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232878" start="28797" end="28806" title="David Day (historian)" label="David Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q18165792" start="29108" end="29123" title="Hotel Kurrajong" label="Hotel Kurrajong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="30041" end="30056" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112564" start="30057" end="30073" title="Government of New South Wales" label="Labor government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141452" start="30247" end="30275" title="University of Western Sydney" label="University of Western Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438976" start="30448" end="30462" title="Western Sydney" label="Western Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q541217" start="30553" end="30561" title="Bob Carr" label="Bob Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527950" start="30573" end="30599" title="Premier of New South Wales" label="Premier of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q532284" start="30699" end="30706" title="Chifley, Australian Capital Territory" label="Chifley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="30710" end="30718" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896400" start="30735" end="30742" title="Chifley, New South Wales" label="Chifley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073690" start="30759" end="30778" title="Division of Chifley" label="Division of Chifley"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605184" start="30803" end="30831" title="Ben Chifley&amp;#x27;s House" label="his former house in Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955397" start="30890" end="30917" title="New South Wales State Heritage Register" label="NSW State Heritage Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q127990" start="30961" end="30991" title="Australian National University" label="Australian National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q54490" start="31004" end="31017" title="Chifley Tower" label="Chifley Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670250" start="31108" end="31121" title="Jenolan Caves" label="Jenolan Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621782" start="31171" end="31177" title="List of Government schools in New South Wales" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="31178" end="31190" title="Secondary school" label="high schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438976" start="31194" end="31208" title="Western Sydney" label="Western Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="31259" end="31270" title="dormitory" label="dormitories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066188" start="31297" end="31321" title="Charles Sturt University" label="Charles Sturt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885422" start="31478" end="31489" title="Ben Chifley Dam" label="Chifley dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142936" start="31606" end="31620" title="Australia Post" label="Australia Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926650" start="31665" end="31669" title="New South Wales D50 class locomotive" label="5112"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869140" start="31718" end="31742" title="Bathurst railway station, New South Wales" label="Bathurst railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116993" start="31752" end="31773" title="Commonwealth Railways" label="Commonwealth Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153840" start="31798" end="31801" title="Commonwealth Railways NJ class" label="NJ1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136910" start="31828" end="31845" title="Clyde Engineering" label="Clyde Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386526" start="31857" end="31862" title="Kelso, New South Wales" label="Kelso"/>
<link wikidata="Q862208" start="31938" end="31949" title="Bill Hunter (actor)" label="Bill Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745582" start="31982" end="31998" title="The Last Bastion" label="The Last Bastion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047161" start="32009" end="32021" title="Ed Devereaux" label="Ed Devereaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847357" start="32051" end="32065" title="True Believers (miniseries)" label="True Believers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534242" start="32077" end="32090" title="Geoff Morrell (actor)" label="Geoff Morrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195636" start="32114" end="32120" title="Curtin (2007 film)" label="Curtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097191" start="32144" end="32162" title="Chifley government" label="Chifley government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452615" start="32165" end="32187" title="First Chifley Ministry" label="First Chifley Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443187" start="32190" end="32213" title="Second Chifley Ministry" label="Second Chifley Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q783256" start="32216" end="32243" title="1949 Australian coal strike" label="1949 Australian coal strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777057" start="32246" end="32267" title="The light on the hill" label="The light on the hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145215" start="32598" end="32613" title="Colin Hughes" label="Hughes, Colin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052568" start="32747" end="32760" title="Norman Makin" label="Makin, Norman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52669" wikidata="Q23386" url="?curid=52669" title="John McEwen">
<text>Sir John McEwen (29 March 1900 – 20 November 1980) was an Australian politician and farmer who served as the 18th prime minister of Australia from 1967 to 1968, in a caretaker capacity following the disappearance of prime minister Harold Holt. He was the leader of the Country Party from 1958 to 1971, serving as the inaugural deputy prime minister of Australia from 1968 to 1971.

McEwen was born in Chiltern, Victoria. He was orphaned at the age of seven and raised by his grandmother, initially in Wangaratta and then in Dandenong. McEwen left school when he was 13 and joined the Australian Army at the age of 18, but the war ended before his unit was shipped out. He was nonetheless eligible for a soldier settlement scheme, and selected a property at Stanhope. He established a dairy farm, but later bought a larger property and farmed beef cattle.

After several previous unsuccessful candidacies, McEwen was elected to the House of Representatives at the 1934 federal election. He was first elevated to cabinet by Joseph Lyons in 1937. McEwen became deputy leader of the Country Party in 1943, under Arthur Fadden. He replaced Fadden as leader in 1958, and remained in the position until his retirement from politics in 1971. He served in parliament for 36 years in total, spending a record 25 years as a government minister.

The Liberal-Country Coalition returned to power in 1949, initially under Robert Menzies and then under Harold Holt. McEwen came to have a major influence on economic policy, particularly in the areas of agriculture, manufacturing, and trade. As soon as McEwen became the leader of the Country Party, he became the de facto deputy prime minister. 

In December 1967, Harold Holt disappeared and was presumed dead while in office. As the de facto deputy prime minister, McEwen was commissioned as caretaker prime minister while the Liberal Party elected a new leader. He was 67 at the time, the oldest person to become prime minister and only the third from the Country Party. McEwen ceded power to John Gorton after 23 days in office in January 1968, and in recognition of his service was appointed deputy prime minister, the first time that position had been formally created. He was Australia&#x27;s third shortest serving prime minister, after Earle Page and Frank Forde. He remained as deputy prime minister until his retirement from politics in 1971.

==Early life==
===Birth and family background===
McEwen was born on 29 March 1900, at his parents&#x27; home in Chiltern, Victoria. He was the son of Amy Ellen (née Porter) and David James McEwen. His mother was born in Victoria, and had English and Irish ancestry. His father was of Ulster Scots origin, born in Mountnorris, County Armagh (in present-day Northern Ireland). He worked as a chemist, and also served a term on the Chiltern Shire Council. The family surname was originally spelled &quot;MacEwen&quot;, but was altered upon David McEwen&#x27;s arrival in Australia in 1889.

===Childhood===
In his memoirs, McEwen recounted that he had almost no memories of his parents. His mother died of lung disease in March 1902, just before his second birthday; she had given birth to a daughter, Amy, a few months earlier. She was the second of his father&#x27;s three wives, and McEwen had three half-siblings – Gladys, Evelyn, and George. After their mother&#x27;s death, McEwen and his sister were raised by their father, living in the rooms behind his chemist&#x27;s shop. He died from meningitis in September 1907, when his son was seven. John and Amy were sent to live with their widowed grandmother, Nellie Porter (née Cook), while their younger half-brother went to live with his mother in Melbourne. They had never lived with their older half-sisters, who had been sent to live in a children&#x27;s home upon their mother&#x27;s death in 1893.

McEwen&#x27;s grandmother ran a boardinghouse in Wangaratta. He grew up in what he described as &quot;pretty frugal circumstances&quot;, and in 1912 his grandmother moved the family to Dandenong, on the outskirts of Melbourne. McEwen attended state schools in Wangaratta and Dandenong until the age of thirteen, when he began working for Rocke, Tompsitt &amp; Co., a drug manufacturer in central Melbourne. He initially worked as a switchboard operator, for which he was paid 15 shillings per week. McEwen began attending night school in Prahran, and in 1915 passed an examination for the Commonwealth Public Service and began working as a junior clerk at the office of the Commonwealth Crown Solicitor. His immediate superior there was Fred Whitlam, the father of another future prime minister, Gough Whitlam.

===Soldier-settler===
With World War I ongoing, McEwen resolved to enter the military when he turned 18. He joined the Australian Army Cadets and completed a Royal Australian Navy course in radiotelegraphy, hoping to qualify for the newly opened Royal Military College, Duntroon. He passed the entrance exam, but instead chose to enlist as a private in the Australian Imperial Force, in order to be posted overseas sooner. The war ended before his unit shipped out. Despite the briefness of his service, McEwen was eligible for the Victorian government&#x27;s soldier settlement scheme. He selected an lot at Stanhope, on land that previously been a sheep station. As with many other soldier-settlers, McEwen initially did not have the money or the expertise needed to run a farm. He spent several months working as a farm labourer and later did the same as a stevedore at the Port of Melbourne, eventually saving enough money to return to Stanhope and establish his dairy farm.

McEwen&#x27;s new property was virtually undeveloped, with only a single existing building (a small shack) and no fences, irrigation, or paddocks. He and the other soldier-settlers in the Stanhope district suffered a number of hardships in the early 1920s, including droughts, rabbit plagues, and low milk prices. Many of them were forced off their properties, allowing those who survived to expand their holdings relatively cheaply. In 1926, McEwen sold his property and bought a larger farm nearby, which he named &quot;Chilgala&quot; (a portmanteau of Chiltern and Tongala, the birthplaces of himself and his wife). He switched from dairy to beef cattle, and was able to expand his property by buying abandoned farms from the government. At its peak, &quot;Chilgala&quot; covered and carried 1,800 head of cattle. McEwen had a reputation as one of the best farmers in the district, and came to be seen by the other soldier-settlers as a spokesman and leader. He represented them in meetings with government officials, and was secretary of the local Water Users&#x27; League, which protected the interests of irrigators. In 1923, he co-founded the Stanhope Dairy Co-operative, and was elected as the company&#x27;s inaugural chairman.

==Early years in politics==

McEwen joined the Victorian Farmers&#x27; Union in 1919 at the age of 19 and was soon active in the Country Party, its political wing. He first stood for parliament at the 1932 Victorian state election, contesting the Legislative Assembly seat of Waranga. While unsuccessful, he more than doubled the Country Party&#x27;s vote from the previous election. His campaigning efforts brought him to the attention of party leaders and he soon joined the state executive.

In 1934, the Victorian Country Party&#x27;s central council mandated that its federal MPs and senators sign a pledge requiring strict party discipline and giving the central council a veto over the terms of any coalition government. The party&#x27;s three MPs and two senators in Victoria refused to sign the pledge, receiving support from their parliamentary colleagues and the party&#x27;s federal executive. Country MP William Hill decided to quit politics altogether in protest, with McEwen endorsed by the Victorian party as its replacement for Hill in the seat of Echuca. At the 1934 election he faced two &quot;Independent Country&quot; opponents supported by the federal party, with the party&#x27;s federal leader Earle Page actively campaigning in their favour. McEwen nonetheless retained Echuca with the aid of favourable preference flows from Australian Labor Party (ALP) voters.

Despite McEwen&#x27;s acceptance of the Victorian Country Party&#x27;s pledge, after his election to parliament he &quot;immediately associated himself with the federal party and incurred the hostility of his Victorian colleagues for urging that the breach be healed&quot;. In his first term he successfully lobbied the Lyons government to introduce a variable excise duty on flour, linking the duty paid by farmers to the international spot rate. He regarded this as &quot;the first step towards a wheat industry stabilisation plan&quot;. In April 1935 he announced his support for a royal commission into the Australian banking system, which the government convened later in the year. In 1936, following the Privy Council&#x27;s ruling in &quot;James v Commonwealth&quot;, McEwen moved in parliament that the constitution be amended to allow for the federal government to legislate on the marketing of agricultural products. The government ultimately put forward a referendum proposal in 1937 which was defeated by voters.

===Interior minister, 1937–1939===
McEwen&#x27;s seat was abolished in a redistribution during his first term and he transferred to the seat of Indi at the 1937 election. He rose rapidly within the parliamentary Country Party and narrowly failed to win the deputy leadership after the 1937 election, losing to Harold Thorby by a single vote on the second ballot. He was subsequently appointed Minister for the Interior in the third Lyons ministry, a coalition government between the Country Party and the United Australia Party (UAP) led by Prime Minister Joseph Lyons. His new portfolio was &quot;spacious in its command of broad policy issues and diversity of administrative functions&quot; and included &quot;Commonwealth public works, railways, immigration, the Northern and Australian Capital territories, Aborigines, electoral administration, mining, and oil exploration&quot;.

As interior minister, McEwen instituted the New Deal for Aborigines, a landmark policy statement on Indigenous Australians which described its aim as &quot;the raising of their status so as to entitle them by right and by qualification to the ordinary rights of citizenship and enable them and help them to share with us the opportunities that are available in their own native land&quot;. The policy specified cultural assimilation as the basis on which civil rights would be extended to the Indigenous population. The policy was drafted by McEwen in conjunction with his adviser A. P. Elkin.

Following Lyons&#x27; death in April 1939, Country Party leader Earle Page withdrew his party from the coalition with the UAP and McEwen&#x27;s first stint as a minister came to an end. Page&#x27;s decision – largely due to his personal disdain for the new UAP prime minister Robert Menzies – proved controversial within his own party and four Country MPs left the parliamentary party.

===Country Party conflict===
McEwen&#x27;s decision to accept a ministerial post after the 1937 election placed him into conflict with the central council of the Victorian Country Party, which had previously called on its federal MPs to withdraw from the federal coalition with the UAP. At the time, the central council was under the control of a left-wing faction and the party&#x27;s state leader Albert Dunstan was governing in Victoria with the support of the Labor Party. In December 1937, McEwen was formally expelled from the Victorian Country Party, while remaining a member of the federal parliamentary Country Party. In response, he issued a statement denying the legitimacy of his expulsion and stating it was instead because he had been &quot;too powerful in opposing the ambitions of the radical element in control of the Victorian central council&quot;. McEwen&#x27;s supporters subsequently formed an alternative organisation, the Liberal Country Party (LCP), to support his election campaigns. His parliamentary colleague Thomas Paterson resigned from the Victorian Country Party in solidarity, with he and McEwen re-elected with the support of the LCP at the 1940 election. The LCP eventually merged back into the Victorian Country Party in 1943.

==World War II and aftermath==
===Leadership candidate===
Page resigned as Country Party leader following the outbreak of World War II, in order to facilitate the resumption of a coalition government with the UAP. McEwen contested the resulting leadership ballot on 13 September 1939, losing by seven votes to five to South Australian MP Archie Cameron. Prior to the ballot, the party room had voted against allowing the four dissident MPs to rejoin the parliamentary party, although this decision was reversed a few months later. According to McEwen, the four MPs were his supporters and their presence would have meant he won the leadership ballot over Cameron.

Cameron&#x27;s leadership of the Country Party proved troubled due to his leadership style. Only a few weeks after his election, McEwen joined three other Country Party MPs in crossed the floor to support an ALP amendment to a bill on conscientious objectors. The 1940 federal election resulted in a hung parliament, with the Country Party losing three seats. A further leadership ballot was held on 16 October 1940, McEwen and Page again nominating for the leadership. Cameron regarded this as a betrayal and &quot;stormed out of the meeting in a fury&quot;, defecting to the UAP a few weeks later. Two ballots were held, with McEwen and Page tied on eight votes each. Arthur Fadden was then elected acting leader as a compromise candidate. He was subsequently confirmed in the position in March 1941, a role he would hold until 1958.

===External affairs minister, 1939–1940===
Following the resumption of the coalition with the UAP, McEwen was appointed Minister for External Affairs in the second Menzies ministry on 14 March 1940.

===Air minister, 1940–1941===

On 16 October 1940, McEwen was appointed Minister for Air and Minister for Civil Aviation in a post-election cabinet reshuffle. Fadden had been acting in the portfolios for several months following the death of James Fairbairn, who had been one of three government ministers killed in the Canberra air disaster in August 1940. McEwen remained as air and civil aviation minister until the defeat of the Fadden government in October 1941, with Fadden having succeeded as prime minister upon Menzies&#x27; resignation in August 1941.

As air minister, McEwen oversaw the continued expansion of the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF). He secured war cabinet approval for volunteers to be recruited from the Citizen Military Forces and also authorised steps to expand RAAF auxiliaries, announcing the creation of the Australian Air Force Cadets and the Women&#x27;s Auxiliary Australian Air Force in early 1941. According to an official RAAF history, he &quot;made it clear that he did not favour the enlistment of women in the air force unless it was unavoidable, but unavoidable it became&quot;. He had a strained relationship with RAAF chief Charles Burnett, frequently clashing over expenditure matters.

McEwen oversaw the acceleration of Australia&#x27;s involvement in the Empire Air Training Scheme, which saw RAAF personnel receive training in Canada before being seconded to the Royal Air Force (RAF) for combat in the European theatre. In May 1941, McEwen announced that 1,000 RAAF ground staff would be seconded to the RAF. He faced criticisms that RAAF personnel in the UK were being assigned to RAF units rather than the Article XV squadrons required by the scheme, and that Australian officers were being denied senior leadership opportunities in RAF commands. In August 1941 he despatched Richard Williams to London to establish RAAF Overseas Headquarters, with the aim of securing greater Australian input in decision-making.

===Opposition, 1941–1949===
McEwen continued to serve on the Advisory War Council following the Fadden government&#x27;s defeat, remaining as a member for the duration of the war. On the council he advocated for &quot;independent and first-hand reports of the New Guinea situation, and was critical of the northern air defence strategy&quot;. McEwen was elected deputy leader of the Country Party in September 1943, with the position having been vacant since Fadden&#x27;s elevation to the leadership. He opposed suggestions that the Country Party should merge into the new Liberal Party of Australia, created by Menzies as a replacement for the UAP, and remained defensive of the Country Party&#x27;s independence throughout his political career.

Remaining in opposition after the ALP won majority government at the 1943 and 1946 elections, McEwen was &quot;closely involved with Fadden in rebuilding the Country Party, developing its policies, and preparing it for office in partnership with Menzies&#x27; rejuvenated Liberal Party&quot;. He was a prominent campaigner for the &quot;No&quot; vote in the Curtin government&#x27;s 1944 post-war reconstruction referendum. He was also a leading opponent of the Chifley government&#x27;s attempts to nationalise the private banking sector in 1947 and 1948.

==Menzies and Holt governments==

The conservatives returned to office in 1949 under Robert Menzies after eight years in opposition. At this election, McEwen stood in the new seat of Murray, which had been carved out of Indi&#x27;s northwest section. He became Minister for Commerce and Agriculture, switching to Minister for Trade in 1956. Menzies nicknamed him &quot;Black Jack&quot;, due to his dark eyebrows, grim nature, and occasional temper. In the Menzies government, McEwen pursued what became known as &quot;McEwenism&quot; – a policy of high tariff protection for the manufacturing industry, so that industry would not challenge the continuing high tariffs on imported raw materials, which benefitted farmers but pushed up industry&#x27;s costs. This policy was a part (some argue the foundation) of what became known as the &quot;Australian settlement&quot; which promoted high wages, industrial development, government intervention in industry (Australian governments traditionally owned banks and insurance companies and the railways and through policies designed to assist particular industries) and decentralisation.

===Trade negotiations===
Beginning in the early 1950s, McEwen and his departmental secretary John Crawford played a key role in the normalisation and acceleration of the Australia–Japan trade relationship. Prior to World War II, Japan had been one of the largest destinations for Australian exports. The resumption of trade after the war was politically sensitive, due both to lingering anti-Japanese sentiment – including from several of McEwen&#x27;s parliamentary colleagues who had been prisoners-of-war – and concerns from Australian manufacturers over the cheaper cost of labour in Japan. McEwen came to see the resumption of trade with Japan as important for Australian producers, as Australia sought new markets outside the existing framework of Imperial Preference.

McEwen first put forward a cabinet proposal to enter into trade negotiations with Japan in July 1953, which was rejected although an accompanying recommendation to liberalise restrictions on Japanese imports was accepted. He eventually secured cabinet approval for trade talks with Japan in November 1954, on his third attempt. In February 1955, he also persuaded cabinet to agree to Japan&#x27;s accession to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), although Australia and many other former Allied powers invoked an exception under Article 35 of the GATT treaty allowing them to continue to discriminate against Japan. After years of negotiations, McEwen and his Japanese counterpart Kishi Nobusuke signed the Japan–Australia Commerce Agreement in July 1957, with each country conferring most favoured nation status on the other and Australia providing a commitment to revoke its Article 35 exception. This eventually occurred in 1960 after McEwen secured Japanese concessions on imports of Australian beef. The final discriminatory trade provisions were removed in a new agreement signed in 1963.

The trade agreement with Japan &quot;ushered in a new era of Australian trade which would make Japan immeasurably Australia&#x27;s biggest trading partner&quot;. Its signing was regarded as a personal triumph for McEwen, who was its main advocate in the government and bore much of the political risk. According to Malcolm Fraser, Menzies only authorised McEwen to negotiate in his own name, not on behalf of the government, and &quot;if it had gone wrong Menzies could have disowned him up to the moment the government accepted the agreement&quot;. In 1973, the Japanese government awarded McEwen the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun, making him only the second Australian politician after Edmund Barton to receive the honour.

===Relationship with the Liberal Party===
In 1958, following Fadden&#x27;s retirement, McEwen was elected unopposed as leader of the Country Party. Under the Coalition agreement, he thus became the &quot;de facto&quot; deputy prime minister, and was afforded a free choice of portfolio. Fadden had been Treasurer, but McEwen somewhat unexpectedly chose to continue on as trade minister. This allowed Harold Holt to become the first Liberal MP to serve as Treasurer; since then every Treasurer in a Coalition government has been a Liberal. McEwen nonetheless had considerable influence in cabinet. He and his party favoured interventionist economic policies and were opposed to foreign ownership of industrial assets, which placed him frequently at odds with his Liberal colleagues. In 1962, a dispute between McEwen and Assistant Treasurer Les Bury ended with Bury being sacked from cabinet. His stature eventually grew to the point where he was considered a potential successor to Menzies as prime minister. An opinion poll in December 1963 showed that 19 percent of Coalition voters favoured McEwen as Menzies&#x27; successor, only two points behind the poll leader Holt. By December 1965, this number had risen to 27 percent, compared with Holt&#x27;s 22 percent. McEwen&#x27;s cause was championed by a number of media outlets, including &quot;The Sun&quot; and &quot;The Australian&quot;. Nonetheless, he had few supporters within the Liberal Party, and it was generally held that he would have to become a Liberal if he were to lead the Coalition, which he was unwilling to do.

Holt replaced Menzies as prime minister in January 1966, with McEwen continuing on his previous position. His portfolio had been expanded after the 1963 election, with his department now called the Department of Trade and Industry. McEwen enjoyed a &quot;sound working relationship&quot; with Holt, but without the same rapport he had had with Menzies. However, he had a poor relationship with William McMahon, Holt&#x27;s replacement as Treasurer. They had philosophical differences over free trade and foreign investment, both of which McEwen opposed. McMahon was also suspected to be undermining McEwen through his connections in the media.

McEwen&#x27;s most serious disagreement with Holt came in November 1967, when it was announced that Australia – which had converted to decimal currency the previous year – would not follow the recent devaluation of the pound sterling. This effectively marked Australia&#x27;s withdrawal from the sterling area. McEwen issued a public statement criticising the decision, which he feared would damage primary industry. Holt considered this a breach of cabinet solidarity, and made preparations for the Liberal Party to govern in its own right in case the Country Party withdrew from the government. The situation was eventually resolved In Holt&#x27;s favour.

==Prime minister==

Harold Holt disappeared while swimming at Portsea, Victoria, on 17 December 1967, and was officially presumed dead two days later. The Governor-General, Lord Casey, sent for McEwen and commissioned him as interim prime minister, on the understanding that his commission would continue only so long as it took for the Liberals to elect a new leader. McEwen contended that if Casey commissioned a Liberal as interim prime minister, it would give that person an undue advantage in the upcoming ballot for a full-time leader.

McEwen retained all of Holt&#x27;s ministers, and had them sworn in as the McEwen Ministry. Approaching 68, McEwen was the oldest person ever to be appointed Prime Minister of Australia, although not the oldest to serve; Menzies left office one month and six days after his 71st birthday. McEwen had been encouraged to remain prime minister on a more permanent basis but to do so would have required him to defect to the Liberals, an option he had never contemplated.

It had long been presumed that McMahon, who was both Treasurer and deputy Liberal leader, would succeed Holt as Liberal leader and hence prime minister. However, McEwen sparked a leadership crisis when he announced that he and his Country Party colleagues would not serve under McMahon. McEwen is reported to have despised McMahon personally. More importantly, McEwen was bitterly opposed to McMahon on political grounds, because McMahon was allied with free trade advocates in the conservative parties and favoured sweeping tariff reforms, a position that was vehemently opposed by McEwen, his Country Party colleagues and their rural constituents.

Another key factor in McEwen&#x27;s antipathy towards McMahon was hinted at soon after the crisis by the veteran political journalist Alan Reid. According to Reid, McEwen was aware that McMahon was habitually breaching Cabinet confidentiality and regularly leaking information to favoured journalists and lobbyists, including Maxwell Newton, who had been hired as a &quot;consultant&quot; by Japanese trade interests.

Even in the wake of their landslide victory in 1966, the Liberals were still four seats short of an outright majority. With only the Country Party as a realistic coalition partner, McEwen&#x27;s opposition forced McMahon to withdraw from the leadership ballot. This opened the door for the successful campaign to promote the Minister for Education and Science, Senator John Gorton, to the Prime Ministership with the support of a group led by Defence Minister Malcolm Fraser. Gorton was elected as leader of the Liberal Party on 9 January 1968, and succeeded McEwen as prime minister the following day. It was the second time the Country Party had effectively vetoed its senior partner&#x27;s choice for the leadership; in 1923 Earle Page had demanded that the Nationalist Party, one of the forerunners of the Liberals, remove Billy Hughes as leader before he would even consider coalition talks.

==Gorton government and final years==

Gorton created the formal title deputy prime minister for McEwen, confirming his status as the second-ranking member of the government. Prior to then, the title had been used informally for whoever was recognised as the second-ranking member of the government – the leader of the Country Party when the Coalition was in government, and Labor&#x27;s deputy leader when Labor was in government. Even before being formally named Deputy Prime Minister, McEwen had exercised an effective veto over government policy since 1966 by virtue of being the most senior member of the government, having been a member of the Coalition frontbench without interruption since 1937.

McEwen retired from politics in 1971. In his memoir, he recalls his career as being &quot;long and very, very hard&quot;, and turned back to managing 1,800 head of cattle on his property in Goulburn Valley. In the same year, Clifton Pugh won the Archibald Prize for a portrait of McEwen. While he had softened in his &quot;unequivocal support for protection&quot; by the time of his retirement he had given way to free-traders with regards to agriculture. However, he felt differently about manufacturing, as it was essential to National power:At the time of his resignation, he had served in parliament for 36 years and 5 months, serving the last 34 years as either a minister (1937–1941 and 1949–1971) or opposition frontbencher (1941–1949). He was the last serving parliamentarian from the Great Depression era, and hence the last parliamentary survivor of the Lyons government. By the time of his death, Malcolm Fraser&#x27;s government was abandoning McEwenite trade policies.

==Honours==
McEwen was appointed a Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour (CH) in 1969. He was knighted in 1971 after his retirement from politics, becoming a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George (GCMG). The Japanese government conferred on him the Grand Cordon, Order of the Rising Sun in 1973.

==Personal life and death==

On 21 September 1921, he married Anne Mills McLeod, known as Annie; they had no children. In 1966, she was made a Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE). After a long illness Dame Anne McEwen died on 10 February 1967.

At the time of becoming prime minister in December of that year, McEwen was a widower, being the first Australian prime minister unmarried during his term of office. (The next such case was Julia Gillard, prime minister 2010–13, who had a domestic partner although unwed.)

On 26 July 1968, McEwen married Mary Eileen Byrne, his personal secretary for 15 years, at Wesley Church, Melbourne; he was aged 68, she was 46. In retirement he distanced himself from politics, undertook some consulting work, and travelled to Japan and South Africa. He had no children by any of his marriages.

McEwen had severe dermatitis for most of his adult life. He recounted that &quot;for literally months at a time, I would be walking about Parliament House with my feet bleeding and damaged.&quot; The pain became unbearable in later years, and he began refusing food in order to hasten his death; he died of self-imposed starvation on 20 November 1980, aged 80. McEwen was cremated, and his estate was sworn for probate at $2,180,479.

==See also==
*McEwen ministry

==References==
==Further reading==
*

==External links==
*
*John McEwen at the National Film and Sound Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23386" start="0" end="15" title="John McEwen" label="Sir John McEwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="114" end="141" title="prime minister of Australia" label="prime minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676846" start="166" end="175" title="Acting (law)" label="caretaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q47654909" start="199" end="242" title="disappearance of Harold Holt" label="disappearance of prime minister Harold Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="269" end="282" title="National Party of Australia" label="Country Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261065" start="327" end="361" title="Deputy Prime Minister of Australia" label="deputy prime minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963640" start="401" end="419" title="Chiltern, Victoria" label="Chiltern, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024728" start="501" end="511" title="Wangaratta" label="Wangaratta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159408" start="524" end="533" title="Dandenong" label="Dandenong"/>
<link wikidata="Q781360" start="584" end="599" title="Australian Army" label="Australian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557352" start="703" end="721" title="Soldier settlement (Australia)" label="soldier settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496629" start="757" end="765" title="Stanhope, Victoria" label="Stanhope"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="931" end="955" title="Australian House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586888" start="963" end="984" title="1934 Australian federal election" label="1934 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q370966" start="1022" end="1034" title="Joseph Lyons" label="Joseph Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q23369" start="1108" end="1121" title="Arthur Fadden" label="Arthur Fadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065320" start="1339" end="1364" title="Coalition (Australia)" label="Liberal-Country Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586891" start="1383" end="1390" title="1949 Australian federal election" label="in 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="1408" end="1422" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q312722" start="1438" end="1449" title="Harold Holt" label="Harold Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="1649" end="1657" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="1865" end="1878" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q356411" start="2032" end="2043" title="John Gorton" label="John Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q370926" start="2281" end="2291" title="Earle Page" label="Earle Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q459146" start="2296" end="2307" title="Frank Forde" label="Frank Forde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963640" start="2503" end="2521" title="Chiltern, Victoria" label="Chiltern, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120476" start="2675" end="2687" title="Ulster Scots people" label="Ulster Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081960" start="2704" end="2715" title="Mountnorris" label="Mountnorris"/>
<link wikidata="Q192761" start="2717" end="2730" title="County Armagh" label="County Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="2747" end="2763" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498391" start="2820" end="2842" title="Shire of Chiltern" label="Chiltern Shire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q126284807" start="2892" end="2899" title="MacEwen (surname)" label="MacEwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="3484" end="3494" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="3692" end="3701" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024728" start="3897" end="3907" title="Wangaratta" label="Wangaratta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159408" start="4033" end="4042" title="Dandenong" label="Dandenong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261521" start="4280" end="4300" title="switchboard operator" label="switchboard operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="4327" end="4335" title="shilling" label="shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733565" start="4386" end="4393" title="Prahran, Victoria" label="Prahran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824587" start="4437" end="4464" title="Commonwealth Public Service" label="Commonwealth Public Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480102" start="4522" end="4550" title="Australian Government Solicitor" label="Commonwealth Crown Solicitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496547" start="4585" end="4597" title="Fred Whitlam" label="Fred Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q23333" start="4644" end="4657" title="Gough Whitlam" label="Gough Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823829" start="4779" end="4801" title="Australian Army Cadets" label="Australian Army Cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q741691" start="4818" end="4839" title="Royal Australian Navy" label="Royal Australian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171074" start="4906" end="4938" title="Royal Military College, Duntroon" label="Royal Military College, Duntroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631278" start="5017" end="5042" title="First Australian Imperial Force" label="Australian Imperial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557352" start="5220" end="5238" title="Soldier settlement (Australia)" label="soldier settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496629" start="5269" end="5277" title="Stanhope, Victoria" label="Stanhope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492439" start="5310" end="5323" title="sheep station" label="sheep station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537445" start="5520" end="5529" title="stevedore" label="stevedore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038062" start="5537" end="5554" title="Port of Melbourne" label="Port of Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339659" start="6208" end="6215" title="Tongala" label="Tongala"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030656" start="6925" end="6954" title="Victorian Farmers&amp;#x27; Union" label="Victorian Farmers&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="7007" end="7020" title="Australian Country Party" label="Country Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927362" start="7079" end="7108" title="1932 Victorian state election" label="1932 Victorian state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386693" start="7125" end="7145" title="Victorian Legislative Assembly" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17058859" start="7154" end="7161" title="Electoral district of Waranga" label="Waranga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440597" start="7507" end="7523" title="party discipline" label="party discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065320" start="7584" end="7604" title="Coalition (Australia)" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012334" start="7795" end="7807" title="William Hill (Australian politician)" label="William Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284522" start="7943" end="7949" title="Division of Echuca" label="Echuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586888" start="7958" end="7971" title="1934 Australian federal election" label="1934 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q370926" start="8096" end="8106" title="Earle Page" label="Earle Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="8229" end="8251" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709791" start="8587" end="8603" title="Lyons government" label="Lyons government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562749" start="8852" end="8868" title="royal commissions in Australia" label="royal commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710982" start="8977" end="8990" title="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825120" start="9232" end="9253" title="1937 Australian referendum (Marketing)" label="a referendum proposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973417" start="9437" end="9441" title="Division of Indi" label="Indi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586887" start="9449" end="9462" title="1937 Australian federal election" label="1937 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662549" start="9603" end="9616" title="Harold Thorby" label="Harold Thorby"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956458" start="9686" end="9711" title="Department of the Interior (1932–1939)" label="Minister for the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784890" start="9719" end="9739" title="third Lyons ministry" label="third Lyons ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065320" start="9743" end="9763" title="Coalition (Australia)" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728956" start="9798" end="9820" title="United Australia Party" label="United Australia Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q370966" start="9849" end="9861" title="Joseph Lyons" label="Joseph Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q131302957" start="10222" end="10245" title="New Deal for Aborigines" label="New Deal for Aborigines"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="10278" end="10300" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous Australians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10589" end="10610" title="cultural assimilation#Australia" label="cultural assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q366014" start="10759" end="10770" title="A. P. Elkin" label="A. P. Elkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q370926" start="10837" end="10847" title="Earle Page" label="Earle Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="11049" end="11063" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710054" start="11559" end="11573" title="Albert Dunstan" label="Albert Dunstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540609" start="12106" end="12127" title="Liberal Country Party" label="Liberal Country Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793036" start="12198" end="12213" title="Thomas Paterson" label="Thomas Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586886" start="12336" end="12349" title="1940 Australian federal election" label="1940 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786639" start="12763" end="12777" title="Archie Cameron" label="Archie Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188683" start="13266" end="13283" title="crossing the floor" label="crossed the floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="13325" end="13347" title="conscientious objector" label="conscientious objector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586886" start="13354" end="13375" title="1940 Australian federal election" label="1940 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394879" start="13390" end="13405" title="hung parliament" label="hung parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q23369" start="13760" end="13773" title="Arthur Fadden" label="Arthur Fadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956060" start="14047" end="14076" title="Department of External Affairs (1921–1970)" label="Minister for External Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443416" start="14084" end="14107" title="second Menzies ministry" label="second Menzies ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829377" start="14199" end="14215" title="Department of Air" label="Minister for Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927120" start="14220" end="14247" title="Department of Civil Aviation (Australia)" label="Minister for Civil Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133743" start="14369" end="14384" title="James Fairbairn" label="James Fairbairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564698" start="14447" end="14468" title="Canberra air disaster" label="Canberra air disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429147" start="14560" end="14577" title="Fadden government" label="Fadden government"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="14753" end="14779" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862909" start="14860" end="14883" title="Citizen Military Forces" label="Citizen Military Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827277" start="14925" end="14936" title="auxiliaries" label="auxiliaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823800" start="14969" end="14996" title="Australian Air Force Cadets" label="Australian Air Force Cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569759" start="15005" end="15048" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Australian Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075902" start="15297" end="15312" title="Charles Burnett (RAF officer)" label="Charles Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q166259" start="15432" end="15458" title="Empire Air Training Scheme" label="Empire Air Training Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="15541" end="15556" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="15581" end="15597" title="European theatre of World War II" label="European theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800904" start="15787" end="15807" title="Article XV squadrons" label="Article XV squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q982586" start="15957" end="15973" title="Richard Williams (RAAF officer)" label="Richard Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274970" start="15997" end="16023" title="RAAF Overseas Headquarters" label="RAAF Overseas Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276692" start="16356" end="16376" title="New Guinea campaign" label="New Guinea situation"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="16670" end="16696" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal Party of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098620" start="16858" end="16868" title="Opposition (Australia)" label="opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586889" start="16914" end="16918" title="1943 Australian federal election" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586890" start="16923" end="16937" title="1946 Australian federal election" label="1946 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195640" start="17203" end="17220" title="Curtin government" label="Curtin government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825121" start="17228" end="17267" title="1944 Australian Post-War Reconstruction and Democratic Rights referendum" label="1944 post-war reconstruction referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097191" start="17307" end="17325" title="Chifley government" label="Chifley government"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="17488" end="17502" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973788" start="17586" end="17592" title="Division of Murray" label="Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865745" start="17664" end="17701" title="Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry (Australia)" label="Minister for Commerce and Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865979" start="17716" end="17734" title="Minister for Trade (Australia)" label="Minister for Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817718" start="17859" end="17877" title="Menzies government (1949–1966)" label="Menzies government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825220" start="18245" end="18266" title="Australian settlement" label="Australian settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227536" start="18630" end="18643" title="John Crawford (economist)" label="John Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q607286" start="18924" end="18947" title="Anti-Japanese sentiment in Australia" label="anti-Japanese sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11976992" start="19291" end="19310" title="Imperial Preference" label="Imperial Preference"/>
<link wikidata="Q194284" start="19727" end="19765" title="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade" label="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q315572" start="20008" end="20022" title="Kishi Nobusuke" label="Kishi Nobusuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q827518" start="20112" end="20132" title="most favoured nation" label="most favoured nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q315979" start="20738" end="20752" title="Malcolm Fraser" label="Malcolm Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q818600" start="21025" end="21068" title="Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun" label="Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q23342" start="21125" end="21138" title="Edmund Barton" label="Edmund Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261065" start="21382" end="21403" title="Deputy Prime Minister of Australia" label="deputy prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q312722" start="21563" end="21574" title="Harold Holt" label="Harold Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820470" start="22003" end="22011" title="Les Bury" label="Les Bury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767311" start="22511" end="22518" title="The Sun (Sydney)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478700" start="22535" end="22549" title="The Australian" label="The Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586897" start="22896" end="22909" title="1963 Australian federal election" label="1963 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959776" start="22946" end="22978" title="Department of Trade and Industry (Australia)" label="Department of Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q356261" start="23142" end="23157" title="William McMahon" label="William McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q259502" start="23528" end="23544" title="Australian dollar" label="decimal currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="23612" end="23626" title="pound sterling" label="pound sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q647109" start="23689" end="23702" title="sterling area" label="sterling area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489446" start="23843" end="23861" title="cabinet solidarity" label="cabinet solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q47654909" start="24084" end="24110" title="Disappearance of Harold Holt" label="disappeared while swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232409" start="24114" end="24131" title="Portsea, Victoria" label="Portsea, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="24207" end="24223" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q335310" start="24225" end="24235" title="Richard Casey, Baron Casey" label="Lord Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="25518" end="25528" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707606" start="25849" end="25858" title="Alan Reid (journalist)" label="Alan Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796140" start="26041" end="26055" title="Maxwell Newton" label="Maxwell Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11796967" start="26459" end="26493" title="Minister for Education (Australia)" label="Minister for Education and Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q356411" start="26503" end="26514" title="John Gorton" label="John Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315112" start="26577" end="26593" title="Minister for Defence (Australia)" label="Defence Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q315979" start="26594" end="26608" title="Malcolm Fraser" label="Malcolm Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q42916952" start="26663" end="26677" title="1968 Liberal Party of Australia leadership election" label="9 January 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q370926" start="26862" end="26872" title="Earle Page" label="Earle Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516976" start="26895" end="26912" title="Nationalist Party of Australia" label="Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q152666" start="26961" end="26973" title="Billy Hughes" label="Billy Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261065" start="27103" end="27124" title="Deputy Prime Minister of Australia" label="deputy prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588252" start="27927" end="27942" title="Goulburn Valley" label="Goulburn Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133302" start="27962" end="27974" title="Clifton Pugh" label="Clifton Pugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q425596" start="27983" end="27998" title="Archibald Prize" label="Archibald Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275668" start="28266" end="28280" title="National power" label="National power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599048" start="28526" end="28546" title="Great Depression in Australia" label="the Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q370966" start="28601" end="28606" title="Joseph Lyons" label="Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q315979" start="28645" end="28659" title="Malcolm Fraser" label="Malcolm Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137694" start="28755" end="28802" title="Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour" label="Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="28888" end="28947" title="Order of St Michael and St George" label="Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George"/>
<link wikidata="Q818600" start="29001" end="29038" title="Order of the Rising Sun" label="Grand Cordon, Order of the Rising Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769382" start="29111" end="29128" title="Annie McEwen" label="Anne Mills McLeod"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="29214" end="29241" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41563" start="29504" end="29517" title="Julia Gillard" label="Julia Gillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q10910263" start="29679" end="29703" title="Wesley Church, Melbourne" label="Wesley Church, Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q229256" start="29919" end="29929" title="dermatitis" label="dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801110" start="30350" end="30365" title="McEwen ministry" label="McEwen ministry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52671" wikidata="Q473867" url="?curid=52671" title="Psychosomatic medicine">
<text>Psychosomatic medicine is an interdisciplinary medical field exploring the relationships among social, psychological, behavioral factors on bodily processes and quality of life in humans and animals.

The academic forebearer of the modern field of behavioral medicine and a part of the practice of consultation-liaison psychiatry, psychosomatic medicine integrates interdisciplinary evaluation and management involving diverse specialties including psychiatry, psychology, neurology, psychoanalysis, internal medicine, pediatrics, surgery, allergy, dermatology, and psychoneuroimmunology. Clinical situations where mental processes act as a major factor affecting medical outcomes are areas where psychosomatic medicine has competence.

==Psychosomatic disorders==

Some physical diseases are believed to have a mental component derived from stresses and strains of everyday living. This has been suggested, for example, of lower back pain and high blood pressure, which some researchers have suggested may be related to stresses in everyday life. The psychosomatic framework additionally sees mental and emotional states as capable of significantly influencing the course of any physical illness. Psychiatry traditionally distinguishes between psychosomatic disorders, disorders in which mental factors play a significant role in the development, expression, or resolution of a physical illness, and somatoform disorders, disorders in which mental factors are the sole cause of a physical illness.

It is difficult to establish for certain whether an illness has a psychosomatic component. A psychosomatic component is often inferred when there are some aspects of the patient&#x27;s presentation that are unaccounted for by biological factors, or some cases where there is no biological explanation at all. For instance, &quot;Helicobacter pylori&quot; causes 80% of peptic ulcers. However, most people living with &quot;Helicobacter pylori&quot; do not develop ulcers, and 20% of patients with ulcers have no &quot;H. pylori&quot; infection. Therefore, in these cases, psychological factors could still play some role. Similarly, in irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), there are abnormalities in the behavior of the gut. However, there are no actual structural changes in the gut, so stress and emotions might still play a role.

The strongest perspective on psychosomatic disorders is that attempting to distinguish between purely physical and mixed psychosomatic disorders is obsolete as almost all physical illness have mental factors that determine their onset, presentation, maintenance, susceptibility to treatment, and resolution. According to this view, even the course of serious illnesses, such as cancer, can potentially be influenced by a person&#x27;s thoughts, feelings and general state of mental health.

Addressing such factors is the remit of the applied field of behavioral medicine. In modern society, psychosomatic aspects of illness are often attributed to stress making the remediation of stress one important factor in the development, treatment, and prevention of psychosomatic illness.

==Connotations of the term &quot;psychosomatic illness&quot;==
The term &quot;psychosomatic disease&quot; was most likely first used by Paul D. MacLean in his 1949 seminal paper ‘Psychosomatic disease and the “visceral brain”; recent developments bearing on the Papez theory of emotions.’ In the field of psychosomatic medicine, the phrase &quot;psychosomatic illness&quot; is used more narrowly than it is within the general population. For example, in lay language, the term often encompasses illnesses with no physical basis at all, and even illnesses that are faked (malingering). In contrast, in contemporary psychosomatic medicine, the term is normally restricted to those illnesses that do have a clear physical basis, but where it is believed that psychological and mental factors also play a role. Some researchers within the field believe that this overly broad interpretation of the term may have caused the discipline to fall into disrepute clinically. For this reason, among others, the field of behavioral medicine has taken over much of the remit of psychosomatic medicine in practice and there exist large areas of overlap in the scientific research.

==Criticism==
Studies have yielded mixed evidence regarding the impact of psychosomatic factors in illnesses. Early evidence suggested that patients with advanced-stage cancer may be able to survive longer if provided with psychotherapy to improve their social support and outlook. However, a major review published in 2007, which evaluated the evidence for these benefits, concluded that no studies meeting the minimum quality standards required in this field have demonstrated such a benefit. The review further argues that unsubstantiated claims that &quot;positive outlook&quot; or &quot;fighting spirit&quot; can help slow cancer may be harmful to the patients themselves if they come to believe that their poor progress results from &quot;not having the right attitude&quot;.

==Treatment==
While in the U.S., psychosomatic medicine is considered a subspecialty of the fields of psychiatry and neurology, in Germany and other European countries it is considered a subspecialty of internal medicine. Thure von Uexküll and contemporary physicians following his thoughts regard the psychosomatic approach as a core attitude of medical doctors, thereby declaring it not as a subspecialty, but rather an integrated part of every specialty. Medical treatments and psychotherapy are used to treat illnesses believed to have a psychosomatic component.

==History==
In the medieval Islamic world the Persian psychologist-physicians Ahmed ibn Sahl al-Balkhi (d. 934) and Haly Abbas (d. 994) developed an early model of illness that emphasized the interaction of the mind and the body. He proposed that a patient&#x27;s physiology and psychology can influence one another.

Contrary to Hippocrates and Galen, Ahmed ibn Sahl al-Balkhi did not believe that mere regulation and modulation of the body tempers and medication would remedy mental disorders because words play a vital and necessary role in emotional regulation. To change such behaviors, he used techniques, such as belief altering, regular musing, rehearsals of experiences, and imagination.

In the beginnings of the 20th century, there was a renewed interest in psychosomatic concepts. Psychoanalyst Franz Alexander had a deep interest in understanding the dynamic interrelation between mind and body. Sigmund Freud pursued a deep interest in psychosomatic illnesses following his correspondence with Georg Groddeck who was, at the time, researching the possibility of treating physical disorders through psychological processes. Hélène Michel-Wolfromm applied psychosomatic medicine to the field of gynecology and sexual problems experienced by women.

In the 1970s, Thure von Uexküll and his colleagues in Germany and elsewhere proposed a biosemiotic theory (the umwelt concept) that was widely influential as a theoretical framework for conceptualizing mind-body relations. This model shows that life is a meaning or functional system. Farzad Goli further explains in &quot;Biosemiotic Medicine&quot; (2016), how signs in the form of matter (e.g., atoms, molecules, cells), energy (e.g., electrical signals in nervous system), symbols (e.g., words, images, machine codes), and reflections (e.g., mindful moments, metacognition) can be interpreted and translated into each other.

Henri Laborit, one of the founders of modern neuropsychopharmacology, carried out experiments in the 1970s that showed that illness quickly occurred when there was inhibition of action in rats. Rats in exactly the same stressful situations but whom were not inhibited in their behavior (those who could flee or fight—even if fighting is completely ineffective) had no negative health consequences. He proposed that psychosomatic illnesses in humans largely have their source in the constraints that society puts on individuals in order to maintain hierarchical structures of dominance. The film &quot;My American Uncle&quot;, directed by Alain Resnais and influenced by Laborit, explores the relationship between self and society and the effects of the inhibition of action.

In February 2005, the Boston Syndromic Surveillance System detected an increase in young men seeking medical treatment for stroke. Most of them did not actually experience a stroke, but the largest number presented a day after Tedy Bruschi, a local sports figure, was hospitalized for a stroke. Presumably they began misinterpreting their own harmless symptoms, a group phenomenon now known as Tedy Bruschi syndrome.

Robert Adler is credited with coining the term Psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) to categorize a new field of study also known as mind-body medicine. The principles of mind-body medicine suggest that our mind and the emotional thoughts we produce have an incredible impact on our physiology, either positive or negative.

PNI integrates the mental/psychological, nervous, and immune system, and these systems are further linked together by ligands, which are hormones, neurotransmitters and peptides. PNI studies how every single cell in our body is in constant communication—how they are literally having a conversation and are responsible for 98% of all data transferred between the body and the brain.

Dr. Candace Pert, a professor and neuroscientist who discovered the opiate receptor, called this communication between our cells the ‘Molecules of Emotion&#x27; because they produce the feelings of bliss, hunger, anger, relaxation, or satiety. Dr. Pert maintains that our body is our subconscious mind, so what is going on in the subconscious mind is being played out by our body.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* , also known as &quot;somatoform disorder&quot;
== References ==
== External links ==
* Mind-Body Medicine: An Overview, US National Institutes of Health, Center for Complementary and Integrative Health
* NIH
* Academy of Psychosomatic Medicine
** Psychosomatics, journal of the Academy of Psychosomatic Medicine
* American Psychosomatic Society
** Psychosomatic Medicine, journal of the American Psychosomatic Society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q473867" start="0" end="22" title="Psychosomatic medicine" label="Psychosomatic medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="29" end="46" title="interdisciplinary" label="interdisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="161" end="176" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332444" start="248" end="267" title="behavioral medicine" label="behavioral medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933911" start="298" end="329" title="Liaison psychiatry" label="consultation-liaison psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="449" end="459" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="461" end="471" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="473" end="482" title="neurology" label="neurology"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="484" end="498" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11180" start="500" end="517" title="internal medicine" label="internal medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q123028" start="519" end="529" title="pediatrics" label="pediatrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="531" end="538" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="540" end="547" title="allergy" label="allergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171171" start="549" end="560" title="dermatology" label="dermatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500332" start="566" end="587" title="psychoneuroimmunology" label="psychoneuroimmunology"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="842" end="850" title="Stress (biology)" label="stresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q852163" start="924" end="939" title="lower back pain" label="lower back pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="944" end="963" title="high blood pressure" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="1021" end="1027" title="Stress (biology)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q936549" start="1401" end="1421" title="Somatoform Disorders" label="somatoform disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q180556" start="1829" end="1848" title="Helicobacter pylori" label="Helicobacter pylori"/>
<link wikidata="Q172941" start="1869" end="1882" title="peptic ulcers" label="peptic ulcers"/>
<link wikidata="Q838966" start="2136" end="2160" title="irritable bowel syndrome" label="irritable bowel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332444" start="2881" end="2900" title="behavioral medicine" label="behavioral medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="2978" end="2984" title="stress (medicine)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q488231" start="3683" end="3694" title="malingering" label="malingering"/>
<link wikidata="Q96373" start="5285" end="5302" title="Thure von Uexküll" label="Thure von Uexküll"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="5650" end="5672" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="medieval Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q624029" start="5698" end="5708" title="Islamic medicine" label="physicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q335516" start="5709" end="5733" title="Ahmed ibn Sahl al-Balkhi" label="Ahmed ibn Sahl al-Balkhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q543191" start="5747" end="5757" title="Ali ibn Abbas al-Majusi" label="Haly Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="5895" end="5905" title="physiology" label="physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="5910" end="5920" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="5961" end="5972" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="5977" end="5982" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q335516" start="5984" end="6008" title="Ahmed ibn Sahl al-Balkhi" label="Ahmed ibn Sahl al-Balkhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267800" start="6175" end="6195" title="emotional regulation" label="emotional regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q557605" start="6438" end="6453" title="Franz Alexander" label="Franz Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="6540" end="6553" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q70258" start="6639" end="6653" title="Georg Groddeck" label="Georg Groddeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q95990042" start="6768" end="6790" title="Hélène Michel-Wolfromm" label="Hélène Michel-Wolfromm"/>
<link wikidata="Q96373" start="6906" end="6923" title="Thure von Uexküll" label="Thure von Uexküll"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="6946" end="6953" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q864714" start="6979" end="6990" title="biosemiotics" label="biosemiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572474" start="7003" end="7009" title="umwelt" label="umwelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q545672" start="7521" end="7534" title="Henri Laborit" label="Henri Laborit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153352" start="8122" end="8139" title="My American Uncle" label="My American Uncle"/>
<link wikidata="Q218022" start="8159" end="8172" title="Alain Resnais" label="Alain Resnais"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="8420" end="8426" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q512013" start="8524" end="8536" title="Tedy Bruschi" label="Tedy Bruschi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52672" wikidata="Q1369991" url="?curid=52672" title="Toasting (Jamaican music)">
<text>Toasting (rap in other parts of the Anglo Caribbean) or deejaying is the act of talking, usually in a monotone melody, over a rhythm or beat by a deejay. It can either be improvised or pre-written. Toasting developed in Jamaica, before it took up that name and being part of the sound system era, a similar sound of it is found in mento and now can be heard over musical styles including ska, reggae, dancehall, dub, grime, hip hop, soca and bouyon music. The combination of singing and toasting is known as singjaying.

In the late 1950s in Jamaica, one of the first Selector, also being a promoter optimized of using a mic and to entertain an audience while playing records was Count Matchuki. He conceived the idea for being comically entertaining from listening to commercial ads and disc jockeys on American radio stations etc. He would create and come up with comical phrases also doing African American jive over the music while selecting and playing R&amp;B music. Deejays like Count Machuki working for producers would play the latest hits on traveling sound systems at parties and add his vocals to the music. These talks consisted of comedy, boastful commentaries, half-sung rhymes, rhythmic chants, squeals, screams and rhymed storytelling.

Osbourne Ruddock ( King Tubby) was a Jamaican sound recording engineer who created vocal-less rhythm backing tracks that were used by DJs doing toasting by creating one-off vinyl discs (also known as dub plates) of songs without the vocals and adding echo and sound effects.

Late 1960s toasting deejays included U-Roy and Dennis Alcapone, the latter known for mixing gangster talk with humor in his toasting. In the early 1970s, toasting deejays included I-Roy (his nickname is in homage to U-Roy) and Dillinger, the latter known for his humorous toasting style. In the early 1970s with the rise of dub Big Youth became popular, also Prince Jazzbo in his early appearance toasting with more cadence on dubs. In the late 1970s, Trinity followed.

The 1980s saw the first deejay toasting duo, Michigan &amp; Smiley, and the development of toasting outside of Jamaica. In England, Pato Banton explored his Caribbean roots, humorous and political toasting while Ranking Roger of the Second Wave or Two-Tone ska revival band The Beat from the 1980s did Jamaican toasting over music that blended ska, pop, and some punk influences.

Jamaican deejay toasting also influenced various types of dance music, such as jungle music and UK garage. Dancehall artists that have achieved pop hits with toasting-influenced vocals include Shabba Ranks, Shaggy, Lady Saw, Sean Paul, Terror Fabulous and Damian Marley.

==See also==

* A cappella
* Beatbox
* Dancehall 
* Deejay 
* Doo-wop
* Onomatopoeia
* Scat singing
* Singjay
* Rapping
* Vocalese
* Voice instrumental music
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1369991" start="0" end="8" title="Toasting (Jamaican music)" label="Toasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369991" start="10" end="13" title="Toasting (Jamaican music)" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369991" start="56" end="65" title="Toasting (Jamaican music)" label="deejaying"/>
<link wikidata="Q52946" start="80" end="87" title="Speech" label="talking"/>
<link wikidata="Q170406" start="126" end="132" title="rhythm" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q654693" start="136" end="140" title="Beat (music)" label="beat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="146" end="152" title="Disc jockey#reggae" label="deejay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262697" start="331" end="336" title="mento" label="mento"/>
<link wikidata="Q54365" start="388" end="391" title="ska" label="ska"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="393" end="399" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q474027" start="401" end="410" title="dancehall" label="dancehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q212688" start="412" end="415" title="dub music" label="dub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166726" start="417" end="422" title="Grime music" label="grime"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="424" end="431" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051735" start="433" end="437" title="Soca music" label="soca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950496" start="442" end="454" title="bouyon music" label="bouyon music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247105" start="508" end="515" title="singjay" label="singjay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176681" start="680" end="694" title="Count Matchuki" label="Count Matchuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571823" start="910" end="914" title="Glossary of jive talk" label="jive"/>
<link wikidata="Q389435" start="1062" end="1075" title="Sound system (Jamaican)" label="sound systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q451858" start="1273" end="1283" title="King Tubby" label="King Tubby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263218" start="1454" end="1463" title="dub plate" label="dub plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356920" start="1567" end="1572" title="U-Roy" label="U-Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188945" start="1577" end="1592" title="Dennis Alcapone" label="Dennis Alcapone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356456" start="1710" end="1715" title="I-Roy" label="I-Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225575" start="1757" end="1766" title="Dillinger (musician)" label="Dillinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q794747" start="1858" end="1867" title="Big Youth" label="Big Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371197" start="1889" end="1902" title="Prince Jazzbo" label="Prince Jazzbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539289" start="1982" end="1989" title="Trinity (musician)" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q864454" start="2046" end="2067" title="Michigan &amp;amp; Smiley" label="Michigan &amp;amp; Smiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386268" start="2133" end="2144" title="Pato Banton" label="Pato Banton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293289" start="2213" end="2226" title="Ranking Roger" label="Ranking Roger"/>
<link wikidata="Q54365" start="2258" end="2261" title="ska" label="ska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165980" start="2275" end="2283" title="The Beat (British band)" label="The Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="2364" end="2368" title="Punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="2461" end="2473" title="Oldschool jungle" label="jungle music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165777" start="2478" end="2487" title="UK garage" label="UK garage"/>
<link wikidata="Q711260" start="2575" end="2587" title="Shabba Ranks" label="Shabba Ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q310763" start="2589" end="2595" title="Shaggy (artist)" label="Shaggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166036" start="2597" end="2605" title="Lady Saw" label="Lady Saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q200577" start="2607" end="2616" title="Sean Paul" label="Sean Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703845" start="2618" end="2633" title="Terror Fabulous" label="Terror Fabulous"/>
<link wikidata="Q310796" start="2638" end="2651" title="Damian Marley" label="Damian Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="2670" end="2680" title="A cappella" label="A cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q213608" start="2683" end="2690" title="Beatbox" label="Beatbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q474027" start="2693" end="2702" title="Dancehall" label="Dancehall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2706" end="2712" title="Disc jockey#Dancehall/reggae deejays" label="Deejay"/>
<link wikidata="Q546359" start="2716" end="2723" title="Doo-wop" label="Doo-wop"/>
<link wikidata="Q170239" start="2726" end="2738" title="Onomatopoeia" label="Onomatopoeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q623202" start="2741" end="2753" title="Scat singing" label="Scat singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247105" start="2756" end="2763" title="Singjay" label="Singjay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="2766" end="2773" title="Rapping" label="Rapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299060" start="2776" end="2784" title="Vocalese" label="Vocalese"/>
<link wikidata="Q685884" start="2787" end="2811" title="Voice instrumental music" label="Voice instrumental music"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52675" wikidata="Q646627" url="?curid=52675" title="Strouhal number">
<text>In dimensional analysis, the Strouhal number (St, or sometimes Sr to avoid the conflict with the Stanton number) is a dimensionless number describing oscillating flow mechanisms. The parameter is named after Vincenc Strouhal, a Czech physicist who experimented in 1878 with wires experiencing vortex shedding and singing in the wind. The Strouhal number is an integral part of the fundamentals of fluid mechanics.

The Strouhal number is often given as

:formula_1

where &quot;f&quot; is the frequency of vortex shedding in Hertz, &quot;L&quot; is the characteristic length (for example, hydraulic diameter or the airfoil thickness) and &quot;U&quot; is the flow velocity. In certain cases, like heaving (plunging) flight, this characteristic length is the amplitude of oscillation. This selection of characteristic length can be used to present a distinction between Strouhal number and reduced frequency:

:formula_2

where &quot;k&quot; is the reduced frequency, and &quot;A&quot; is amplitude of the heaving oscillation.

For large Strouhal numbers (order of 1), viscosity dominates fluid flow, resulting in a collective oscillating movement of the fluid &quot;plug&quot;. For low Strouhal numbers (order of 10−4 and below), the high-speed, quasi-steady-state portion of the movement dominates the oscillation. Oscillation at intermediate Strouhal numbers is characterized by the buildup and rapidly subsequent shedding of vortices.

For spheres in uniform flow in the Reynolds number range of 8×102 &lt; Re &lt; 2×105 there co-exist two values of the Strouhal number. The lower frequency is attributed to the large-scale instability of the wake, is independent of the Reynolds number Re and is approximately equal to 0.2. The higher-frequency Strouhal number is caused by small-scale instabilities from the separation of the shear layer.

== Derivation ==
Knowing Newton’s Second Law stating force is equivalent to mass times acceleration, or formula_3, and that acceleration is the derivative of velocity, or formula_4 (characteristic speed/time) in the case of fluid mechanics, we see

:formula_5,

Since characteristic speed can be represented as length per unit time, formula_6, we get

:formula_7,

where,
: &quot;m&quot; = mass,
: &quot;U&quot; = characteristic speed,
: &quot;L&quot; = characteristic length.

Dividing both sides by formula_8, we get

:formula_9 ⇒ formula_10,

where,
: &quot;m&quot; = mass,
: &quot;U&quot; = characteristic speed,
: &quot;F&quot; = net external forces,
: &quot;L&quot; = characteristic length.

This provides a dimensionless basis for a relationship between mass, characteristic speed, net external forces, and length (size) which can be used to analyze the effects of fluid mechanics on a body with mass. 

If the net external forces are predominantly elastic, we can use Hooke’s Law to see

:formula_11,

where,
: &quot;k&quot; = spring constant (stiffness of elastic element),
: &quot;ΔL&quot; = deformation (change in length).

Assuming formula_12, then formula_13. With the natural resonant frequency of the elastic system, formula_14, being equal to formula_15, we get

:formula_16,

where,
: &quot;m&quot; = mass,
: &quot;U&quot; = characteristic speed,
: &quot;formula_17&quot; = natural resonant frequency,
: &quot;ΔL&quot; = deformation (change in length).

Given that cyclic motion frequency can be represented by formula_18 we get,

:formula_19,

where,
: &quot;f&quot; = frequency,
: &quot;L&quot; = characteristic length,
: &quot;U&quot; = characteristic speed.

== Applications ==
===Micro/Nanorobotics===
In the field of micro and nanorobotics, the Strouhal number is used alongside the Reynolds number in analyzing the impact of an external oscillatory fluidic flow on the body of a microrobot. When considering a microrobot with cyclic motion, the Strouhal number can be evaluated as

:formula_20,

where,
: &quot;f&quot; = cyclic motion frequency,
: &quot;L&quot; = characteristic length of robot,
: &quot;U&quot; = characteristic speed.

The analysis of a microrobot using the Strouhal number allows one to assess the impact that the motion of the fluid it is in has on its motion in relation to the inertial forces acting on the robot–regardless of the dominant forces being elastic or not.

===Medical===
In the medical field, microrobots that use swimming motions to move may make micromanipulations in unreachable environments. 

The equation used for a blood vessel:

:formula_21,

where,
: &quot;f&quot; = oscillation frequency of the microbot swimming motion
: &quot;D&quot; = blood vessel diameter
: &quot;V&quot; = unsteady viscoelastic flow

The Strouhal number is used as a ratio of the Deborah number (De) and Weissenberg number (Wi):

:formula_22.

The Strouhal number may also be used to obtain the Womersley number (Wo). The case for blood flow can be categorized as an unsteady viscoelastic flow, therefore the Womersley number is

:formula_23,

Or considering both equations,

:formula_24.

===Metrology===
In metrology, specifically axial-flow turbine meters, the Strouhal number is used in combination with the Roshko number to give a correlation between flow rate and frequency. The advantage of this method over the frequency/viscosity versus K-factor method is that it takes into account temperature effects on the meter.

:formula_25
where,
: &quot;f&quot; = meter frequency,
: &quot;U&quot; = flow rate,
: &quot;C&quot; = linear coefficient of expansion for the meter housing material.

This relationship leaves Strouhal dimensionless, although a dimensionless approximation is often used for &quot;C&quot;3, resulting in units of pulses/volume (same as K-factor).

This relationship between flow and frequency can also be found in the aeronautical field. Considering pulsating methane-air coflow jet diffusion flames, we get

:formula_26,

where,
: &quot;a&quot; = fuel jet radius
: &quot;w&quot; = the modulation frequency
: &quot;U&quot; = exit velocity of the fuel jet

For a small Strouhal number (St=0.1) the modulation forms a deviation in the flow that travels very far downstream. As the Strouhal number grows, the non-dimensional frequency approaches the natural frequency of a flickering flame, and eventually will have greater pulsation than the flame.
===Animal locomotion===
In swimming or flying animals, Strouhal number is defined as 

:formula_27
where,
: &quot;f&quot; = oscillation frequency (tail-beat, wing-flapping, etc.),
: &quot;U&quot; = flow rate,
: &quot;A&quot; = peak-to-peak oscillation amplitude.

In animal flight or swimming, propulsive efficiency is high over a narrow range of Strouhal constants, generally peaking in the 0.2 &lt; St &lt; 0.4 range. This range is used in the swimming of dolphins, sharks, and bony fish, and in the cruising flight of birds, bats and insects. However, in other forms of flight other values are found. Intuitively the ratio measures the steepness of the strokes, viewed from the side (e.g., assuming movement through a stationary fluid) – &quot;f&quot; is the stroke frequency, &quot;A&quot; is the amplitude, so the numerator &quot;fA&quot; is half the vertical speed of the wing tip, while the denominator &quot;V&quot; is the horizontal speed. Thus the graph of the wing tip forms an approximate sinusoid with aspect (maximal slope) twice the Strouhal constant.

==== Efficient motion ====
The Strouhal number is most commonly used for assessing oscillating flow as a result of an object&#x27;s motion through a fluid. The Strouhal number reflects the difficulty for animals to travel efficiently through a fluid with their cyclic propelling motions. The number relates to propulsive efficiency, which peaks between when within the optimal Strouhal number range of . Through the use of factors such as the stroke frequency, the amplitude of each stroke, and velocity, the Strouhal number is able to analyze the efficiency and impact of an animal&#x27;s propulsive forces through a fluid, such as those from swimming or flying. For instance, the value represents the constraints to achieve greater propulsive efficiency, which affects motion when cruising and aerodynamic forces when hovering.

Greater reactive forces and properties that act against the object, such as viscosity and density, reduce the ability of an animal&#x27;s motion to fall within the ideal Strouhal number range when swimming. Through the assessment of different species that fly or swim, it was found that the motion of many species of birds and fish falls within the optimal Strouhal range. However, the Strouhal number varies more within the same species than other species based on the method of how they move in a constrained manner in response to aerodynamic forces.

=====Example: Alcid=====
The Strouhal number has significant importance in analyzing the flight of animals since it is based on the streamlines and the animal&#x27;s velocity as it travels through the fluid. Its significance is demonstrated through the motion of alcids as it passes through different mediums (air to water). The assessment of alcids determined the peculiarity of being able to fly under the efficient Strouhal number range in air and water despite a high mass relative to their wing area. The alcid’s efficient dual-medium motion developed through natural selection where the environment played a role in the evolution of animals over time to fall under a certain efficient range. The dual-medium motion demonstrates how alcids had two different flight patterns based on the stroke velocities as it moved through each fluid. However, as the bird travels through a different medium, it has to face the influence of the fluid’s density and viscosity. Furthermore, the alcid also has to resist the upward-acting buoyancy as it moves horizontally.

== Scaling of the Strouhal number==
===Scale Analysis===
In order to determine significance of the Strouhal number at varying scales, one may perform scale analysis–a simplification method to analyze the impact of factors as they change with respect to some scale. When considered in the context of microrobotics and nanorobotics, size is the factor of interest when performing scale analysis.

Scale analysis of the Strouhal number allows for analysis of the relationship between mass and inertial forces as both change with respect to size. Taking its original underived form, formula_28, we can then relate each term to size and see how the ratio changes as size changes.

Given formula_29 where &quot;m&quot; is mass, &quot;V&quot; is volume, and formula_30 is density, we can see mass is directly related to size as volume scales with length (L). Taking the volume to be formula_31, we can directly relate mass and size as 

:formula_32.

Characteristic speed (&quot;U&quot;) is in terms of formula_33, and relative distance scales with size, therefore

:formula_34.

The net external forces (&quot;F&quot;) scales in relation to mass and acceleration, given by formula_35. Acceleration is in terms of formula_36, therefore formula_37. The mass-size relationship was established to be formula_32, so considering all three relationships, we get

:formula_39.

Length (&quot;L&quot;) already denotes size and remains &quot;L&quot;.

Taking all of this together, we get

:formula_40.

With the Strouhal number relating the mass to inertial forces, this can be expected as these two factors will scale proportionately with size and neither will increase nor decrease in significance with respect to their contribution to the body’s behavior in the cyclic motion of the fluid.

===Relationship with the Richardson number===
The scaling relationship between the Richardson number and the Strouhal number is represented by the equation:

:formula_41,

where &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; are constants depending on the condition.

For round helium buoyant jets and plumes:

:formula_42.

When formula_43,

:formula_44.

When formula_45,

:formula_46.

For planar buoyant jets and plumes:

:formula_47.

For shape-independent scaling:

:formula_48

===Relationship with Reynolds number===
The Strouhal number and Reynolds number must be considered when addressing the ideal method to develop a body made to move through a fluid. Furthermore, the relationship for these values is expressed through Lighthill&#x27;s elongated-body theory, which relates the reactive forces experienced by a body moving through a fluid with its inertial forces. The Strouhal number was determined to depend upon the dimensionless Lighthill number, which in turn relates to the Reynolds number. The value of the Strouhal number can then be seen to decrease with an increasing Reynolds number, and to increase with an increasing Lighthill number.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==
*Vincenc Strouhal, Ueber eine besondere Art der Tonerregung</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217113" start="3" end="23" title="dimensional analysis" label="dimensional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q646627" start="29" end="44" title="Strouhal number" label="Strouhal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q646627" start="46" end="48" title="Strouhal number" label="St"/>
<link wikidata="Q646627" start="63" end="65" title="Strouhal number" label="Sr"/>
<link wikidata="Q901845" start="97" end="111" title="Stanton number" label="Stanton number"/>
<link wikidata="Q126818" start="118" end="138" title="dimensionless number" label="dimensionless number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000744" start="208" end="224" title="Vincenc Strouhal" label="Vincenc Strouhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28129961" start="293" end="308" title="vortex shedding" label="vortex shedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q172145" start="397" end="412" title="fluid mechanics" label="fluid mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q28129961" start="506" end="521" title="vortex shedding" label="vortex shedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="525" end="530" title="Hertz" label="Hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327735" start="589" end="607" title="hydraulic diameter" label="hydraulic diameter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="615" end="632" title="Airfoil#Airfoil terminology" label="airfoil thickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462119" start="659" end="672" title="flow velocity" label="flow velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306329" start="948" end="965" title="reduced frequency" label="reduced frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q178932" start="1474" end="1489" title="Reynolds number" label="Reynolds number"/>
<link wikidata="Q178932" start="1674" end="1689" title="Reynolds number" label="Reynolds number"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1870" end="1889" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion#Second" label="Newton’s Second Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q170282" start="2821" end="2832" title="Hooke&amp;#x27;s law" label="Hooke’s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q178932" start="3651" end="3666" title="Reynolds number" label="Reynolds number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138045" start="4666" end="4680" title="Deborah number" label="Deborah number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753014" start="4690" end="4708" title="Weissenberg number" label="Weissenberg number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066584" start="4781" end="4797" title="Womersley number" label="Womersley number"/>
<link wikidata="Q394" start="4995" end="5004" title="metrology" label="metrology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5019" end="5044" title="Flow meter#Turbine flowmeter" label="axial-flow turbine meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066945" start="5098" end="5111" title="Roshko number" label="Roshko number"/>
<link wikidata="Q28294" start="8973" end="8979" title="Auk" label="alcids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845204" start="9922" end="9936" title="Scale analysis (mathematics)" label="scale analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q961847" start="11633" end="11650" title="Richardson number" label="Richardson number"/>
<link wikidata="Q178932" start="12084" end="12099" title="Reynolds number" label="Reynolds number"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52682" wikidata="Q1089547" url="?curid=52682" title="Greek literature">
<text>Greek literature () dates back from the ancient Greek literature, beginning in 800 BC, to the modern Greek literature of today. 

Ancient Greek literature was written in an Ancient Greek dialect, literature ranges from the oldest surviving written works until works from approximately the fifth century AD. This time period is divided into the Preclassical, Classical, Hellenistic, and Roman periods. Preclassical Greek literature primarily revolved around myths and include the works of Homer; the &quot;Iliad&quot; and the &quot;Odyssey&quot;. The Classical period saw the dawn of drama and history. Three philosophers are especially notable: Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. During the Roman era, significant contributions were made in a variety of subjects, including history, philosophy, and the sciences.

Byzantine literature, the literature of the Byzantine Empire, was written in Atticizing, Medieval and early Modern Greek. Chronicles, distinct from historics, arose in this period. Encyclopedias also flourished in this period.

Modern Greek literature is written in common Modern Greek. The Cretan Renaissance poem &quot;Erotokritos&quot; is one of the most significant works from this time period. Adamantios Korais and Rigas Feraios are two of the most notable figures.

==Ancient Greek literature (800 BC – 350 AD)==
Ancient Greek literature refers to literature written in Ancient Greek dialects. These works range from the oldest surviving written works in the Greek language until works from the fifth century AD. The Greek language arose from the proto-Indo-European language; roughly two-thirds of its words can be derived from various reconstructions of the tongue. A number of alphabets and syllabaries had been used to render Greek, but surviving Greek literature was written in a Phoenician-derived alphabet that arose primarily in Greek Ionia and was fully adopted by Athens by the fifth century BC.

===Preclassical (800–500 BC)===
All ancient Greek literature was to some degree oral in nature, and the earliest literature was completely so. The Greeks created poetry before making use of writing for literary purposes. Poems created in the Preclassical period were meant to be sung or recited (writing was little known before the 7th century BC). Most poems focused on myths, legends that were part folktale and part religion. Tragedies and comedies emerged around 600 BC.

At the beginning of Greek literature stand the works of Homer; the &quot;Iliad&quot; and the &quot;Odyssey&quot;. Though dates of composition vary, these works were fixed around 800 BC or after. Another significant figure was the poet Hesiod. His two surviving works are &quot;Works and Days&quot; and &quot;Theogony&quot;.

===Classical (500–323 BC)===
During the classical period, many of the genres of western literature became more prominent. Lyrical poetry, odes, pastorals, elegies, epigrams; dramatic presentations of comedy and tragedy; histories, rhetorical treatises, philosophical dialectics, and philosophical treatises all arose in this period.

The two major lyrical poets were Sappho and Pindar. Of the hundreds of tragedies written and performed during this time period, only a limited number of plays survived. These plays are authored by Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides.

The comedy arose from a ritual in honor of Dionysus. These plays were full of obscenity, abuse, and insult. The surviving plays by Aristophanes are a treasure trove of comic presentation.

Two influential historians of this age are Herodotus and Thucydides. A third historian, Xenophon, wrote &quot;Hellenica,&quot; which is considered an extension of Thucydides&#x27;s work.

The greatest prose achievement of the 4th century BC was in philosophy. Greek philosophy flourished during the classical period. Of the philosophers, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle are the most famous.

===Hellenistic (323–31 BC)===
By 338 BC many of the key Greek cities had been conquered by Philip II of Macedon. Philip II&#x27;s son Alexander extended his father&#x27;s conquests greatly.

The Hellenistic age is defined as the time between the death of Alexander the Great and the rise of Roman domination. After the 3rd century BC, the Greek colony of Alexandria in northern Egypt became the center of Greek culture.

Greek poetry flourished with significant contributions from Theocritus, Callimachus, and Apollonius of Rhodes. Theocritus, who lived from about 310 to 250 BC, was the creator of pastoral poetry, a type that the Roman Virgil mastered in his Eclogues.

Drama was represented by the New Comedy, of which Menander was the principal exponent.

One of the most valuable contributions of the Hellenistic period was the Septuagint translation of the Old Testament into Greek. This work was done at Alexandria and completed by the end of the 2nd century BC.

===Roman Age (31 BC – 284 AD)===

Literature in Greek in the Roman period contributed significant works to the subjects of poetry, comedy, history, and tragedy. A large proportion of literature from this time period were histories.

Significant historians of the period were Timaeus, Polybius, Diodorus Siculus, Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Appian of Alexandria, Arrian, and Plutarch. The period of time they cover extends from late in the 4th century BC to the 2nd century AD.

Eratosthenes of Alexandria wrote on astronomy and geography, but his work is known mainly from later summaries. The physician Galen pioneered developments in various scientific disciplines including anatomy, physiology, pathology, pharmacology, and neurology. This is also the period in which most of the Ancient Greek novels were written.

The New Testament, written by various authors in varying qualities of Koine Greek, hails from this period. The Gospels and the Epistles of Saint Paul were written in this time period as well.

==Byzantine literature (350–1453)==

Byzantine literature refers to literature of the Byzantine Empire written in Atticizing, Medieval and early Modern Greek.

Byzantine literature combined Greek and Christian civilization on the common foundation of the Roman political system. This type of literature was set in the intellectual and ethnographic atmosphere of the Near East. Byzantine literature possesses four primary cultural elements: Greek, Christian, Roman, and Oriental.

Aside from personal correspondence, the literature of this period was primarily written in the Atticizing style. Some early literature of this period was written in Latin; some of the works from the Latin Empire were written in French.

Chronicles, distinct from historic, arose in this period. Encyclopedias also flourished in this period.

&quot;Digenes Akritas&quot; (Διγενῆς Ἀκρίτας) is the most famous of the Acritic songs and is often regarded as the only surviving epic poem from the Byzantine Empire. It is considered by some to signal the beginnings of modern Greek literature.

==Modern Greek literature (1453–present) ==

Modern Greek literature is written in common Modern Greek. During this period, the modern vernacular form of the Greek language became more commonplace in writing.

This period saw the revival of Greek and Roman studies and the development of Renaissance humanism and science.

The Cretan Renaissance poem &quot;Erotokritos&quot; is a prominent work of this time period. It is a verse romance written around 1600 by Vitsentzos Kornaros (1553–1613).

Modern Greek literature is significantly influenced by the Diafotismos, a movement that translated the ideas of the European Enlightenment into the Greek world. Adamantios Korais and Rigas Feraios are two prominent figures of this movement.

Today, Modern Greek Literature participates in the global literary community. The Greek authors George Seferis and Odysseas Elytis have been awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature.

==See also==
*Ancient literature
*Latin literature
*Greek scholars in the Renaissance
*Modern Greek Enlightenment
*Modern Greek theatre
*Loeb Classical Library
*&quot;Greek Anthology&quot;

==Notes==
==Sources==
*Encyclopædia Britannica Article on Greek Literature
*Warwick University Bibliography of Greek Literature

=== Preclassical ===
* Overview of Preclassical Greek Literature

=== Classical ===
* Princeton and Stanford Working Papers in Classics
* Ancient World Open Bibliography on Classical Literature 
* Williams College Bibliography for the Classics

=== Hellenistic ===
* Bryn Mawr Guide to Hellenistic Literature
* Oxford Bibliographies for Hellenistic Literature
* Ancient-Greec.org overview of Hellenistic Literature 
* History Channel Vault of Hellenistic Greece 
* Hellenistic Historiography by Syracuse University

=== Greco-Roman ===
* University of Chicago Greco-Roman Literature Overview 
* Shawnee Heights Greco-Roman Literature Overview

=== Byzantine ===
* University of Notre Dame, History of Byzantine Literature
* King&#x27;s College London History of Byzantine Literature 

=== Modern ===
* Modern Greek Studies Association 
* Hellenism.net, Modern Greek Literature Overview 
* Greece In Print</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1089547" start="0" end="16" title="Greek literature" label="Greek literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q657246" start="40" end="64" title="ancient Greek literature" label="ancient Greek literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976891" start="94" end="117" title="modern Greek literature" label="modern Greek literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="488" end="493" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="505" end="510" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="531" end="538" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="550" end="559" title="Classical antiquity" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="645" end="653" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="655" end="660" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="666" end="675" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265137" start="811" end="831" title="Byzantine literature" label="Byzantine literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="855" end="871" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q746783" start="888" end="898" title="Atticism" label="Atticizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q36387" start="900" end="908" title="Medieval Greek" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q36510" start="919" end="931" title="Modern Greek" label="Modern Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q185363" start="933" end="942" title="Chronicle" label="Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292" start="992" end="1004" title="Encyclopedia" label="Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36510" start="1084" end="1096" title="Modern Greek" label="Modern Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378978" start="1102" end="1120" title="Cretan Renaissance" label="Cretan Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420051" start="1132" end="1143" title="Erotokritos" label="Erotokritos"/>
<link wikidata="Q319635" start="1210" end="1227" title="Adamantios Korais" label="Adamantios Korais"/>
<link wikidata="Q319684" start="1232" end="1245" title="Rigas Feraios" label="Rigas Feraios"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1477" end="1491" title="Greek language" label="Greek language"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="1565" end="1593" title="proto-Indo-European language" label="proto-Indo-European language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9779" start="1698" end="1706" title="alphabet" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q182133" start="1712" end="1723" title="Syllabary" label="syllabaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="1803" end="1813" title="Phoenician alphabet" label="Phoenician"/>
<link wikidata="Q620874" start="1861" end="1866" title="Ionia" label="Ionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="1892" end="1898" title="Classical Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="2457" end="2462" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="2474" end="2479" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="2500" end="2507" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5890329" start="2586" end="2594" title="Homeric scholarship" label="or after"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="2636" end="2642" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q667285" start="2678" end="2692" title="Works and Days" label="Works and Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="2709" end="2717" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="2766" end="2775" title="Classical antiquity" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q182357" start="2848" end="2862" title="Lyric poetry" label="Lyrical poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q178985" start="2864" end="2867" title="ode" label="ode"/>
<link wikidata="Q390001" start="2870" end="2878" title="pastoral" label="pastoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q174864" start="2881" end="2888" title="elegy" label="elegies"/>
<link wikidata="Q193121" start="2890" end="2897" title="epigram" label="epigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="2900" end="2905" title="drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q40831" start="2926" end="2932" title="comedy" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="2937" end="2944" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="2946" end="2955" title="history" label="histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="2957" end="2965" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="2979" end="2992" title="philosophy" label="philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9453" start="2993" end="3002" title="dialectic" label="dialectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17892" start="3093" end="3099" title="Sappho" label="Sappho"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="3104" end="3110" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="3131" end="3140" title="tragedy" label="tragedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="3257" end="3266" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="3268" end="3277" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="3283" end="3292" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="3338" end="3346" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="3426" end="3438" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="3527" end="3536" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="3541" end="3551" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="3572" end="3580" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="3744" end="3760" title="Greek philosophy" label="Greek philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="3822" end="3830" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="3832" end="3837" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="3843" end="3852" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="3966" end="3986" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="4009" end="4018" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="4230" end="4240" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="4253" end="4258" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q219484" start="4356" end="4366" title="Theocritus" label="Theocritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="4368" end="4379" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192638" start="4385" end="4405" title="Apollonius of Rhodes" label="Apollonius of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="4507" end="4512" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="4513" end="4519" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q546203" start="4536" end="4544" title="Eclogues" label="Eclogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100736" start="4576" end="4586" title="New Comedy" label="New Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q118992" start="4597" end="4605" title="Menander" label="Menander"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="4708" end="4718" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="4738" end="4751" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q367298" start="5121" end="5128" title="Timaeus (historian)" label="Timaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="5130" end="5138" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="5140" end="5156" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26204" start="5158" end="5184" title="Dionysius of Halicarnassus" label="Dionysius of Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190368" start="5186" end="5206" title="Appian of Alexandria" label="Appian of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q31845" start="5208" end="5214" title="Arrian" label="Arrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="5220" end="5228" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43182" start="5324" end="5336" title="Eratosthenes" label="Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="5360" end="5369" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="5374" end="5383" title="geography" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="5450" end="5455" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246055" start="5629" end="5648" title="Ancient Greek novel" label="Ancient Greek novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="5669" end="5682" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="5735" end="5746" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="5776" end="5783" title="Gospels" label="Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="5792" end="5814" title="Pauline epistles" label="Epistles of Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="5944" end="5960" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q506588" start="5972" end="5982" title="Attic Greek" label="Atticizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q36387" start="5984" end="5992" title="Medieval Greek" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q36510" start="6003" end="6015" title="Modern Greek" label="Modern Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243324" start="6058" end="6080" title="Christian civilization" label="Christian civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="6224" end="6233" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q205653" start="6327" end="6335" title="Oriental" label="Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q746783" start="6433" end="6443" title="Atticism" label="Atticizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="6503" end="6508" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178897" start="6537" end="6549" title="Latin Empire" label="Latin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="6566" end="6572" title="French Language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q185363" start="6575" end="6584" title="Chronicle" label="Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292" start="6633" end="6645" title="Encyclopedia" label="Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129515" start="6686" end="6701" title="Digenes Akritas" label="Digenes Akritas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564938" start="6752" end="6765" title="Acritic songs" label="Acritic songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="6829" end="6845" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976891" start="6900" end="6923" title="modern Greek literature" label="modern Greek literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q36510" start="7016" end="7028" title="Modern Greek" label="Modern Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="7167" end="7172" title="ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="7177" end="7182" title="ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="7214" end="7234" title="Renaissance humanism" label="Renaissance humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288583" start="7239" end="7246" title="History of science in the Renaissance" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378978" start="7253" end="7271" title="Cretan Renaissance" label="Cretan Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420051" start="7283" end="7294" title="Erotokritos" label="Erotokritos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159457" start="7356" end="7363" title="Romance (heroic literature)" label="romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q381135" start="7387" end="7406" title="Vitsentzos Kornaros" label="Vitsentzos Kornaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424747" start="7480" end="7491" title="Diafotismos" label="Diafotismos"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="7537" end="7559" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="European Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q319635" start="7582" end="7599" title="Adamantios Korais" label="Adamantios Korais"/>
<link wikidata="Q319684" start="7604" end="7617" title="Rigas Feraios" label="Rigas Feraios"/>
<link wikidata="Q165823" start="7759" end="7773" title="George Seferis" label="George Seferis"/>
<link wikidata="Q160478" start="7778" end="7793" title="Odysseas Elytis" label="Odysseas Elytis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="7816" end="7841" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q541923" start="7858" end="7876" title="Ancient literature" label="Ancient literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q184890" start="7878" end="7894" title="Latin literature" label="Latin literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639386" start="7896" end="7929" title="Greek scholars in the Renaissance" label="Greek scholars in the Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424747" start="7931" end="7957" title="Modern Greek Enlightenment" label="Modern Greek Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011313" start="7959" end="7979" title="Modern Greek theatre" label="Modern Greek theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="7981" end="8003" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q8934183" start="8011" end="8026" title="Greek Anthology" label="Greek Anthology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52684" wikidata="Q331273" url="?curid=52684" title="Ancient Greek architecture">
<text>Ancient Greek architecture came from the Greeks, or Hellenes, whose culture flourished on the Greek mainland, the Peloponnese, the Aegean Islands, and in colonies in Anatolia and Italy for a period from about 900 BC until the 1st century AD, with the earliest remaining architectural works dating from around 600 BC.

Ancient Greek architecture is best known for its temples, many of which are found throughout the region, with the Parthenon regarded, now as in ancient times, as the prime example. Most remains are very incomplete ruins, but a number survive substantially intact, mostly outside modern Greece. The second important type of building that survives all over the Hellenic world is the open-air theatre, with the earliest dating from around 525–480 BC. Other architectural forms that are still in evidence are the processional gateway (&quot;propylon&quot;), the public square (&quot;agora&quot;) surrounded by storied colonnade (&quot;stoa&quot;), the town council building (&quot;bouleuterion&quot;), the public monument, the monumental tomb (&quot;mausoleum&quot;) and the &quot;stadium&quot;.

Ancient Greek architecture is distinguished by its highly formalised characteristics, both of structure and decoration. This is particularly so in the case of temples where each building appears to have been conceived as a sculptural entity within the landscape, most often raised on high ground so that the elegance of its proportions and the effects of light on its surfaces might be viewed from all angles. Nikolaus Pevsner refers to &quot;the plastic shape of the [Greek] temple [...] placed before us with a physical presence more intense, more alive than that of any later building&quot;.

The formal vocabulary of ancient Greek architecture, in particular the division of architectural style into three defined orders: the Doric Order, the Ionic Order and the Corinthian Order, was to have a profound effect on Western architecture of later periods. The architecture of ancient Rome grew out of that of Greece and maintained its influence in Italy unbroken until the present day. From the Renaissance, revivals of Classicism have kept alive not only the precise forms and ordered details of Greek architecture, but also its concept of architectural beauty based on balance and proportion. The successive styles of Neoclassical architecture and Greek Revival architecture followed and adapted ancient Greek styles closely.
== Influences ==

=== Geography ===
The mainland and islands of Greece are very rocky, with deeply indented coastline, and rugged mountain ranges with few substantial forests. The most freely available building material is stone. Limestone was readily available and easily worked. There is an abundance of high quality white marble both on the mainland and islands, particularly Paros and Naxos. This finely grained material was a major contributing factor to precision of detail, both architectural and sculptural, that adorned ancient Greek architecture. Deposits of high-quality potter&#x27;s clay were found throughout Greece and the Islands, with major deposits near Athens. It was used not only for pottery vessels but also roof tiles and architectural decoration.

The climate of Greece is maritime, with both the coldness of winter and the heat of summer tempered by sea breezes. This led to a lifestyle where many activities took place outdoors. Hence temples were placed on hilltops, their exteriors designed as a visual focus of gatherings and processions, while theatres were often an enhancement of a naturally occurring sloping site where people could sit, rather than a containing structure. Colonnades encircling buildings, or surrounding courtyards provided shelter from the sun and from sudden winter storms.

The light of Greece may be another important factor in the development of the particular character of ancient Greek architecture. The light is often extremely bright, with both the sky and the sea vividly blue. The clear light and sharp shadows give a precision to the details of the landscape, pale rocky outcrops and seashore. This clarity is alternated with periods of haze that varies in colour to the light on it. In this characteristic environment, the ancient Greek architects constructed buildings that were marked by the precision of detail. The gleaming marble surfaces were smooth, curved, fluted, or ornately sculpted to reflect the sun, cast graded shadows and change in colour with the ever-changing light of day.

=== History ===
Historians divide ancient Greek civilization into two eras, the Hellenic period (from around 900 BC to the death of Alexander the Great in 323 BC), and the Hellenistic period (323 BC – 30 AD). During the earlier Hellenic period, substantial works of architecture began to appear around 600 BC. During the later (Hellenistic) period, Greek culture spread as a result of Alexander&#x27;s conquest of other lands, and later as a result of the rise of the Roman Empire, which adopted much of Greek culture.

Before the Hellenic era, two major cultures had dominated the region: the Minoan (), and the Mycenaean (c. 1500–1100 BC). Minoan is the name given by modern historians to the culture of the people of ancient Crete, known for its elaborate and richly decorated Minoan palaces, and for its pottery, the most famous of which painted with floral and motifs of sea life. The Mycenaean culture, which flourished on the Peloponnesus, was different in character. Its people built citadels, fortifications and tombs, and decorated their pottery with bands of marching soldiers rather than octopus and seaweed. Both these civilizations came to an end around 1100 BC, that of Crete possibly because of volcanic devastation, and that of Mycenae because of an invasion by the Dorian people who lived on the Greek mainland. Following these events, there was a period from which only a village level of culture seems to have existed. This period is thus often referred to as the Greek Dark Age.

=== Art ===
The art history of the Hellenic era is generally subdivided into four periods: the Protogeometric (1100–900 BC), the Geometric (900–700 BC), the Archaic (700–500 BC) and the Classical (500–323 BC) with sculpture being further divided into Severe Classical, High Classical and Late Classical. The first signs of the particular artistic character that defines ancient Greek architecture are to be seen in the pottery of the Dorian Greeks from the 10th century BC. Already at this period it is created with a sense of proportion, symmetry and balance not apparent in similar pottery from Crete and Mycenae. The decoration is precisely geometric, and ordered neatly into zones on defined areas of each vessel. These qualities were to manifest themselves not only through a millennium of Greek pottery making, but also in the architecture that was to emerge in the 6th century. The major development that occurred was in the growing use of the human figure as the major decorative motif, and the increasing surety with which humanity, its mythology, activities and passions were depicted.

The development in the depiction of the human form in pottery was accompanied by a similar development in sculpture. The tiny stylised bronzes of the Geometric period gave way to life-sized highly formalised monolithic representation in the Archaic period. The Classical period was marked by a rapid development towards idealised but increasingly lifelike depictions of gods in human form. This development had a direct effect on the sculptural decoration of temples, as many of the greatest extant works of ancient Greek sculpture once adorned temples, and many of the largest recorded statues of the age, such as the lost chryselephantine statues of Zeus at the Temple of Zeus at Olympia and Athena at the Parthenon, Athens, both over 40 feet high, were once housed in them.

=== Religion and philosophy ===
The religion of ancient Greece was a form of nature worship that grew out of the beliefs of earlier cultures. However, unlike earlier cultures, man was no longer perceived as being threatened by nature, but as its sublime product. The natural elements were personified as gods of the complete human form, and very human behaviour.

The home of the gods was thought to be Olympus, the highest mountain in Greece. The most important deities were: Zeus, the supreme god and ruler of the sky; Hera, his wife and goddess of marriage; Athena, goddess of wisdom; Poseidon, the god of the sea; Demeter, goddess of the harvest; Apollo, the god of the sun, law, healing, plague, reason, music and poetry; Artemis, goddess of chastity, the hunt and the wilderness; Aphrodite, goddess of love; Ares, God of war; Hermes, the god of commerce and travellers, Hephaestus, the god of fire and metalwork; and Dionysus, the god of wine and fruit-bearing plants. Worship, like many other activities, was done in the community, in the open. However, by 600 BC, the gods were often represented by large statues and it was necessary to provide a building in which each of these could be housed. This led to the development of temples.

The ancient Greeks perceived order in the universe, and in turn, applied order and reason to their creations. Their humanist philosophy put mankind at the centre of things and promoted well-ordered societies and the development of democracy. At the same time, the respect for human intellect demanded a reason, and promoted a passion for enquiry, logic, challenge, and problem-solving. The architecture of the ancient Greeks, and in particular, temple architecture, responds to these challenges with a passion for beauty, and for order and symmetry which is the product of a continual search for perfection, rather than a simple application of a set of working rules.

== Architectural character ==

=== Early development ===
There is a clear division between the architecture of the preceding Mycenaean and Minoan cultures and that of the ancient Greeks, with much of the techniques and an understanding of their style being lost when these civilisations fell.

Mycenaean architecture is marked by massive fortifications, typically surrounding a citadel with a royal palace, much smaller than the rambling Minoan &quot;palaces&quot;, and relatively few other buildings. The megaron, a rectangular hall with a hearth in the centre, was the largest room in the palaces, and also larger houses. Sun-dried brick above rubble bases were the usual materials, with wooden columns and roof-beams. Rows of ashlar stone orthostats lined the base of walls in some prominent locations.

The Minoan architecture of Crete was of the trabeated form like that of ancient Greece. It employed wooden columns with capitals, but the wooden columns were of a very different form to Doric columns, being narrow at the base and splaying upward. The earliest forms of columns in Greece seem to have developed independently. As with Minoan architecture, ancient Greek domestic architecture centred on open spaces or courtyards surrounded by colonnades. This form was adapted to the construction of hypostyle halls within the larger temples. The evolution that occurred in architecture was towards the public building, first and foremost the temple, rather than towards grand domestic architecture such as had evolved in Crete, if the Cretan &quot;palaces&quot; were indeed domestic, which remains uncertain.

Some Mycenaean tombs are marked by circular structures and tapered domes with flat-bedded, cantilevered courses. This architectural form did not carry over into the architecture of ancient Greece, but reappeared about 400 BC in the interior of large monumental tombs such as the Lion Tomb at Knidos (c. 350 BC).

=== Types of buildings ===
==== Domestic buildings ====
The Greek word for the family or household, &quot;oikos&quot;, is also the name for the house. Houses followed several different types. It is probable that many of the earliest houses were simple structures of two rooms, with an open porch or pronaos, above which rose a low pitched gable or pediment. This form is thought to have contributed to temple architecture.

The construction of many houses employed walls of sun-dried clay bricks or wooden framework filled with fibrous material such as straw or seaweed covered with clay or plaster, on a base of stone which protected the more vulnerable elements from damp. The roofs were probably of thatch with eaves which overhung the permeable walls. Many larger houses, such as those at Delos, were built of stone and plastered. The roofing material for the substantial house was tile. Houses of the wealthy had mosaic floors and demonstrated the Classical style.

Many houses centred on a wide passage or &quot;pasta&quot; which ran the length of the house and opened at one side onto a small courtyard which admitted light and air. Larger houses had a fully developed peristyle (courtyard) at the centre, with the rooms arranged around it. Some houses had an upper floor which appears to have been reserved for the use of the women of the family.

City houses were built with adjoining walls and were divided into small blocks by narrow streets. Shops were sometimes located in the rooms towards the street. City houses were inward-facing, with major openings looking onto the central courtyard, rather than the street.
==== Public buildings ====
The rectangular temple is the most common and best-known form of Greek public architecture. This rectilinear structure borrows from the Late Helladic, Mycenaean megaron, which contained a central throne room, vestibule, and porch. The temple did not serve the same function as a modern church, since the altar stood under the open sky in the &quot;temenos&quot; or sacred precinct, often directly before the temple. Temples served as the location of a cult image and as a storage place or strong room for the treasury associated with the cult of the god in question, and as a place for devotees of the god to leave their votive offerings, such as statues, helmets and weapons. Some Greek temples appear to have been oriented astronomically. The temple was generally part of a religious precinct known as the &quot;acropolis&quot;. According to Aristotle, &quot;the site should be a spot seen far and wide, which gives good elevation to virtue and towers over the neighbourhood&quot;. Small circular temples, &quot;tholoi&quot; were also constructed, as well as small temple-like buildings that served as treasuries for specific groups of donors.
During the late 5th and 4th centuries BC, town planning became an important consideration of Greek builders, with towns such as Paestum and Priene being laid out with a regular grid of paved streets and an agora or central market place surrounded by a colonnade or stoa. The completely restored Stoa of Attalos can be seen in Athens. Towns were also equipped with a public fountain where water could be collected for household use. The development of regular town plans is associated with Hippodamus of Miletus, a pupil of Pythagoras.

Public buildings became &quot;dignified and gracious structures&quot;, and were sited so that they related to each other architecturally. The propylon or porch, formed the entrance to temple sanctuaries and other significant sites with the best-surviving example being the Propylaea on the Acropolis of Athens. The bouleuterion was a large public building with a hypostyle hall that served as a court house and as a meeting place for the town council (boule). Remnants of bouleuterion survive at Athens, Olympia and Miletus, the latter having held up to 1,200 people.

Every Greek town had an open-air theatre. These were used for both public meetings as well as dramatic performances. The theatre was usually set in a hillside outside the town, and had rows of tiered seating set in a semicircle around the central performance area, the &quot;orchestra&quot;. Behind the orchestra was a low building called the &quot;skênê&quot;, which served as a store-room, a dressing room, and also as a backdrop to the action taking place in the orchestra. A number of Greek theatres survive almost intact, the best known being at Epidaurus by the architect Polykleitos the Younger.

Greek towns of substantial size also had a palaestra or a gymnasium, the social centre for male citizens which included spectator areas, baths, toilets and club rooms. Other buildings associated with sports include the hippodrome for horse racing, of which only remnants have survived, and the stadium for foot racing, 600 feet in length, of which examples exist at Olympia, Delphi, Epidaurus and Ephesus, while the Panathinaiko Stadium in Athens, which seats 45,000 people, was restored in the 19th century and was used in the 1896, 1906 and 2004 Olympic Games.


=== Structure ===

==== Post and lintel ====
The architecture of ancient Greece is of a trabeated or &quot;post and lintel&quot; form, i.e. it is composed of upright beams (posts) supporting horizontal beams (lintels). Although the existent buildings of the era are constructed in stone, it is clear that the origin of the style lies in simple wooden structures, with vertical posts supporting beams which carried a ridged roof. The posts and beams divided the walls into regular compartments which could be left as openings, or filled with sun dried bricks, lathes or straw and covered with clay daub or plaster. Alternately, the spaces might be filled with rubble. It is likely that many early houses and temples were constructed with an open porch or &quot;pronaos&quot; above which rose a low pitched gable or pediment.

The earliest temples, built to enshrine statues of deities, were probably of wooden construction, later replaced by the more durable stone temples many of which are still in evidence today. The signs of the original timber nature of the architecture were maintained in the stone buildings.

A few of these temples are very large, with several, such as the Temple of Zeus Olympus and the Olympians at Athens being well over 300 feet in length, but most were less than half this size. It appears that some of the large temples began as wooden constructions in which the columns were replaced piecemeal as stone became available. This, at least was the interpretation of the historian Pausanias looking at the Temple of Hera at Olympia in the 2nd century AD.

The stone columns are made of a series of solid stone cylinders or &quot;drums&quot; that rest on each other without mortar, but were sometimes centred with a bronze pin. The columns are wider at the base than at the top, tapering with an outward curve known as entasis. Each column has a capital of two parts, the upper, on which rests the lintels, being square and called the abacus. The part of the capital that rises from the column itself is called the echinus. It differs according to the order, being plain in the Doric order, fluted in the Ionic and foliate in the Corinthian. Doric and usually Ionic capitals are cut with vertical grooves known as fluting. This fluting or grooving of the columns is a retention of an element of the original wooden architecture.

==== Entablature and pediment ====
The columns of a temple support a structure that rises in two main stages, the entablature and the pediment.

The entablature is the major horizontal structural element supporting the roof and encircling the entire building. It is composed of three parts. Resting on the columns is the architrave made of a series of stone &quot;lintels&quot; that spanned the space between the columns, and meet each other at a joint directly above the centre of each column.

Above the architrave is a second horizontal stage called the frieze. The frieze is one of the major decorative elements of the building and carries a sculptured relief. In the case of Ionic and Corinthian architecture, the relief decoration runs in a continuous band, but in the Doric order, it is divided into sections called metopes, which fill the spaces between vertical rectangular blocks called triglyphs. The triglyphs are vertically grooved like the Doric columns, and retain the form of the wooden beams that would once have supported the roof.

The upper band of the entablature is called the cornice, which is generally ornately decorated on its lower edge. The cornice retains the shape of the beams that would once have supported the wooden roof at each end of the building. At the front and rear of each temple, the entablature supports a triangular structure called the pediment. The tympanum is the triangular space framed by the cornices and the location of the most significant sculptural decoration on the exterior of the building.

==== Masonry ====
Every temple rested on a masonry base called the crepidoma, generally of three steps, of which the upper one which carried the columns was the stylobate. Masonry walls were employed for temples from about 600 BC onwards. Masonry of all types was used for ancient Greek buildings, including rubble, but the finest ashlar masonry was usually employed for temple walls, in regular courses and large sizes to minimise the joints. The blocks were rough hewn and hauled from quarries to be cut and bedded very precisely, with mortar hardly ever being used. Blocks, particularly those of columns and parts of the building bearing loads were sometimes fixed in place or reinforced with iron clamps, dowels and rods of wood, bronze or iron fixed in lead to minimise corrosion.

==== Openings ====
Door and window openings were spanned with a lintel, which in a stone building limited the possible width of the opening. The distance between columns was similarly affected by the nature of the lintel, columns on the exterior of buildings and carrying stone lintels being closer together than those on the interior, which carried wooden lintels. Door and window openings narrowed towards the top. Temples were constructed without windows, the light to the naos entering through the door. It has been suggested that some temples were lit from openings in the roof. A door of the Ionic Order at the Erechtheion (17 feet high and 7.5 feet wide at the top) retains many of its features intact, including mouldings, and an entablature supported on console brackets. 

==== Roof ====

The widest span of a temple roof was across the cella, or inner chamber. In a large building, this space contains columns to support the roof, the architectural form being known as hypostyle. It appears that, although the architecture of ancient Greece was initially of wooden construction, the early builders did not have the concept of the diagonal truss as a stabilising member. This is evidenced by the nature of temple construction in the 6th century BC, where the rows of columns supporting the roof of the cella rise higher than the outer walls, unnecessary if roof trusses are employed as an integral part of the wooden roof. The indication is that initially all the rafters were supported directly by the entablature, walls and hypostyle, rather than on a trussed wooden frame, which came into use in Greek architecture only in the 3rd century BC.

Ancient Greek buildings of timber, clay and plaster construction were probably roofed with thatch. With the rise of stone architecture came the appearance of fired ceramic roof tiles. These early roof tiles showed an S-shape, with the pan and cover tile forming one piece. They were much larger than modern roof tiles, being up to long, wide, thick and weighing around apiece. Only stone walls, which were replacing the earlier mudbrick and wood walls, were strong enough to support the weight of a tiled roof.

The earliest finds of roof tiles of the Archaic period in Greece are documented from a very restricted area around Corinth, where fired tiles began to replace thatched roofs at the temples of Apollo and Poseidon between 700 and 650 BC. Spreading rapidly, roof tiles were within fifty years in evidence for a large number of sites around the Eastern Mediterranean, including Mainland Greece, Western Asia Minor, Southern and Central Italy. Being more expensive and labour-intensive to produce than thatch, their introduction has been explained by the fact that their fireproof quality would have given desired protection to the costly temples. As a side-effect, it has been assumed that the new stone and tile construction also ushered in the end of overhanging eaves in Greek architecture, as they made the need for an extended roof as rain protection for the mudbrick walls obsolete.

Vaults and arches were not generally used, but begin to appear in tombs (in a &quot;beehive&quot; or cantilevered form such as used in Mycenaea) and occasionally, as an external feature, exedrae of voussoired construction from the 5th century BC. The dome and vault never became significant structural features, as they were to become in ancient Roman architecture.

==== Temple plans ====
Most ancient Greek temples were rectangular, and were approximately twice as long as they were wide, with some notable exceptions such as the enormous Temple of Olympian Zeus, Athens with a length of nearly 2 times its width. A number of surviving temple-like structures are circular, and are referred to as &quot;tholos&quot;. The smallest temples are less than 25 metres (approx. 75 feet) in length, or in the case of the circular &quot;tholos&quot;, in diameter. The great majority of temples are between 30 and 60 metres (approx. 100–200 feet) in length. A small group of Doric temples, including the Parthenon, are between 60 and 80 metres (approx. 200–260 feet) in length. The largest temples, mainly Ionic and Corinthian, but including the Doric Temple of the Olympian Zeus, Agrigento, were between 90 and 120 metres (approx. 300–390 feet) in length.

The temple rises from a stepped base or stylobate, which elevates the structure above the ground on which it stands. Early examples, such as the Temple of Zeus at Olympus, have two steps, but the majority, like the Parthenon, have three, with the exceptional example of the Temple of Apollo at Didyma having six. The core of the building is a masonry-built &quot;naos&quot; within which is a cella, a windowless room originally housing the statue of the god. The cella generally has a porch or &quot;pronaos&quot; before it, and perhaps a second chamber or &quot;antenaos&quot; serving as a treasury or repository for trophies and gifts. The chambers were lit by a single large doorway, fitted with a wrought iron grill. Some rooms appear to have been illuminated by skylights.

On the stylobate, often completely surrounding the naos, stand rows of columns. Each temple is defined as being of a particular type, with two terms: one describing the number of columns across the entrance front, and the other defining their distribution.

Examples:
*&quot;Distyle in antis&quot; describes a small temple with two columns at the front, which are set between the projecting walls of the &quot;pronaos&quot; or porch, like the Temple of Nemesis at Rhamnus. 
*&quot;Amphiprostyle tetrastyle&quot; describes a small temple that has columns at both ends which stand clear of the &quot;naos&quot;. &quot;Tetrastyle&quot; indicates that the columns are four in number, like those of the Temple on the Ilissus in Athens. 
*&quot;Peripteral hexastyle&quot; describes a temple with a single row of peripheral columns around the &quot;naos&quot;, with six columns across the front, like the Theseion in Athens. 
*&quot;Peripteral octastyle&quot; describes a temple with a single row of columns around the &quot;naos&quot;, with eight columns across the front, like the Parthenon, Athens. 
*&quot;Dipteral decastyle&quot; describes the huge temple of Apollo at Didyma, with the &quot;naos&quot; surrounded by a double row of columns, with ten columns across the entrance front.
* The Temple of Zeus Olympius at Agrigentum, is termed &quot;Pseudo-periteral heptastyle&quot;, because its encircling colonnade has &quot;pseudo&quot; columns that are attached to the walls of the &quot;naos&quot;. &quot;Heptastyle&quot; means that it has seven columns across the entrance front.

==== Proportion and optical illusion ====
The ideal of proportion that was used by ancient Greek architects in designing temples was not a simple mathematical progression using a square module. The math involved a more complex geometrical progression, the so-called golden mean. The ratio is similar to that of the growth patterns of many spiral forms that occur in nature such as rams&#x27; horns, nautilus shells, fern fronds, and vine tendrils and which were a source of decorative motifs employed by ancient Greek architects as particularly in evidence in the volutes of capitals of the Ionic and Corinthian Orders.

:formula_1

The ancient Greek architects took a philosophic approach to the rules and proportions. The determining factor in the mathematics of any notable work of architecture was its ultimate appearance. The architects calculated for perspective, for the optical illusions that make edges of objects appear concave and for the fact that columns that are viewed against the sky look different from those adjacent that are viewed against a shadowed wall. Because of these factors, the architects adjusted the plans so that the major lines of any significant building are rarely straight. The most obvious adjustment is to the profile of columns, which narrow from base to top. However, the narrowing is not regular, but gently curved so that each column appears to have a slight swelling, called &quot;entasis&quot; below the middle. The &quot;entasis&quot; is never sufficiently pronounced as to make the swelling wider than the base; it is controlled by a slight reduction in the rate of decrease of diameter.
The Parthenon, the Temple to the Goddess Athena on the Acropolis in Athens, is referred to by many as the pinnacle of ancient Greek architecture. Helen Gardner refers to its &quot;unsurpassable excellence&quot;, to be surveyed, studied and emulated by architects of later ages. Yet, as Gardner points out, there is hardly a straight line in the building. Banister Fletcher calculated that the &quot;stylobate&quot; curves upward so that its centres at either end rise about above the outer corners, and on the longer sides. A slightly greater adjustment has been made to the entablature. The columns at the ends of the building are not vertical but are inclined towards the centre, with those at the corners being out of plumb by about . These outer columns are both slightly wider than their neighbours and are slightly closer than any of the others.

== Style ==
=== Orders ===
Ancient Greek architecture of the most formal type, for temples and other public buildings, is divided stylistically into three Classical orders, first described by the Roman architectural writer Vitruvius. These are: the Doric order, the Ionic order, and the Corinthian order, the names reflecting their regional origins within the Greek world. While the three orders are most easily recognizable by their capitals, they also governed the form, proportions, details and relationships of the columns, entablature, pediment, and the stylobate. The different orders were applied to the whole range of buildings and monuments.

The Doric order developed on mainland Greece and spread to Magna Graecia (Italy). It was firmly established and well-defined in its characteristics by the time of the building of the Temple of Hera at Olympia, c. 600 BC. The Ionic order co-existed with the Doric, being favoured by the Greek cities of Ionia, in Asia Minor and the Aegean Islands. It did not reach a clearly defined form until the mid 5th century BC. The early Ionic temples of Asia Minor were particularly ambitious in scale, such as the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus. The Corinthian order was a highly decorative variant not developed until the Hellenistic period and retaining many characteristics of the Ionic. It was popularised by the Romans.

==== Doric order ====
The Doric order is recognised by its capital, of which the &quot;echinus&quot; is like a circular cushion rising from the top of the column to the square &quot;abacus&quot; on which rest the lintels. The echinus appears flat and splayed in early examples, deeper and with greater curve in later, more refined examples, and smaller and straight-sided in Hellenistic examples. A refinement of the Doric column is the entasis, a gentle convex swelling to the profile of the column, which prevents an optical illusion of concavity. This is more pronounced in earlier examples.

Doric columns are almost always cut with grooves, known as &quot;fluting&quot;, which run the length of the column and are usually 20 in number, although sometimes fewer. The flutes meet at sharp edges called &quot;arrises&quot;. At the top of the columns, slightly below the narrowest point, and crossing the terminating arrises, are three horizontal grooves known as the &quot;hypotrachelion&quot;. Doric columns have no bases, until a few examples in the Hellenistic period.

The columns of an early Doric temple such as the Temple of Apollo at Syracuse, Sicily, may have a height to base diameter ratio of only 4:1 and a column height to entablature ratio of 2:1, with relatively crude details. A column height to diameter of 6:1 became more usual, while the column height to entablature ratio at the Parthenon is about 3:1. During the Hellenistic period, Doric conventions of solidity and masculinity dropped away, with the slender and unfluted columns reaching a height to diameter ratio of 7.5:1.

The Doric entablature is in three parts, the architrave, the frieze and the cornice. The architrave is composed of the stone lintels which span the space between the columns, with a joint occurring above the centre of each abacus. On this rests the frieze, one of the major areas of sculptural decoration. The frieze is divided into &quot;triglyphs&quot; and &quot;metopes&quot;, the triglyphs, as stated elsewhere in this article, are a reminder of the timber history of the architectural style. Each triglyph has three vertical grooves, similar to the columnar fluting, and below them, seemingly connected, are guttae, small strips that appear to connect the triglyphs to the architrave below. A triglyph is located above the centre of each capital, and above the centre of each lintel. However, at the corners of the building, the triglyphs do not fall over the centre the column. The ancient architects took a pragmatic approach to the apparent &quot;rules&quot;, simply extending the width of the last two metopes at each end of the building.

The cornice is a narrow jutting band of complex molding, which overhangs and protects the ornamented frieze, like the edge of an overhanging wooden-framed roof. It is decorated on the underside with projecting blocks, &quot;mutules&quot;, further suggesting the wooden nature of the prototype. At either end of the building the pediment rises from the cornice, framed by moulding of similar form.

The pediment is decorated with figures that are in relief in the earlier examples, though almost free-standing by the time of the sculpture on the Parthenon. Early architectural sculptors found difficulty in creating satisfactory sculptural compositions in the tapering triangular space. By the Early Classical period, with the decoration of the Temple of Zeus at Olympia (486–460 BC), the sculptors had solved the problem by having a standing central figure framed by rearing centaurs and fighting men who are falling, kneeling and lying in attitudes that fit the size and angle of each part of the space. The famous sculptor Phidias fills the space at the Parthenon (448–432 BC) with a complex array of draped and undraped figures of deities, who appear in attitudes of sublime relaxation and elegance.

==== Ionic order ====
The Ionic order is recognized by its voluted capital, in which a curved &quot;echinus&quot; of similar shape to that of the Doric order, but decorated with stylised ornament, is surmounted by a horizontal band that scrolls under to either side, forming spirals or &quot;volutes&quot; similar to those of the nautilus shell or ram&#x27;s horn. In plan, the capital is rectangular. It is designed to be viewed frontally but the capitals at the corners of buildings are modified with an additional scroll so as to appear regular on two adjoining faces. In the Hellenistic period, four-fronted Ionic capitals became common.

Like the Doric order, the Ionic order retains signs of having its origins in wooden architecture. The horizontal spread of a flat timber plate across the top of a column is a common device in wooden construction, giving a thin upright a wider area on which to bear the lintel, while at the same time reinforcing the load-bearing strength of the lintel itself. Likewise, the columns always have bases, a necessity in wooden architecture to spread the load and protect the base of a comparatively thin upright. The columns are fluted with narrow, shallow flutes that do not meet at a sharp edge but have a flat band or &quot;fillet&quot; between them. The usual number of flutes is twenty-four but there may be as many as forty-four. The base has two convex mouldings called &quot;torus&quot;, and from the late Hellenic period stood on a square plinth similar to the &quot;abacus&quot;.

The architrave of the Ionic order is sometimes undecorated, but more often rises in three outwardly-stepped bands like overlapping timber planks. The frieze, which runs in a continuous band, is separated from the other members by rows of small projecting blocks. They are referred to as dentils, meaning &quot;teeth&quot;, but their origin is clearly in narrow wooden slats which supported the roof of a timber structure. The Ionic order is altogether lighter in appearance than the Doric, with the columns, including base and capital, having a 9:1 ratio with the diameter, while the whole entablature was also much narrower and less heavy than the Doric entablature. There was some variation in the distribution of decoration. Formalised bands of motifs such as alternating forms known as egg-and-dart were a feature of the Ionic entablatures, along with the bands of dentils. The external frieze often contained a continuous band of figurative sculpture or ornament, but this was not always the case. Sometimes a decorative frieze occurred around the upper part of the &quot;naos&quot; rather than on the exterior of the building. These Ionic-style friezes around the &quot;naos&quot; are sometimes found on Doric buildings, notably the Parthenon. Some temples, like the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus, had friezes of figures around the lower drum of each column, separated from the fluted section by a bold moulding.

Caryatids, draped female figures used as supporting members to carry the entablature, were a feature of the Ionic order, occurring at several buildings including the Siphnian Treasury at Delphi in 525 BC and at the Erechtheion, about 410 BC.

==== Corinthian order ==== 

The Corinthian order does not have its origin in wooden architecture. It grew directly out of the Ionic in the mid 5th century BC, and was initially of much the same style and proportion, but distinguished by its more ornate capitals. The capital was very much deeper than either the Doric or the Ionic capital, being shaped like a large &quot;krater&quot;, a bell-shaped mixing bowl, and being ornamented with a double row of acanthus leaves above which rose voluted tendrils, supporting the corners of the abacus, which, no longer perfectly square, splayed above them. According to Vitruvius, the capital was invented by a bronze founder, Callimachus of Corinth, who took his inspiration from a basket of offerings that had been placed on a grave, with a flat tile on top to protect the goods. The basket had been placed on the root of an acanthus plant which had grown up around it. The ratio of the column height to diameter is generally 10:1, with the capital taking up more than 1/10 of the height. The ratio of capital height to diameter is generally about 1.16:1.

The Corinthian order was initially used internally, as at the Temple of Apollo Epicurius at Bassae (c. 450–425 BC). In 334 BC, it appeared as an external feature on the Choragic Monument of Lysicrates in Athens, and then on a huge scale at the Temple of Zeus Olympia in Athens (174 BC–132 AD). It was popularised by the Romans, who added a number of refinements and decorative details. During the Hellenistic period, Corinthian columns were sometimes built without fluting.

=== Decoration ===

==== Architectural ornament ====
Early wooden structures, particularly temples, were ornamented and in part protected by fired and painted terracotta revetments in the form of rectangular panels, and ornamental discs. Many fragments of these have outlived the buildings that they decorated and demonstrate a wealth of formal border designs of geometric scrolls, overlapping patterns and foliate motifs. With the introduction of stone-built temples, the revetments no longer served a protective purpose and sculptured decoration became more common.

The clay ornaments were limited to the roof of buildings, decorating the cornice, the corners and surmounting the pediment. At the corners of pediments they were called acroteria and along the sides of the building, antefixes. Early decorative elements were generally semi-circular, but later of roughly triangular shape with moulded ornament, often palmate. Ionic cornices were often set with a row of lion&#x27;s masks, with open mouths that ejected rainwater. From the Late Classical period, acroteria were sometimes sculptured figures (see Architectural sculpture).

In the three orders of ancient Greek architecture, the sculptural decoration, be it a simple half round astragal, a frieze of stylised foliage or the ornate sculpture of the pediment, is all essential to the architecture of which it is a part. In the Doric order, there is no variation in its placement. Reliefs never decorate walls in an arbitrary way. The sculpture is always located in several predetermined areas, the metopes and the pediment. In later Ionic architecture, there is greater diversity in the types and numbers of mouldings and decorations, particularly around doorways, where voluted brackets sometimes occur supporting an ornamental cornice over a door, such as that at the Erechtheion. A much applied narrow moulding is called &quot;bead and reel&quot; and is symmetrical, stemming from turned wooden prototypes. Wider mouldings include one with tongue-like or pointed leaf shapes, which are grooved and sometimes turned upward at the tip, and &quot;egg and dart&quot; moulding which alternates ovoid shapes with narrow pointed ones.

==== Architectural sculpture ====

Architectural sculpture showed a development from early Archaic examples through Severe Classical, High Classical, Late Classical and Hellenistic. Remnants of Archaic architectural sculpture (700–500 BC) exist from the early 6th century BC with the earliest surviving pedimental sculptures being fragments of a Gorgon flanked by heraldic panthers from the centre of the pediment of the Artemis Temple of Corfu. A metope from a temple known as &quot;Temple C&quot; at Selinus, Sicily, shows, in a better preserved state, Perseus slaying the Gorgon Medusa. Both images parallel the stylised depiction of the Gorgons on the black figure name vase decorated by the Nessos painter (c. 600 BC), with the face and shoulders turned frontally, and the legs in a running or kneeling position. At this date, images of terrifying monsters have predominance over the emphasis on the human figure that developed with Humanist philosophy.

Early pedimental sculptures, and those on smaller temples, were usually in relief, and the late free-standing ones were often in terracotta, which has survived only in fragments. The sculptures were covered with a layer of stucco and painted or, if terracotta, painted with the more restrained fired colours of Greek pottery.

The &quot;Severe Classical Style&quot; (500–450 BC) is represented by the pedimental sculptures of the Temple of Zeus at Olympia (470–456 BC). The eastern pediment shows a moment of stillness and &quot;impending drama&quot; before the beginning of a chariot race, the figures of Zeus and the competitors being severe and idealised representations of the human form. The western pediment has Apollo as the central figure, &quot;majestic&quot; and &quot;remote&quot;, presiding over a battle of Lapiths and Centaurs, in strong contrast to that of the eastern pediment for its depiction of violent action, and described by Donald E. Strong as the &quot;most powerful piece of illustration&quot; for a hundred years.
The reliefs and three-dimensional sculpture which adorned the frieze and pediments, respectively, of the Parthenon, are the lifelike products of the High Classical style (450–400 BC) and were created under the direction of the sculptor Phidias. The pedimental sculpture represents the Gods of Olympus, while the frieze shows the Panathenaic procession and ceremonial events that took place every four years to honour the titular Goddess of Athens. The frieze and remaining figures of the eastern pediment show a profound understanding of the human body, and how it varies depending upon its position and the stresses that action and emotion place upon it. Benjamin Robert Haydon described the reclining figure of Dionysus as &quot;the most heroic style of art, combined with all the essential detail of actual life&quot;.

The names of many famous sculptors are known from the Late Classical period (400–323 BC), including Timotheos, Praxiteles, Leochares and Skopas, but their works are known mainly from Roman copies. Little architectural sculpture of the period remains intact. The Temple of Asclepius at Epidauros had sculpture by Timotheos working with the architect Theodotos. Fragments of the eastern pediment survive, showing the Sack of Troy. The scene appears to have filled the space with figures carefully arranged to fit the slope and shape available, as with the earlier east pediment of the Temple of Zeus at Olympus. But the figures are more violent in action, the central space taken up, not with a commanding God, but with the dynamic figure of Neoptolemos as he seizes the aged king Priam and stabs him. The remaining fragments give the impression of a range of human emotions, fear, horror, cruelty and lust for conquest. The &quot;acroteria&quot; were sculptured by Timotheus, except for that at the centre of the east pediment which is the work of the architect. The palmate acroteria have been replaced here with small figures, the eastern pediment being surmounted by a winged Nike, poised against the wind.

Hellenistic architectural sculpture (323–31 BC) was to become more flamboyant, both in the rendering of expression and motion, which is often emphasised by flowing draperies, the Nike Samothrace which decorated a monument in the shape of a ship being a well-known example. The Pergamon Altar (c. 180–160 BC) has a frieze (120 metres long by 2.3 metres high) of figures in very high relief. The frieze represents the battle for supremacy of Gods and Titans, and employs many dramatic devices: frenzy, pathos and triumph, to convey the sense of conflict.


== See also ==

* Ancient Greek art
* Ancient Roman architecture
* Byzantine architecture
* Classical architecture
* Greek culture
* Greek technology
* List of ancient architectural records
* List of ancient Greek temples
* Modern Greek architecture
* Outline of classical architecture

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* The Foundations of Classical Architecture Part Two: Greek Classicism – Free educational program by the ICAA (published August 29, 2018)
* Joseph Woods (1828), Letters of an Architect, From France, Italy, and Greece.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q331273" start="0" end="26" title="Ancient Greek architecture" label="Ancient Greek architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="41" end="47" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="68" end="75" title="Ancient Greece" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="114" end="125" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q878481" start="131" end="145" title="Aegean Islands" label="Aegean Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="166" end="174" title="Asia Minor" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q267596" start="367" end="374" title="Ancient Greek temple" label="temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q10288" start="432" end="441" title="Parthenon" label="Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="699" end="715" title="Theatre of Ancient Greece#Characteristics of the buildings" label="open-air theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661523" start="772" end="790" title="architectural form" label="architectural form"/>
<link wikidata="Q275136" start="855" end="863" title="propylon" label="propylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q187909" start="897" end="902" title="agora" label="agora"/>
<link wikidata="Q327328" start="949" end="953" title="stoa" label="stoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q751024" start="995" end="1007" title="bouleuterion" label="bouleuterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="1064" end="1073" title="mausoleum" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q483110" start="1095" end="1102" title="stadium" label="stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q61682" start="1521" end="1537" title="Nikolaus Pevsner" label="Nikolaus Pevsner"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="1841" end="1852" title="Doric Order" label="Doric Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="1858" end="1869" title="Ionic Order" label="Ionic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="1878" end="1894" title="Corinthian Order" label="Corinthian Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q8180985" start="1929" end="1949" title="History of architecture" label="Western architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="1972" end="2000" title="Ancient Roman architecture" label="architecture of ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="2107" end="2118" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="2132" end="2142" title="Classicism" label="Classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="2332" end="2357" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513688" start="2362" end="2388" title="Greek Revival architecture" label="Greek Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="2765" end="2771" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q201272" start="2819" end="2824" title="Paros" label="Paros"/>
<link wikidata="Q188527" start="2829" end="2834" title="Naxos (island)" label="Naxos"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="5091" end="5097" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="5110" end="5119" title="Mycenaean Greece" label="Mycenaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="5225" end="5230" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q61059595" start="5277" end="5291" title="Minoan palaces" label="Minoan palaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937490" start="5363" end="5381" title="Marine Style" label="motifs of sea life"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="5430" end="5442" title="Peloponnesus" label="Peloponnesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q210443" start="5981" end="5995" title="Greek Dark Age" label="Greek Dark Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088535" start="7719" end="7735" title="chryselephantine" label="chryselephantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="7909" end="7935" title="Ancient Greek religion" label="religion of ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q80344" start="8276" end="8283" title="Mount Olympus" label="Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="8350" end="8354" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="8394" end="8398" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="8434" end="8440" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="8461" end="8469" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="8491" end="8498" title="Demeter" label="Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="8524" end="8530" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="8600" end="8607" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="8659" end="8668" title="Aphrodite" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="8687" end="8691" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="8705" end="8711" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44384" start="8749" end="8759" title="Hephaestus" label="Hephaestus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="8796" end="8804" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="9912" end="9921" title="Mycenaean Greece" label="Mycenaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="9926" end="9932" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="10081" end="10103" title="Mycenaean architecture" label="Mycenaean architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q657117" start="10293" end="10300" title="megaron" label="megaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122603" start="10516" end="10522" title="ashlar" label="ashlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738992" start="10529" end="10539" title="Orthostates" label="orthostats"/>
<link wikidata="Q657100" start="11035" end="11044" title="colonnade" label="colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324228" start="11092" end="11101" title="hypostyle" label="hypostyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661523" start="11521" end="11539" title="architectural form" label="architectural form"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284134" start="11682" end="11701" title="Lion of Knidos" label="Lion Tomb at Knidos"/>
<link wikidata="Q533820" start="11822" end="11827" title="oikos" label="oikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q185600" start="12015" end="12022" title="pronaos" label="pronaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q190996" start="12064" end="12072" title="pediment" label="pediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q725453" start="12892" end="12901" title="peristyle" label="peristyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q267596" start="13387" end="13393" title="Greek temple" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q657117" start="13532" end="13539" title="megaron" label="megaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q740625" start="13719" end="13726" title="temenos" label="temenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820111" start="13823" end="13833" title="cult image" label="cult image"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601788" start="13992" end="14007" title="votive offering" label="votive offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q131668" start="14185" end="14194" title="acropolis" label="acropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="14215" end="14224" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635722" start="14385" end="14391" title="Tholos (architecture)" label="tholoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q329967" start="14645" end="14652" title="Paestum" label="Paestum"/>
<link wikidata="Q142819" start="14657" end="14663" title="Priene" label="Priene"/>
<link wikidata="Q187909" start="14723" end="14728" title="agora" label="agora"/>
<link wikidata="Q327328" start="14782" end="14786" title="stoa" label="stoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263335" start="14812" end="14827" title="Stoa of Attalos" label="Stoa of Attalos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="14843" end="14849" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q298071" start="15006" end="15027" title="Hippodamus of Miletus" label="Hippodamus of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261" start="15040" end="15050" title="Pythagoras" label="Pythagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q275136" start="15195" end="15203" title="propylon" label="propylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407649" start="15326" end="15362" title="Propylaea (Acropolis of Athens)" label="Propylaea on the Acropolis of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q751024" start="15368" end="15380" title="bouleuterion" label="bouleuterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324228" start="15416" end="15425" title="hypostyle" label="hypostyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q729128" start="15505" end="15510" title="Boule (ancient Greece)" label="boule"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="15655" end="15662" title="theatre" label="theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q348564" start="15971" end="15976" title="Skene (theatre)" label="skênê"/>
<link wikidata="Q19762" start="16101" end="16125" title="List of ancient Greek theatres" label="number of Greek theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q233576" start="16173" end="16182" title="Epidaurus" label="Epidaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342867" start="16200" end="16223" title="Polykleitos the Younger" label="Polykleitos the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q647160" start="16269" end="16278" title="palaestra" label="palaestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q504400" start="16284" end="16293" title="gymnasium (ancient Greece)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q184949" start="16445" end="16455" title="hippodrome" label="hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16520" end="16527" title="Stadium#Antiquity" label="stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q208811" start="16642" end="16662" title="Panathinaiko Stadium" label="Panathinaiko Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="16774" end="16787" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q30327019" start="16898" end="16913" title="post and lintel" label="post and lintel"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="18298" end="18307" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146145" start="18635" end="18642" title="entasis" label="entasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193893" start="18662" end="18669" title="Capital (architecture)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q208454" start="18751" end="18757" title="Abacus (architecture)" label="abacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15126831" start="19030" end="19037" title="Fluting (architecture)" label="fluting"/>
<link wikidata="Q187459" start="19260" end="19271" title="entablature" label="entablature"/>
<link wikidata="Q190996" start="19280" end="19288" title="pediment" label="pediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q183448" start="19467" end="19477" title="architrave" label="architrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q183272" start="19703" end="19709" title="frieze" label="frieze"/>
<link wikidata="Q206285" start="19969" end="19975" title="metope" label="metope"/>
<link wikidata="Q190764" start="20043" end="20051" title="triglyph" label="triglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q328092" start="20245" end="20252" title="cornice" label="cornice"/>
<link wikidata="Q223209" start="20541" end="20549" title="tympanum (architecture)" label="tympanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q743919" start="20761" end="20770" title="crepidoma" label="crepidoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q465110" start="20855" end="20864" title="stylobate" label="stylobate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122603" start="21025" end="21031" title="ashlar" label="ashlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q827125" start="22328" end="22333" title="cella" label="cella"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661523" start="22427" end="22445" title="architectural form" label="architectural form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324228" start="22461" end="22470" title="hypostyle" label="hypostyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q268547" start="23310" end="23320" title="roof tiles" label="roof tiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090236" start="23566" end="23574" title="mudbrick" label="mudbrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q271834" start="23690" end="23714" title="Archaic period in Greece" label="Archaic period in Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="23765" end="23772" title="Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q874531" start="23809" end="23817" title="Thatching" label="thatched"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="23842" end="23848" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18385210" start="23853" end="23861" title="Temple of Isthmia" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="23999" end="24012" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="24033" end="24039" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="24049" end="24059" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="24082" end="24087" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189771" start="24536" end="24542" title="Vault (architecture)" label="Vaults"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="24547" end="24551" title="arch" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q594648" start="24723" end="24729" title="exedra" label="exedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316819" start="24734" end="24742" title="voussoir" label="voussoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12493" start="24787" end="24791" title="dome" label="dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="24874" end="24900" title="ancient Roman architecture" label="ancient Roman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123019" start="25077" end="25108" title="Temple of Olympian Zeus, Athens" label="Temple of Olympian Zeus, Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q10288" start="25531" end="25540" title="Parthenon" label="Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000309" start="25679" end="25717" title="Temple of the Olympian Zeus, Agrigento" label="Temple of the Olympian Zeus, Agrigento"/>
<link wikidata="Q465110" start="25825" end="25834" title="stylobate" label="stylobate"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135812" start="26839" end="26855" title="Distyle in antis" label="Distyle in antis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41690" start="28413" end="28424" title="Golden ratio" label="golden mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q223939" start="28546" end="28554" title="nautilus" label="nautilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10288" start="29784" end="29793" title="Parthenon" label="Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="29821" end="29827" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q131668" start="29835" end="29844" title="Acropolis" label="Acropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702331" start="29926" end="29939" title="Helen Gardner (art historian)" label="Helen Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634186" start="30135" end="30152" title="Banister Fletcher" label="Banister Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q217175" start="30788" end="30803" title="Classical order" label="Classical order"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="30856" end="30865" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="30882" end="30893" title="Doric order" label="Doric order"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="30899" end="30910" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic order"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="30920" end="30936" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian order"/>
<link wikidata="Q187459" start="31161" end="31172" title="entablature" label="entablature"/>
<link wikidata="Q190996" start="31174" end="31182" title="pediment" label="pediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q465110" start="31192" end="31201" title="stylobate" label="stylobate"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="31344" end="31357" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q633572" start="31468" end="31482" title="Temple of Hera (Olympia)" label="Temple of Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q38888" start="31486" end="31493" title="Olympia, Greece" label="Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q620874" start="31587" end="31592" title="Ionia" label="Ionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="31597" end="31607" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q878481" start="31616" end="31630" title="Aegean Islands" label="Aegean Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q43018" start="31790" end="31807" title="Temple of Artemis" label="Temple of Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47611" start="31811" end="31818" title="Ephesus" label="Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="31897" end="31908" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146145" start="32437" end="32444" title="entasis" label="entasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16833885" start="32811" end="32816" title="arris" label="arris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961431" start="32975" end="32989" title="hypotrachelion" label="hypotrachelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q619477" start="33124" end="33140" title="Temple of Apollo (Syracuse)" label="Temple of Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q187459" start="33611" end="33622" title="entablature" label="entablature"/>
<link wikidata="Q183448" start="33646" end="33656" title="architrave" label="architrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q183272" start="33662" end="33668" title="frieze" label="frieze"/>
<link wikidata="Q328092" start="33677" end="33684" title="cornice" label="cornice"/>
<link wikidata="Q871758" start="34214" end="34220" title="guttae" label="guttae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770806" start="34698" end="34705" title="Molding (decorative)" label="molding"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="35099" end="35105" title="relief" label="relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q606662" start="35178" end="35204" title="Elgin Marbles" label="sculpture on the Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q197019" start="35394" end="35408" title="Temple of Zeus, Olympia" label="Temple of Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83203" start="35525" end="35532" title="centaur" label="centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q177302" start="35675" end="35682" title="Phidias" label="Phidias"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="35880" end="35891" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic order"/>
<link wikidata="Q218626" start="35913" end="35919" title="volute" label="volute"/>
<link wikidata="Q223939" start="36184" end="36192" title="nautilus" label="nautilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q143952" start="37671" end="37677" title="dentil" label="dentil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458802" start="38174" end="38186" title="egg-and-dart" label="egg-and-dart"/>
<link wikidata="Q208120" start="38803" end="38811" title="Caryatid" label="Caryatid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754028" start="38969" end="38986" title="Siphnian Treasury" label="Siphnian Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q242741" start="39018" end="39029" title="Erechtheion" label="Erechtheion"/>
<link wikidata="Q158091" start="39502" end="39510" title="acanthus (plant)" label="acanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="39659" end="39668" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q553631" start="39716" end="39727" title="Callimachus (sculptor)" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q464923" start="40210" end="40236" title="Bassae" label="Temple of Apollo Epicurius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160691" start="40317" end="40348" title="Choragic Monument of Lysicrates" label="Choragic Monument of Lysicrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="40782" end="40792" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q421214" start="41361" end="41370" title="Acroterion" label="acroteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q571723" start="41408" end="41415" title="antefix" label="antefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476515" start="41736" end="41759" title="Architectural sculpture" label="Architectural sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263742" start="41867" end="41875" title="astragal" label="astragal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465790" start="42366" end="42374" title="Bracket (architecture)" label="brackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476515" start="42854" end="42877" title="Architectural sculpture" label="Architectural sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q109060368" start="43122" end="43142" title="pedimental sculpture" label="pedimental sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654754" start="43240" end="43263" title="Temple of Artemis (Corfu)" label="Artemis Temple of Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q130832" start="43374" end="43381" title="Perseus" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160730" start="43401" end="43407" title="Medusa" label="Medusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="43854" end="43860" title="relief" label="relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q334794" start="44599" end="44605" title="Lapith" label="Lapith"/>
<link wikidata="Q83203" start="44611" end="44618" title="Centaur" label="Centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q177302" start="45055" end="45062" title="Phidias" label="Phidias"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="45532" end="45540" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342534" start="45742" end="45751" title="Timotheus (sculptor)" label="Timotheos"/>
<link wikidata="Q105290" start="45753" end="45763" title="Praxiteles" label="Praxiteles"/>
<link wikidata="Q323430" start="45765" end="45774" title="Leochares" label="Leochares"/>
<link wikidata="Q309579" start="45779" end="45785" title="Skopas" label="Skopas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698713" start="45904" end="45936" title="Temple of Asclepius at Epidauros" label="Temple of Asclepius at Epidauros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627579" start="46057" end="46069" title="Sack of Troy" label="Sack of Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q322639" start="46382" end="46393" title="Neoptolemos" label="Neoptolemos"/>
<link wikidata="Q170473" start="46421" end="46426" title="Priam" label="Priam"/>
<link wikidata="Q165023" start="46820" end="46824" title="Nike (mythology)" label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q216402" start="47031" end="47046" title="Winged Victory of Samothrace" label="Nike Samothrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q158058" start="47129" end="47143" title="Pergamon Altar" label="Pergamon Altar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747618" start="47425" end="47442" title="Ancient Greek art" label="Ancient Greek art"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="47445" end="47471" title="Ancient Roman architecture" label="Ancient Roman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="47474" end="47496" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198718" start="47499" end="47521" title="Classical architecture" label="Classical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149548" start="47524" end="47537" title="Greek culture" label="Greek culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704909" start="47540" end="47556" title="Greek technology" label="Greek technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605839" start="47559" end="47596" title="List of ancient architectural records" label="List of ancient architectural records"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711507" start="47599" end="47628" title="List of Ancient Greek temples" label="List of ancient Greek temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888683" start="47631" end="47656" title="Modern Greek architecture" label="Modern Greek architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920566" start="47659" end="47692" title="Outline of classical architecture" label="Outline of classical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q920730" start="47931" end="47943" title="Joseph Woods (architect)" label="Joseph Woods"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52685" wikidata="Q223750" url="?curid=52685" title="Ancient Roman architecture">
<text>Ancient Roman architecture adopted the external language of classical ancient Greek architecture for the purposes of the ancient Romans, but was different from Greek buildings, becoming a new architectural style. The two styles are often considered one body of classical architecture. Roman architecture flourished in the Roman Republic and to an even greater extent under the Empire, when the great majority of surviving buildings were constructed. It used new materials, particularly Roman concrete, and newer technologies such as the arch and the dome to make buildings that were typically strong and well engineered. Large numbers remain in some form across the former empire, sometimes complete and still in use today.

Roman architecture covers the period from the establishment of the Roman Republic in 509 BC to about the 4th century AD, after which it becomes reclassified as Late Antique or Byzantine architecture. Few substantial examples survive from before about 100 BC, and most of the major survivals are from the later empire, after about 100 AD. Roman architectural style continued to influence building in the former empire for many centuries, and the style used in Western Europe beginning about 1000 is called Romanesque architecture to reflect this dependence on basic Roman forms.
The Romans only began to achieve significant originality in architecture around the beginning of the Imperial period, after they had combined aspects of their originally Etruscan architecture with others taken from Greece, including most elements of the style we now call classical architecture. They moved from trabeated construction mostly based on columns and lintels to one based on massive walls, punctuated by arches, and later domes, both of which greatly developed under the Romans. The classical orders now became largely decorative rather than structural, except in colonnades. Stylistic developments included the Tuscan and Composite orders; the first being a shortened, simplified variant on the Doric order and the Composite being a tall order with the floral decoration of the Corinthian and the scrolls of the Ionic. The period from roughly 40 BC to about 230 AD saw most of the greatest achievements, before the Crisis of the Third Century and later troubles reduced the wealth and organizing power of the central governments.

The Romans produced massive public buildings and works of civil engineering, and were responsible for significant developments in housing and public hygiene, for example their public and private baths and latrines, under-floor heating in the form of the hypocaust, mica glazing (examples in Ostia Antica), and piped hot and cold water (examples in Pompeii and Ostia).

== Overview ==
Despite the technical developments of the Romans, which took their buildings far away from the basic Greek conception where columns were needed to support heavy beams and roofs, they were reluctant to abandon the classical orders in formal public buildings, even though these had become essentially decorative. However, they did not feel entirely restricted by Greek aesthetic concerns and treated the orders with considerable freedom.

Innovation started in the 3rd or 2nd century BC with the development of Roman concrete as a readily available adjunct to, or substitute for, stone and brick. More daring buildings soon followed, with great pillars supporting broad arches and domes. The freedom of concrete also inspired the colonnade screen, a row of purely decorative columns in front of a load-bearing wall. In smaller-scale architecture, concrete&#x27;s strength freed the floor plan from rectangular cells to a more free-flowing environment.
Factors such as wealth and high population densities in cities forced the ancient Romans to discover new architectural solutions of their own. The use of vaults and arches, together with a sound knowledge of building materials, enabled them to achieve unprecedented successes in the construction of imposing infrastructure for public use. Examples include the aqueducts of Rome, the Baths of Diocletian and the Baths of Caracalla, the basilicas and Colosseum. These were reproduced at a smaller scale in the most important towns and cities in the Empire. Some surviving structures are almost complete, such as the town walls of Lugo in Hispania Tarraconensis, now northern Spain. The administrative structure and wealth of the Empire made possible very large projects even in locations remote from the main centers, as did the use of slave labor, both skilled and unskilled.

Especially under the empire, architecture often served a political function, demonstrating the power of the Roman state in general, and of specific individuals responsible for building. Roman architecture perhaps reached its peak in the reign of Hadrian, whose many achievements include rebuilding the Pantheon in its current form and leaving his mark on the landscape of northern Britain with Hadrian&#x27;s Wall.

=== Origins ===
While borrowing much from the preceding Etruscan architecture, such as the use of hydraulics and the construction of arches, Roman prestige architecture remained firmly under the spell of ancient Greek architecture and the classical orders. This came initially from Magna Graecia, the Greek colonies in southern Italy, and indirectly from Greek influence on the Etruscans, but after the Roman conquest of Greece directly from the best classical and Hellenistic examples in the Greek world. The influence is evident in many ways; for example, in the introduction and use of the triclinium in Roman villas as a place and manner of dining. Roman builders employed Greeks in many capacities, especially in the great boom in construction in the early Empire.

=== Roman architectural revolution ===

The Roman architectural revolution, also known as the &quot;concrete revolution&quot;, was the widespread use in Roman architecture of the previously little-used architectural forms of the arch, vault, and dome. For the first time in history, their potential was fully exploited in the construction of a wide range of civil engineering structures, public buildings, and military facilities. These included amphitheatres, aqueducts, baths, bridges, circuses, dams, domes, harbours, temples, and theatres. According to Gottfried Semper, Roman architecture was &quot;the idea of world domination expressed in stone&quot;.

A crucial factor in this development, which saw a trend toward monumental architecture, was the invention of Roman concrete (&quot;opus caementicium&quot;), which led to the liberation of shapes from the dictates of the traditional materials of stone and brick.

These enabled the building of the many aqueducts throughout the Roman Empire, such as the Aqueduct of Segovia, the Pont du Gard, and the eleven aqueducts of Rome. The same concepts produced numerous bridges, some of which are still in daily use, for example, the Puente Romano at Mérida in Spain, and the Pont Julien and the bridge at Vaison-la-Romaine, both in Provence, France. 

The dome permitted the construction of vaulted ceilings without crossbeams and made possible large covered public spaces such as public baths and basilicas, such as Hadrian&#x27;s Pantheon, the Baths of Diocletian and the Baths of Caracalla, all in Rome.

The Romans first adopted the arch from the Etruscans and implemented it in their own building. The use of arches that spring directly from the tops of columns was a Roman development, seen from the 1st century AD, that was very widely adopted in medieval Western, Byzantine and Islamic architecture.

=== Domes ===

The Romans were the first builders in the history of architecture to realize the potential of domes for the creation of large and well-defined interior spaces. Domes were introduced in a number of Roman building types such as temples, thermae, palaces, mausolea and later also churches. Half-domes also became a favored architectural element and were adopted as apses in Christian sacred architecture.

Monumental domes began to appear in the 1st century BC in Rome and the provinces around the Mediterranean Sea. Along with vaults, they gradually replaced the traditional post and lintel construction which makes use of the column and architrave. The construction of domes was greatly facilitated by the invention of concrete, a process which has been termed the Roman architectural revolution. Their enormous dimensions remained unsurpassed until the introduction of structural steel frames in the late 19th century (see List of the world&#x27;s largest domes).

== Influence on later architecture ==
Roman architecture supplied the basic vocabulary of Pre-Romanesque and Romanesque architecture, and spread across Christian Europe well beyond the old frontiers of the empire, to Ireland and Scandinavia for example. In the East, Byzantine architecture developed new styles of churches, but most other buildings remained very close to Late Roman forms. The same can be said in turn of Islamic architecture, where Roman forms long continued, especially in private buildings such as houses and the bathhouse, and civil engineering such as fortifications and bridges.

In Europe the Italian Renaissance saw a conscious revival of correct classical styles, initially purely based on Roman examples. Vitruvius was respectfully reinterpreted by a series of architectural writers, and the Tuscan and Composite orders formalized for the first time, to give five rather than three orders. After the flamboyance of Baroque architecture, the Neoclassical architecture of the 18th century revived purer versions of classical style, and for the first time added direct influence from the Greek world.

Numerous local classical styles developed, such as Palladian architecture, Georgian architecture and Regency architecture in the English-speaking world, Federal architecture in the United States, and later Stripped Classicism and PWA Moderne.

Roman influences may be found around us today, in banks, government buildings, great houses, and even small houses, perhaps in the form of a porch with Doric columns and a pediment or in a fireplace or a mosaic shower floor derived from a Roman original, often from Pompeii or Herculaneum. The mighty pillars, domes and arches of Rome echo in the New World too, where in Washington, D.C. stand the Capitol building, the White House, the Lincoln Memorial, and other government buildings. All across the US the seats of regional government were normally built in the grand traditions of Rome, with vast flights of stone steps sweeping up to towering pillared porticoes, with huge domes gilded or decorated inside with the same or similar themes that were popular in Rome.

In Britain, a similar enthusiasm has seen the construction of thousands of neoclassical buildings over the last five centuries, both civic and domestic, and many of the grandest country houses and mansions are purely Classical in style, an obvious example being Buckingham Palace.

== Materials ==

===Stone===
Marble is not found especially close to Rome, and was only rarely used there before Augustus, who famously boasted that he had found Rome made of brick and left it made of marble, though this was mainly as a facing for brick or concrete. The Temple of Hercules Victor of the late 2nd century BC is the earliest surviving exception in Rome. From Augustus&#x27; reign the quarries at Carrara were extensively developed for the capital, and other sources around the empire exploited, especially the prestigious Greek marbles like Parian. Travertine limestone was found much closer, around Tivoli, and was used from the end of the Republic; the Colosseum is mainly built of this stone, which has good load-bearing capacity, with a brick core. Other more or less local stones were used around the Empire.

The Romans were fond of luxury imported coloured marbles with fancy veining, and the interiors of the most important buildings were often faced with slabs of these, which have usually now been removed even where the building survives. Imports from Greece for this purpose began in the 2nd century BC.

=== Roman brick ===

The Romans made fired clay bricks from about the beginning of the Empire, replacing earlier sun-dried mudbrick. Roman brick was almost invariably of a lesser height than modern brick, but was made in a variety of different shapes and sizes. Shapes included square, rectangular, triangular and round, and the largest bricks found have measured over three feet in length. Ancient Roman bricks had a general size of 1½ Roman feet by 1 Roman foot, but common variations up to 15 inches existed. Other brick sizes in ancient Rome included 24&quot; x 12&quot; x 4&quot;, and 15&quot; x 8&quot; x 10&quot;. Ancient Roman bricks found in France measured 8&quot; x 8&quot; x 3&quot;. The Constantine Basilica in Trier is constructed from Roman bricks 15&quot; square by 1½&quot; thick. There is often little obvious difference (particularly when only fragments survive) between Roman bricks used for walls on the one hand, and tiles used for roofing or flooring on the other, so archaeologists sometimes prefer to employ the generic term ceramic building material (or CBM).

The Romans perfected brick-making during the first century of their empire and used it ubiquitously, in public and private construction alike. They took their brickmaking skills everywhere they went, introducing the craft to the local populations. The Roman legions, which operated their own kilns, introduced bricks to many parts of the Empire; bricks are often stamped with the mark of the legion that supervised their production. The use of bricks in southern and western Germany, for example, can be traced to traditions already described by the Roman architect Vitruvius. In the British Isles, the introduction of Roman brick by the ancient Romans was followed by a 600–700 year gap in major brick production.

=== Roman concrete ===

Concrete quickly supplanted brick as the primary building material, and more daring buildings soon followed, with great pillars supporting broad arches and domes rather than dense lines of columns suspending flat architraves. The freedom of concrete also inspired the colonnade screen, a row of purely decorative columns in front of a load-bearing wall. In smaller-scale architecture, concrete&#x27;s strength freed the floor plan from rectangular cells to a more free-flowing environment. Most of these developments are described by Vitruvius, writing in the first century BC in his work &quot;De architectura&quot;.

Although concrete had been used on a minor scale in Mesopotamia, Roman architects perfected Roman concrete and used it in buildings where it could stand on its own and support a great deal of weight. The first use of concrete by the Romans was in the town of Cosa sometime after 273 BC. Ancient Roman concrete was a mixture of lime mortar, aggregate, pozzolana, water, and stones, and was stronger than previously used concretes. The ancient builders placed these ingredients in wooden frames where they hardened and bonded to a facing of stones or (more frequently) bricks. The aggregates used were often much larger than in modern concrete, amounting to rubble.

When the framework was removed, the new wall was very strong, with a rough surface of bricks or stones. This surface could be smoothed and faced with an attractive stucco or thin panels of marble or other coloured stones called a &quot;revetment&quot;. Concrete construction proved to be more flexible and less costly than building solid stone buildings. The materials were readily available and not difficult to transport. The wooden frames could be used more than once, allowing builders to work quickly and efficiently. Concrete is arguably the Roman contribution most relevant to modern architecture.

== Building types ==

=== Amphitheatre ===

The amphitheatre was, with the triumphal arch and basilica, the only major new type of building developed by the Romans. Some of the most impressive secular buildings are the amphitheatres, over 200 being known and many of which are well preserved, such as that at Arles, as well as its progenitor, the Colosseum in Rome. They were used for gladiatorial contests, public displays, public meetings and bullfights, the tradition of which still survives in Spain and Portugal. Their typical shape, functions and name distinguish them from Roman theatres, which are more or less semicircular in shape; from the circuses (akin to hippodromes) whose much longer circuits were designed mainly for horse or chariot racing events; and from the smaller stadia, which were primarily designed for athletics and footraces.

The earliest Roman amphitheatres date from the middle of the first century BC, but most were built under Imperial rule, from the Augustan period (27 BC–14 AD) onwards. Imperial amphitheatres were built throughout the Roman Empire; the largest could accommodate 40,000–60,000 spectators, and the most elaborate featured multi-storeyed, arcaded façades and were elaborately decorated with marble, stucco and statuary. After the end of gladiatorial games in the 5th century and of animal killings in the 6th, most amphitheatres fell into disrepair, and their materials were mined or recycled. Some were razed, and others converted into fortifications. A few continued as convenient open meeting places; in some of these, churches were sited.

Architecturally, they are typically an example of the Roman use of the classical orders to decorate large concrete walls pierced at intervals, where the columns have nothing to support. Aesthetically, however, the formula is successful.

=== Basilica ===

The Roman basilica was a large public building where business or legal matters could be transacted. They were normally where the magistrates held court, and used for other official ceremonies, having many of the functions of the modern town hall. The first basilicas had no religious function. As early as the time of Augustus, a public basilica for transacting business had been part of any settlement that considered itself a city, used in the same way as the late medieval covered market houses of northern Europe, where the meeting room, for lack of urban space, was set above the arcades. Although their form was variable, basilicas often contained interior colonnades that divided the space, giving aisles or arcaded spaces on one or both sides, with an apse at one end (or less often at each end), where the magistrates sat, often on a slightly raised dais. The central aisle tended to be wide and was higher than the flanking aisles, so that light could penetrate through the clerestory windows.

The oldest known basilica, the Basilica Porcia, was built in Rome in 184 BC by Cato the Elder during the time he was censor. Other early examples include the basilica at Pompeii (late 2nd century BC). After Christianity became the official religion, the basilica shape was found appropriate for the first large public churches, with the attraction of avoiding reminiscences of the Greco-Roman temple form.

=== Circus ===
The Roman circus was a large open-air venue used for public events in the ancient Roman Empire. The circuses were similar to the ancient Greek hippodromes, although circuses served varying purposes and differed in design and construction. Along with theatres and amphitheatres, circuses were one of the main entertainment sites of the time. Circuses were venues for chariot racing, horse races, and performances that commemorated important events of the Empire were performed there. For events that involved re-enactments of naval battles, the circus was flooded with water.

The performance space of the Roman circus was normally, despite its name, an oblong rectangle of two linear sections of race track, separated by a median strip running along the length of about two thirds the track, joined at one end with a semicircular section and at the other end with an undivided section of track closed (in most cases) by a distinctive starting gate known as the &quot;carceres&quot;, thereby creating a circuit for the races.

=== Forum ===


During the years of the Republic, Augustus claimed he &quot;found the city in brick and left it in marble&quot;. While chances are high that this was an exaggeration, there is something to be said for the influx of marble use in Roman Forum from 63 BC onwards. During Augustus&#x27; reign, the Forum was described to have been &quot;a larger, freer space than was the Forum of Imperial times.&quot; The Forum began to take on even more changes upon the arrival of Julius Caesar, who drew out extensive plans for the market hub. While Caesar&#x27;s death came prematurely, his ideas, as well as Augustus&#x27; in regards to the Forum proved to be the most influential for years to come. According to Walter Dennison&#x27;s &quot;The Roman Forum As Cicero Saw It&quot;, the author writes that &quot;the diverting of public business to the larger and splendid Imperial fora erected in the vicinity resulted in leaving the general design of the Forum Romanum&quot;.

Every city had at least one forum of varying size. In addition to its standard function as a marketplace, a forum was a gathering place of great social significance, and often the scene of diverse activities, including political discussions and debates, rendezvous, meetings, etc. The best known example is the Roman Forum, the earliest of several in Rome. In new Roman towns the forum was usually located at, or just off, the intersection of the main north–south and east–west streets (the cardo and decumanus). All forums would have a Temple of Jupiter at the north end, and would also contain other temples, as well as the basilica; a public weights and measures table, so customers at the market could ensure they were not being sold short measures; and would often have the baths nearby.

=== Horreum ===

A horreum was a type of public warehouse used during the ancient Roman period. Although the Latin term is often used to refer to granaries, Roman horrea were used to store many other types of consumables; the giant Horrea Galbae in Rome were used not only to store grain but also olive oil, wine, foodstuffs, clothing and even marble. By the end of the Imperial period, the city of Rome had nearly 300 horrea to supply its demands. The biggest were enormous, even by modern standards; the Horrea Galbae contained 140 rooms on the ground floor alone, covering an area of some .

The first horrea were built in Rome towards the end of the 2nd century BC, with the first known public horreum being constructed by the ill-fated tribune Gaius Gracchus in 123 BC. The word came to be applied to any place designated for the preservation of goods; thus, it was often used to refer to cellars (&quot;horrea subterranea&quot;), but it could also be applied to a place where artworks were stored, or even to a library. Some public horrea functioned somewhat like banks, where valuables could be stored, but the most important class of horrea were those where foodstuffs such as grain and olive oil were stored and distributed by the state.

The word itself is thought to have linguist roots tied to the word &quot;hordeum&quot;, which in Latin means barley. In the Johns Hopkins University Press, The Classical Weekly states that &quot;Pliny the Elder does indeed make a distinction between the two words. He describes the horreum as a structure made of brick, the walls of which were not less than three feet thick; it had no windows or openings for ventilation&quot;. Furthermore, the storehouses would also host oil and wine and also use large jars that could serve as cache&#x27;s for large amounts of products. These storehouses were also used to keep large sums of money and were used much like personal storage units today are. &quot;These horrea were divided and subdivided, so that one could hire only so much space as one wanted, a whole room (cella), a closet (armarium), or only a chest or strong box (arca, arcula, locus, loculus).&quot;

=== Insula ===

Multi-story apartment blocks called &quot;insulae&quot; catered to a range of residential needs. The cheapest rooms were at the top owing to the inability to escape in the event of a fire and the lack of piped water. Windows were mostly small, facing the street, with iron security bars. &quot;Insulae&quot; were often dangerous, unhealthy, and prone to fires because of overcrowding and haphazard cooking arrangements. There are examples in the Roman port town of Ostia, that date to the reign of Trajan, but they seem to have been found mainly in Rome and a few other places. Elsewhere writers report them as something remarkable, but Livy and Vitruvius refer to them in Rome. External walls were in &quot;opus reticulatum&quot; and interiors in &quot;opus incertum&quot;, which would then be plastered and sometimes painted.

To lighten up the small dark rooms, some tenants able to afford a degree of painted colourful murals on the walls. Examples have been found of jungle scenes with wild animals and exotic plants. Imitation windows (&quot;trompe-l&#x27;œil&quot;) were sometimes painted to make the rooms seem less confined.

Ancient Rome had elaborate and luxurious houses owned by the elite. The average house, or in cities apartment, of a commoner or plebeius did not contain many luxuries. The &quot;domus&quot;, or single-family residence, was only for the well-off in Rome, with most having a layout of the closed unit, consisting of one or two rooms. Between 312 and 315 AD Rome had 1781 &quot;domus&quot; and 44,850 of &quot;insulae&quot;.

&quot;Insulae&quot; have been the subject of debate for historians of Roman culture, defining the various meanings of the word. &quot;Insula&quot; was a word used to describe apartment buildings, or the apartments themselves, meaning apartment, or inhabitable room, demonstrating just how small apartments for plebeians were. Urban divisions were originally street blocks, and later began to divide into smaller divisions, the word &quot;insula&quot; referring to both blocks and smaller divisions. The &quot;insula&quot; contained &quot;cenacula&quot;, &quot;tabernae&quot;, storage rooms under the stairs, and lower floor shops. Another type of housing unit for plebs was a &quot;cenaculum&quot;, an apartment, divided into three individual rooms: &quot;cubiculum&quot;, &quot;exedra&quot;, and &quot;medianum&quot;. Common Roman apartments were mainly masses of smaller and larger structures, many with narrow balconies that present mysteries as to their use, having no doors to access them, and they lacked the excessive decoration and display of wealth that aristocrats&#x27; houses contained. Luxury in houses was not common, as the life of the average person did not consist of being in their houses, as they instead would go to public baths, and engage in other communal activities.

=== Lighthouses ===
Many lighthouses were built around the Mediterranean and the coasts of the empire, including the Tower of Hercules at A Coruña in northern Spain, a structure which survives to this day. A smaller lighthouse at Dover, England also exists as a ruin about half the height of the original. The light would have been provided by a fire at the top of the structure.

=== Thermae ===

All Roman cities had at least one &quot;thermae&quot;, a popular facility for public bathing, exercising and socializing. Exercise might include wrestling and weightlifting, as well as swimming. Bathing was an important part of the Roman day, where some hours might be spent, at a very low cost subsidized by the government. Wealthier Romans were often accompanied by one or more slaves, who performed any required tasks such as fetching refreshment, guarding valuables, providing towels, and at the end of the session, applying olive oil to their masters&#x27; bodies, which was then scraped off with a strigil, a scraper made of wood or bone.

Roman bath-houses were also provided for private villas, town houses and forts. They were normally supplied with water from an adjacent river or stream, or by aqueduct. The design of &quot;thermae&quot; is discussed by Vitruvius in &quot;De architectura&quot;.

=== Temples ===

Roman temples were among the most important and richest buildings in Roman culture, though only a few survive in any sort of complete state. Their construction and maintenance was a major part of ancient Roman religion, and all towns of any importance had at least one main temple, as well as smaller shrines. The main room &quot;(cella)&quot; housed the cult image of the deity to whom the temple was dedicated, and often a small altar for incense or libations. Behind the &quot;cella&quot; was a room or rooms used by temple attendants for storage of equipment and offerings.

Remains of many Roman temples survive, above all in Rome itself, but the relatively few near-complete examples were nearly all converted to Christian churches, usually a considerable time after the initial triumph of Christianity under Constantine. The decline of Roman religion was relatively slow, and the temples themselves were not appropriated by the government until a decree of the Emperor Honorius in 415. Some of the oldest surviving temples include the Temple of Hercules Victor (mid 2nd century BC) and Temple of Portunus (120–80 BC), both standing within the Forum Boarium. Original marble columns of the Temple of Janus in Rome&#x27;s Forum Holitorium, dedicated by Gaius Duilius after his naval victory at the Battle of Mylae in 260 BC, still stand as a component of the exterior wall of the Renaissance era church of San Nicola in Carcere.

The form of the Roman temple was mainly derived from the Etruscan model, but using Greek styles. Roman temples emphasised the front of the building, which followed Greek temple models and typically consisted of wide steps leading to a portico with columns, a pronaos, and usually a triangular pediment above, which was filled with statuary in the most grand examples; this was as often in terracotta as stone, and no examples have survived except as fragments. However, unlike the Greek models, which generally gave equal treatment to all sides of the temple, which could be viewed and approached from all directions, the sides and rear of Roman temples might be largely undecorated (as in the Pantheon, Rome and temple of Vic), inaccessible by steps (as in the &quot;Maison carrée&quot; and Vic), and even back on to other buildings. As in the &quot;Maison carrée&quot;, columns at the side might be engaged columns, emerging from (&quot;engaged with&quot; in architectural terminology) the wall. The platform on which the temple sat was typically raised higher in Roman examples than Greek, with up ten or twelve or more steps rather than the three typical in Greek temples; the Temple of Claudius was raised twenty steps. These steps were normally only at the front, and typically not the whole width of that.

The Greek classical orders in all their details were closely followed in the façades of temples, as in other prestigious buildings. However, the idealized proportions between the different elements set out by the only significant Roman writer on architecture to survive, Vitruvius, and subsequent Italian Renaissance writers, do not reflect actual Roman practice, which could be very variable, though always aiming at balance and harmony. Following a Hellenistic trend, the Corinthian order and its variant the Composite order were most common in surviving Roman temples, but for small temples like that at Alcántara, a simple Tuscan order could be used.

There was considerable local variation in style, as Roman architects often tried to incorporate elements the population expected in its sacred architecture. This was especially the case in Egypt and the Near East, where different traditions of large stone temples were already millennia old. The Romano-Celtic temple was a simple style for small temples found in the Western Empire, and by far the most common type in Roman Britain. It often lacked any of the distinctive classical features, and may have had considerable continuity with pre-Roman temples of the Celtic religion.

=== Theatres ===
Roman theatres were built in all areas of the Empire, from Spain to the Middle East. Because of the Romans&#x27; ability to influence local architecture, numerous theatres were built around the world with uniquely Roman attributes.

These buildings were semi-circular and possessed certain inherent architectural structures, with minor differences depending on the region in which they were constructed. The &quot;scaenae frons&quot; was a high back wall of the stage floor, supported by columns. The &quot;proscaenium&quot; was a wall that supported the front edge of the stage with ornately decorated niches to the sides. The Hellenistic influence is seen through the use of the &quot;proscaenium&quot;. The Roman theatre also had a &quot;podium&quot;, which sometimes supported the columns of the &quot;scaenae frons&quot;. The &quot;scaenae&quot; was originally not part of the building itself, constructed only to provide sufficient background for the actors. Eventually, it became a part of the edifice itself, made out of concrete. The theatre itself was divided into the stage (orchestra) and the seating section (auditorium). &quot;Vomitoria&quot; or entrances and exits were made available to the audience.

=== Villa ===

A Roman villa was a country house built for the upper class, while a &quot;domus&quot; was a wealthy family&#x27;s house in a town. The Empire contained many kinds of villas, not all of them lavishly appointed with mosaic floors and frescoes. In the provinces, any country house with some decorative features in the Roman style may be called a &quot;villa&quot; by modern scholars. Some, like Hadrian&#x27;s Villa at Tivoli, were pleasure palaces such as those that were situated in the cool hills within easy reach of Rome or, like the Villa of the Papyri at Herculaneum, on picturesque sites overlooking the Bay of Naples. Some villas were more like the country houses of England, the visible seat of power of a local magnate, such as the famous palace rediscovered at Fishbourne in Sussex.

Suburban villas on the edge of cities were also known, such as the Middle and Late Republican villas that encroached on the Campus Martius, at that time on the edge of Rome, and which can be also seen outside the city walls of Pompeii, including the Villa of the Mysteries, known for its frescos. These early suburban villas, such as the one at Rome&#x27;s Auditorium site or at Grottarossa in Rome, demonstrate the antiquity and heritage of the &quot;villa suburbana&quot; in Central Italy. It is possible that these early, suburban villas were also in fact the seats of power (maybe even palaces) of regional strongmen or heads of important families (&quot;gentes&quot;).

A third type of villa provided the organizational center of the large farming estates called &quot;latifundia&quot;; such villas might be lacking in luxuries. By the 4th century, &quot;villa&quot; could simply mean an agricultural estate or holding: Jerome translated the Gospel of Mark (xiv, 32) &quot;chorion&quot;, describing the olive grove of Gethsemane, with &quot;villa&quot;, without an inference that there were any dwellings there (&quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot; &quot;Gethsemane&quot;).

With the colossal Diocletian&#x27;s Palace, built in the countryside but later turned into a fortified city, a form of residential castle emerges, that anticipates the Middle Ages.

=== Watermills ===

The initial invention of the watermill appears to have occurred in the Hellenized eastern Mediterranean in the wake of the conquests of Alexander the Great and the rise of Hellenistic science and technology. In the subsequent Roman era, the use of water-power was diversified and different types of watermills were introduced. These include all three variants of the vertical water wheel as well as the horizontal water wheel. Apart from its main use in grinding flour, water-power was also applied to pounding grain, crushing ore, sawing stones and possibly fulling and bellows for iron furnaces.

== Decorative structures ==

=== Monoliths ===

In architecture, a monolith is a structure which has been excavated as a unit from a surrounding matrix or outcropping of rock. Monoliths are found in all types of Roman buildings. They were either: quarried without being moved; or quarried and moved; or quarried, moved and lifted clear off the ground into their position (e.g., architraves); or quarried, moved and erected in an upright position (e.g., columns).

Transporting was done by land or water (or a combination of both), in the later case often by special-built ships such as obelisk carriers. For lifting operations, ancient cranes were employed since c. 515 BC, such as in the construction of Trajan&#x27;s Column.

=== Obelisks ===

An obelisk is a tall, four-sided, narrow tapering monument which ends in a pyramid-like shape at the top. These were originally called &quot;tekhenu&quot; by the builders, the ancient Egyptians. The Greeks who saw them used the Greek &#x27;obeliskos&#x27; to describe them, and this word passed into Latin and then English. The Romans commissioned obelisks in an ancient Egyptian style. Examples include:
*Arles, France – the Arles Obelisk, in &quot;Place de la République&quot;, a 4th-century obelisk of Roman origin
*Benevento, Italy – three Roman obelisks
*Munich – obelisk of Titus Sextius Africanus, Staatliches Museum Ägyptischer Kunst, Kunstareal, 1st century AD, 5.80 m
*Rome – there are five ancient Roman obelisks in Rome.

=== Roman gardens ===

Roman gardens were influenced by Egyptian, Persian, and Greek gardening techniques. In Ancient Latium, a garden was part of every farm. According to Cato the Elder, every garden should be close to the house and should have flower beds and ornamental trees. Horace wrote that during his time flower gardens became a national indulgence.

Gardens were not reserved for the extremely wealthy. Excavations in Pompeii show that gardens attaching to residences were scaled down to meet the space constraints of the home of the average Roman. Modified versions of Roman garden designs were adopted in Roman settlements in Africa, Gaul, and Britannia. As town houses were replaced by tall &quot;insulae&quot; (apartment buildings), these urban gardens were replaced by window boxes or roof gardens.

=== Triumphal arches ===
A triumphal arch is a monumental structure in the shape of an archway with one or more arched passageways, often designed to span a road. The origins of the Roman triumphal arch are unclear, other than in the temporary structures, whose appearance is unknown, erected for Roman triumphs under the Roman Republic, and later. There were precursors to the permanent triumphal arch within the Roman world; in Italy, the Etruscans used elaborately decorated single bay arches as gates or portals to their cities. Surviving examples of Etruscan arches can still be seen at Perugia and Volterra. The two key elements of the triumphal arch – a round-topped arch and a square entablature – had long been in use as separate architectural elements in ancient Greece.

The innovation of the Romans was to use these elements in a single free-standing structure. The columns became purely decorative elements on the outer face of the arch, while the entablature, liberated from its role as a building support, became the frame for the civic and religious messages that the arch builders wished to convey. Little is known about how the Romans viewed triumphal arches. Pliny the Elder, writing in the first century AD, was the only ancient author to discuss them. He wrote that they were intended to &quot;elevate above the ordinary world&quot; an image of an honoured person usually depicted in the form of a statue with a quadriga.

The first recorded Roman triumphal arches were set up in the time of the Roman Republic. Generals who were granted a triumph were termed &quot;triumphators&quot; and would erect &quot;fornices&quot; or honorific arches bearing statues to commemorate their victories.
Roman triumphal practices changed significantly at the start of the Imperial period, when the first Roman Emperor Augustus decreed that only emperors would be granted triumphs. The triumphal arch changed from being a personal monument to being an essentially propagandistic one, serving to announce and promote the presence of the ruler and the laws of the state. Arches were not necessarily built as entrances, but – unlike many modern triumphal arches – they were often erected across roads and were intended to be passed through, not round.

Most Roman triumphal arches were built during the Imperial period. By the fourth century AD there were 36 such arches in Rome, of which three have survived – the Arch of Titus (AD 81), the Arch of Septimius Severus (203–205) and the Arch of Constantine (312). Numerous arches were built elsewhere in the Roman Empire. The single arch was the most common, but many triple arches were also built, of which the Triumphal Arch of Orange (c. AD 21) is the earliest surviving example. From the 2nd century AD, many examples of the &quot;arcus quadrifrons&quot; – a square triumphal arch erected over a crossroads, with arched openings on all four sides – were built, especially in North Africa. Arch-building in Rome and Italy diminished after the time of Trajan (AD 98–117) but remained widespread in the provinces during the 2nd and 3rd centuries AD; they were often erected to commemorate imperial visits.

The ornamentation of an arch was intended to serve as a constant visual reminder of the triumph and &quot;triumphator&quot;. The façade was ornamented with marble columns, and the piers and attics with decorative cornices. Sculpted panels depicted victories and achievements, the deeds of the &quot;triumphator&quot;, the captured weapons of the enemy or the triumphal procession itself. The spandrels usually depicted flying Victories, while the attic was often inscribed with a dedicatory inscription naming and praising the &quot;triumphator&quot;. The piers and internal passageways were also decorated with reliefs and free-standing sculptures. The vault was ornamented with coffers. Some triumphal arches were surmounted by a statue or a &quot;currus triumphalis&quot;, a group of statues depicting the emperor or general in a quadriga.

Inscriptions on Roman triumphal arches were works of art in themselves, with very finely cut, sometimes gilded letters. The form of each letter and the spacing between them was carefully designed for maximum clarity and simplicity, without any decorative flourishes, emphasizing the Roman taste for restraint and order. This conception of what later became the art of typography remains of fundamental importance to the present day.

=== Victory columns ===
== Infrastructure ==

=== Roads ===
Roman roads were vital to the maintenance and development of the Roman state, and were built from about 500 BC through the expansion and consolidation of the Roman Republic and the Roman Empire. They provided efficient means for the overland movement of armies, officials and civilians, and the inland carriage of official communications and trade goods. At the peak of Rome&#x27;s development, no fewer than 29 great military highways radiated from the capital, and the Late Empire&#x27;s 113 provinces were interconnected by 372 great road links.
Roman road builders aimed at a regulation width (see Laws and standards above), but actual widths have been measured at between and more than . Today, the concrete has worn from the spaces around the stones, giving the impression of a very bumpy road, but the original practice was to produce a surface that was much closer to being flat.

=== Aqueduct ===

The Romans constructed numerous aqueducts in order to bring water from distant sources into their cities and towns, supplying public baths, latrines, fountains and private households. Waste water was removed by complex sewage systems and released into nearby bodies of water, keeping the towns clean and free from effluent. Aqueducts also provided water for mining operations, milling, farms and gardens.

Aqueducts moved water through gravity alone, being constructed along a slight downward gradient within conduits of stone, brick or concrete. Most were buried beneath the ground, and followed its contours; obstructing peaks were circumvented or, less often, tunnelled through. Where valleys or lowlands intervened, the conduit was carried on bridgework, or its contents fed into high-pressure lead, ceramic or stone pipes and siphoned across. Most aqueduct systems included sedimentation tanks, sluices and distribution tanks to regulate the supply as needed.

Ancient Rome&#x27;s first aqueduct – the Aqua Appia – supplied a water-fountain sited at the city&#x27;s cattle market in the fourth century BC. By the third century AD, the city had eleven aqueducts, sustaining a population of over a million people in a water-extravagant economy; most of the water supplied the city&#x27;s many public baths. Cities and municipalities throughout the Roman Empire emulated this model and funded aqueducts as objects of public interest and civic pride, &quot;an expensive yet necessary luxury to which all could, and did, aspire.&quot;

Most Roman aqueducts proved reliable, and durable; some were maintained into the early modern era, and a few are still partly in use. Methods of aqueduct surveying and construction are noted by Vitruvius in his work &quot;De architectura&quot; (1st century BC). The general Frontinus gives more detail in his official report on the problems, uses and abuses of Imperial Rome&#x27;s public water supply. Notable examples of aqueduct architecture include the supporting piers of the Aqueduct of Segovia, and the aqueduct-fed cisterns of Constantinople.

=== Bridges ===

Roman bridges, built by ancient Romans, were the first large and lasting bridges built. Roman bridges were built with stone and had the arch as the basic structure. Most used concrete as well, which the Romans were the first to use for bridges.

Roman arch bridges were usually semicircular, although a few were segmental (such as Alconétar Bridge). A segmental arch is an arch that is less than a semicircle. The advantages of the segmental arch bridge were that it allowed great amounts of flood water to pass under it, which would prevent the bridge from being swept away during floods and the bridge itself could be more lightweight. Generally, Roman bridges featured wedge-shaped primary arch stones (voussoirs) of the same in size and shape. The Romans built both single spans and lengthy multiple arch aqueducts, such as the Pont du Gard and Segovia Aqueduct. Their bridges featured from an early time onwards flood openings in the piers, e.g. in the Pons Fabricius in Rome (62 BC), one of the world&#x27;s oldest major bridges still standing. Roman engineers were the first and until the Industrial Revolution the only ones to construct bridges with concrete, which they called &quot;opus caementicium&quot;. The outside was usually covered with brick or ashlar, as in the Alcántara bridge.

The Romans also introduced segmental arch bridges into bridge construction. The 330 m long Limyra Bridge in southwestern Turkey features 26 segmental arches with an average span-to-rise ratio of 5.3:1, giving the bridge an unusually flat profile unsurpassed for more than a millennium. Trajan&#x27;s bridge over the Danube featured open-spandrel segmental arches made of wood (standing on 40 m high concrete piers). This was to be the longest arch bridge for a thousand years both in terms of overall and individual span length, while the longest extant Roman bridge is the 790 m long Puente Romano at Mérida.

=== Canals ===

Roman canals were typically multi-purpose structures, intended for irrigation, drainage, land reclamation, flood control and navigation where feasible. Some navigational canals were recorded by ancient geographers and are still traceable by modern archaeology. Channels which served the needs of urban water supply are covered at the List of aqueducts in the Roman Empire.

=== Cisterns ===
Freshwater reservoirs were commonly set up at the termini of aqueducts and their branch lines, supplying urban households, agricultural estates, imperial palaces, &quot;thermae&quot; or naval bases of the Roman navy.

=== Dams ===

Roman dam construction began in earnest in the early imperial period. For the most part, it concentrated on the semi-arid fringe of the empire, namely the provinces of North Africa, the Near East, and Hispania. The relative abundance of Spanish dams below is due partly to more intensive field work there; for Italy only the Subiaco Dams, created by emperor Nero (54–68 AD) for recreational purposes, are attested. These dams are noteworthy, though, for their extraordinary height, which remained unsurpassed anywhere in the world until the Late Middle Ages.

The most frequent dam types were earth- or rock-filled embankment dams and masonry gravity dams. These served a wide array of purposes, such as irrigation, flood control, river diversion, soil-retention, or a combination of these functions. The impermeability of Roman dams was increased by the introduction of waterproof hydraulic mortar and especially &quot;opus caementicium&quot; in the Concrete Revolution. These materials also allowed for bigger structures to be built, like the Lake Homs Dam, possibly the largest water barrier today, and the sturdy Harbaqa Dam, both of which consist of a concrete core.

Roman builders were the first to realize the stabilizing effect of arches and buttresses, which they integrated into their dam designs. Previously unknown dam types introduced by the Romans include arch-gravity dams, arch dams, buttress dams, and multiple-arch buttress dams.

===Defensive walls===
The Romans generally fortified cities rather than fortresses, but there are some fortified camps such as the Saxon Shore forts like Porchester Castle in England. City walls were already significant in Etruscan architecture, and in the struggle for control of Italy under the early Republic many more were built, using different techniques. These included tightly fitting massive irregular polygonal blocks, shaped to fit exactly in a way reminiscent of later Inca work. The Romans called a simple rampart wall an agger; at this date great height was not necessary. The Servian Wall around Rome was an ambitious project of the early 4th century BC. The wall was up to in height in places, wide at its base, long, and is believed to have had 16 main gates, though many of these are mentioned only from writings, with no other known remains. Some of it had a &quot;fossa&quot; or ditch in front, and an agger behind, and it was enough to deter Hannibal. Later the Aurelian Wall replaced it, enclosing an expanded city, and using more sophisticated designs, with small forts at intervals.

The Romans walled major cities and towns in areas they saw as vulnerable, and parts of many walls remain incorporated in later defensive fortifications, as at Córdoba (2nd century BC), Chester (earth and wood in the 70s AD, stone from ), and York (from 70s AD). Strategic walls across open country were far rarer, and Hadrian&#x27;s Wall (from 122) and the Antonine Wall (from 142, abandoned only 8 years after completion) are the most significant examples, both on the Pictish frontier of Roman Britain.

== Architectural features ==

=== Mosaics ===
On his return from campaigns in Greece, the general Sulla brought back what is probably the best-known element of the early imperial period: the mosaic, a decoration made of colourful chips of stone inserted into cement. This tiling method took the empire by storm in the late first century and the second century and in the Roman home joined the well-known mural in decorating floors, walls, and grottoes with geometric and pictorial designs.

There were two main techniques in Greco-Roman mosaic. &quot;Opus vermiculatum&quot; used tiny &quot;tesserae&quot;, typically cubes of 4 millimeters or less, and was produced in workshops in relatively small panels, which were transported to the site glued to some temporary support. The tiny &quot;tesserae&quot; allowed very fine detail and an approach to the illusionism of painting. Often small panels called &quot;emblemata&quot; were inserted into walls or as the highlights of larger floor-mosaics in coarser work. The normal technique, however, was &quot;opus tessellatum&quot;, using larger tesserae, which were laid on site. There was a distinct native Italian style using black on a white background, which was no doubt cheaper than fully coloured work.

A specific genre of Roman mosaic obtained the name &quot;asaroton&quot; (Greek &quot;unswept floor&quot;). It represented an optical illusion of the leftovers from a feast on the floor of rich houses.

=== Hypocaust ===

A hypocaust was an ancient Roman system of underfloor heating, used to heat buildings with hot air. The Roman architect Vitruvius, writing about the end of the 1st century BC, attributes their invention to Sergius Orata. Many remains of Roman hypocausts have survived throughout Europe, western Asia, and northern Africa. The hypocaust was an invention which improved the hygiene and living conditions of citizens, and was a forerunner of modern central heating.

Hypocausts were used for heating hot baths (&quot;thermae&quot;), houses and other buildings, whether public or private. The floor was raised above the ground by pillars, called pilae stacks, with a layer of tiles, then a layer of concrete, then another of tiles on top; and spaces were left inside the walls so that hot air and smoke from the furnace would pass through these enclosed areas and out of flues in the roof, thereby heating but not polluting the interior of the room.

=== Roman roofs ===

In Magna Graecia truss roofs presumably appeared as early as 550 BC. Their potential was fully realized in the Roman period, which saw trussed roofs over 30 meters wide spanning the rectangular spaces of monumental public buildings such as temples, basilicas, and later churches. Such spans were three times as wide as the widest prop-and-lintel roofs and only surpassed by the largest Roman domes.

The largest truss roof by span of ancient Rome covered the Aula Regia (throne room) built for emperor Domitian (81–96 AD) on the Palatine Hill, Rome. The timber truss roof had a width of 31.67 m, slightly surpassing the postulated limit of 30 m for Roman roof constructions. Tie-beam trusses allowed for much larger spans than the older prop-and-lintel system and even concrete vaulting. Nine out of the ten largest rectangular spaces in Roman architecture were bridged this way, the only exception being the groin vaulted Basilica of Maxentius.

=== Spiral stairs ===

The spiral stair is a type of stairway which, due to its complex helical structure, was introduced relatively late into architecture. Although the oldest example dates to the 5th century BC, it was only in the wake of the influential design of Trajan&#x27;s Column that this space-saving new type permanently caught hold in Roman architecture.

Apart from the triumphal columns in the imperial cities of Rome and Constantinople, other types of buildings such as temples, thermae, basilicas and tombs were also fitted with spiral stairways. Their notable absence in the towers of the Aurelian Wall indicates that although used in medieval castles, they did not yet figure prominently in Roman military engineering. By late antiquity, separate stair towers were constructed adjacent to the main buildings, as in the Basilica of San Vitale.

The construction of spiral stairs passed on both to Christian and Islamic architecture.

== City design ==

The ancient Romans employed regular orthogonal structures on which they molded their colonies. They probably were inspired by Greek and Hellenic examples, as well as by regularly planned cities that were built by the Etruscans in Italy. (see Marzabotto)

The Romans used a consolidated scheme for city planning, developed for military defense and civil convenience. The basic plan consisted of a central forum with city services, surrounded by a compact, rectilinear grid of streets, and wrapped in a wall for defense. To reduce travel times, two diagonal streets crossed the square grid, passing through the central square. A river usually flowed through the city, providing water, transport, and sewage disposal. Hundreds of towns and cities were built by the Romans throughout their Empire.
Many European towns, such as Turin, preserve the remains of these schemes, which show the very logical way the Romans designed their cities. They would lay out the streets at right angles, in the form of a square grid. All roads were equal in width and length, except for two, which were slightly wider than the others. One of these ran east–west, the other, north–south, and they intersected in the middle to form the center of the grid. All roads were made of carefully fitted flagstones and filled in with smaller, hard-packed rocks and pebbles. Bridges were constructed where needed. Each square marked off by four roads was called an &quot;insula,&quot; the Roman equivalent of a modern city block. 
Each &quot;insula&quot; was square, with the land within it divided. As the city developed, each &quot;insula&quot; would eventually be filled with buildings of various shapes and sizes and crisscrossed with back roads and alleys. Most &quot;insulae&quot; were given to the first settlers of a Roman city, but each person had to pay to construct his own house.

The city was surrounded by a wall to protect it from invaders and to mark the city limits. Areas outside city limits were left open as farmland. At the end of each main road was a large gateway with watchtowers. A portcullis covered the opening when the city was under siege, and additional watchtowers were constructed along the city walls. An aqueduct was built outside the city walls.

The development of Greek and Roman urbanization is well-known, as there are relatively many written sources, and there has been much attention to the subject, since the Romans and Greeks are generally regarded as the main ancestors of modern Western culture. It should not be forgotten, though, that the Etruscans had many considerable towns and there were also other cultures with more or less urban settlements in Europe, primarily of Celtic origin.

== Significant buildings and areas ==


=== Public buildings ===
* Baths of Trajan – these were a massive &quot;thermae&quot;, a bathing and leisure complex, built in ancient Rome starting from 104 AD and dedicated during the &quot;Kalends&quot; of July in 109.
* Baths of Diocletian – in ancient Rome, these were the grandest of the public baths (thermae), built by successive emperors
* Baths of Caracalla
* Colosseum
* Trajan&#x27;s Column, in Rome
* Circus Maximus, in Rome
* Curia Hostilia (Senate House), in Rome
* Domus Aurea (former building)
* Forum of Augustus
* Hadrian&#x27;s Villa
* Pantheon
* Tower of Hercules
* Tropaeum Traiani
* Verona Arena, in Verona
* Rotunda Church of St. George, Serdika, Sofia, Bulgaria
* Roman theatre of Philippopolis, Plovdiv, Bulgaria
* Roman Stadium, Philippopolis, Plovdiv, Bulgaria
* Roman baths, Odessos, Varna, Bulgaria
* Roman city walls of Diocletianopolis (Thrace), Hisarya, Bulgaria
* Roman tomb, Primorsko, Bulgaria
* Tholos

=== Private architecture ===
* Alyscamps – a necropolis in Arles, France, one of the most famous necropolises of the ancient world
* Domus
* Catacombs of Rome
* Roman villa
** Villa rustica
* Pompeii
* Herculaneum
* Stabiae
=== Civil engineering ===
* Roman engineering – Romans are famous for their advanced engineering accomplishments, although some of their own inventions were improvements on older ideas, concepts and inventions.
* Roman watermill

=== Military engineering ===
* Castrum
* Antonine Wall
* Hadrian&#x27;s Wall
* Limes Germanicus

== See also ==

* Outline of ancient Rome
* Outline of architecture
* Ancient Greek architecture
* Architecture of Mesopotamia
* Achaemenid architecture
* Roman technology
* Agriculture in ancient Rome

== References ==

=== Footnotes ===
=== Works cited ===
*
*
* 
*
*
*Favro, Diane, et al. &quot;Rome, ancient, Architecture.&quot; Grove Art Online. Oxford Art Online. Oxford University Press, accessed 26 March 2016, subscription required 
*
*
*
*Henig, Martin (ed), &quot;A Handbook of Roman Art&quot;, Chapter 2 &quot;Architecture&quot; by Thomas Blagg, Phaidon, 1983, 
*
*
*
*
*
*Lawrence, A. W., &quot;Greek Architecture&quot;, 1957, Penguin, Pelican history of art
*
* 
*
* 
*
*
*
* 
*
*
*Semper, Gottfried, &quot;Style in the technical and tectonic arts, or, Practical aesthetics&quot;, 2004 translation of &quot;Der Stil in der technischen und tektonischen Künsten&quot; (1860-62), Getty Research Institute, ISBN 9780892365975, google books
* 
*
*
*Summerson, John, &quot;The Classical Language of Architecture&quot;, 1980 edition, Thames and Hudson &quot;World of Art&quot; series, 
* 
*
*
*
*
*Yarwood, Doreen, &quot;The Architecture of Europe&quot;, 1987 (first edn. 1974), Spring Books, 


== Further reading ==
*Adam, Jean Pierre. &quot;Roman Building: Materials and Techniques&quot;. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1994.
*Anderson, James C. &quot;Roman Architecture and Society&quot;. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997.
*Boëthius, Axel. &quot;Etruscan and Early Roman Architecture&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1994.
*Fant, J. Clayton. &quot;Quarrying and Stoneworking.&quot; In &quot;The Oxford Handbook of Engineering and Technology in the Classical World&quot;, edited by John P. Oleson, 121–135. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.
*Hopkins, John North. &quot;The Genesis of Roman Architecture&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2016. 
*Lancaster, Lynne C. &quot;Concrete Vaulted Construction In Imperial Rome: Innovations In Context&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
*--. &quot;Roman Engineering and Construction.&quot; In &quot;The Oxford Handbook of Engineering and Technology in the Classical World&quot;, edited by John P. Oleson, 256–284. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2008.
*MacDonald, William Lloyd. &quot;The Architecture of the Roman Empire&quot;. Rev. ed. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1982.
*Macready, Sarah, and F. H. Thompson. &quot;Roman architecture in the Greek world&quot;. London: Society of Antiquaries, 1987.
*Sear, Frank. &quot;Roman Architecture&quot;. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 1983.
*Thomas, Edmund V. &quot;Monumentality and the Roman Empire: Architecture in the Antonine age&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007.
*Ulrich, Roger B. &quot;Roman Woodworking&quot;. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 2007.
*Ulrich, Roger B., and Caroline K Quenemoen. &quot;A Companion to Roman Architecture&quot;. Somerset: Wiley, 2013.

== External links ==

* Traianus – Technical investigation of Roman public works
* Housing and apartments in Rome – A look at various aspects of housing in ancient Rome, apartments and villas.
* Rome Reborn − A Video Tour through Ancient Rome based on a digital model. .
* —A virtual tour through Ancient Rome based on a digital model</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="0" end="26" title="Ancient Roman architecture" label="Ancient Roman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q331273" start="70" end="96" title="ancient Greek architecture" label="ancient Greek architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="121" end="135" title="ancient Romans" label="ancient Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="192" end="205" title="architectural" label="architectural"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198718" start="261" end="283" title="classical architecture" label="classical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="322" end="336" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="377" end="383" title="Roman Empire" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q610076" start="486" end="500" title="Roman concrete" label="Roman concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="537" end="541" title="arch" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12493" start="550" end="554" title="dome" label="dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="885" end="897" title="Late Antique" label="Late Antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="901" end="923" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="1230" end="1253" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1404" end="1419" title="Roman Empire" label="Imperial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771791" start="1473" end="1494" title="Etruscan architecture" label="Etruscan architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q30327019" start="1615" end="1624" title="trabeated" label="trabeated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817" start="1654" end="1660" title="column" label="column"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370517" start="1666" end="1672" title="lintel" label="lintel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="1719" end="1723" title="arch" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12493" start="1737" end="1741" title="dome" label="dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q657100" start="1879" end="1888" title="colonnade" label="colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q654057" start="1927" end="1933" title="Tuscan order" label="Tuscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q734649" start="1938" end="1947" title="Composite order" label="Composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q217175" start="1948" end="1954" title="Classical orders" label="orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="2011" end="2022" title="Doric order" label="Doric order"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="2094" end="2104" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="2128" end="2133" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q329838" start="2231" end="2258" title="Crisis of the Third Century" label="Crisis of the Third Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q731794" start="2601" end="2610" title="hypocaust" label="hypocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="2612" end="2616" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012797" start="2638" end="2650" title="Ostia Antica" label="Ostia Antica"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="2695" end="2702" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q217175" start="2944" end="2959" title="classical order" label="classical order"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="3098" end="3107" title="aesthetic" label="aesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q610076" start="3240" end="3254" title="Roman concrete" label="Roman concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q657100" start="3459" end="3468" title="colonnade" label="colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q18965" start="3611" end="3621" title="floor plan" label="floor plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189771" start="3835" end="3841" title="Vault (architecture)" label="vaults"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="3846" end="3850" title="arch" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218676" start="4041" end="4058" title="aqueducts of Rome" label="aqueducts of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q836108" start="4064" end="4083" title="Baths of Diocletian" label="Baths of Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q502098" start="4092" end="4110" title="Baths of Caracalla" label="Baths of Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959538" start="4116" end="4124" title="List of Roman basilicas" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="4130" end="4139" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q57346" start="4295" end="4304" title="town wall" label="town wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11125" start="4309" end="4313" title="Lugo" label="Lugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216791" start="4317" end="4339" title="Hispania Tarraconensis" label="Hispania Tarraconensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="4803" end="4810" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="4859" end="4867" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="4951" end="4970" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="5029" end="5037" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="5071" end="5081" title="hydraulics" label="hydraulics"/>
<link wikidata="Q331273" start="5177" end="5203" title="ancient Greek architecture" label="ancient Greek architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q217175" start="5212" end="5228" title="classical orders" label="classical orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="5255" end="5268" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497438" start="5376" end="5400" title="Roman conquest of Greece" label="Roman conquest of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="5438" end="5449" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q914598" start="5566" end="5576" title="triclinium" label="triclinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q918230" start="5580" end="5591" title="Roman villa" label="Roman villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361577" start="5788" end="5818" title="Roman architectural revolution" label="Roman architectural revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="5973" end="5977" title="arch" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q189771" start="5979" end="5984" title="Vault (architecture)" label="vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q12493" start="5990" end="5994" title="dome" label="dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362268" start="6190" end="6203" title="Roman amphitheatre" label="amphitheatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218676" start="6205" end="6214" title="Roman aqueduct" label="aqueducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581615" start="6216" end="6221" title="Thermae" label="baths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223230" start="6223" end="6230" title="Roman bridge" label="bridges"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6232" end="6240" title="Circus (building)#List of Roman circuses" label="circuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862831" start="6242" end="6246" title="List of Roman dams and reservoirs" label="dams"/>
<link wikidata="Q847797" start="6248" end="6253" title="List of Roman domes" label="domes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6255" end="6263" title="Roman harbour" label="harbours"/>
<link wikidata="Q867143" start="6265" end="6272" title="Roman temple" label="temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q19757" start="6278" end="6286" title="Roman theatre (structure)" label="theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q61342" start="6301" end="6317" title="Gottfried Semper" label="Gottfried Semper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605839" start="6452" end="6490" title="List of ancient architectural records" label="a trend toward monumental architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q610076" start="6513" end="6527" title="Roman concrete" label="Roman concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q18870689" start="6706" end="6715" title="aqueduct (bridge)" label="aqueducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="6731" end="6743" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q244947" start="6757" end="6776" title="Aqueduct of Segovia" label="Aqueduct of Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189764" start="6782" end="6794" title="Pont du Gard" label="Pont du Gard"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218676" start="6811" end="6828" title="aqueducts of Rome" label="aqueducts of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q588535" start="6930" end="6943" title="Puente Romano" label="Puente Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q14323" start="6947" end="6953" title="Mérida, Spain" label="Mérida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780937" start="6972" end="6983" title="Pont Julien" label="Pont Julien"/>
<link wikidata="Q504887" start="7002" end="7019" title="Vaison-la-Romaine" label="Vaison-la-Romaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12493" start="7053" end="7057" title="dome" label="dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q189771" start="7088" end="7103" title="vaulted ceiling" label="vaulted ceiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q785952" start="7178" end="7190" title="public baths" label="public baths"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="7195" end="7204" title="basilicas" label="basilicas"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="7229" end="7237" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q836108" start="7243" end="7262" title="Baths of Diocletian" label="Baths of Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q502098" start="7271" end="7289" title="Baths of Caracalla" label="Baths of Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="7569" end="7578" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q212940" start="7583" end="7603" title="Islamic architecture" label="Islamic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8180985" start="7663" end="7686" title="history of architecture" label="history of architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12493" start="7715" end="7719" title="dome" label="dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q867143" start="7847" end="7854" title="Roman temple" label="temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581615" start="7856" end="7863" title="thermae" label="thermae"/>
<link wikidata="Q16560" start="7865" end="7871" title="palace" label="palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="7874" end="7882" title="mausolea" label="mausolea"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="7983" end="7987" title="apse" label="apse"/>
<link wikidata="Q47848" start="8002" end="8021" title="sacred architecture" label="sacred architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="8082" end="8086" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="8095" end="8104" title="Roman province" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="8116" end="8133" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q189771" start="8146" end="8152" title="vault (architecture)" label="vaults"/>
<link wikidata="Q30327019" start="8194" end="8209" title="post and lintel" label="post and lintel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817" start="8246" end="8252" title="column" label="column"/>
<link wikidata="Q183448" start="8257" end="8267" title="architrave" label="architrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q610076" start="8339" end="8347" title="Roman concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361577" start="8385" end="8415" title="Roman architectural revolution" label="Roman architectural revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q725158" start="8490" end="8506" title="structural steel" label="structural steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860671" start="8544" end="8582" title="List of the world&amp;#x27;s largest domes" label="List of the world&amp;#x27;s largest domes"/>
<link wikidata="Q708807" start="8676" end="8690" title="Pre-Romanesque" label="Pre-Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="8695" end="8718" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="8815" end="8826" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="8853" end="8875" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q212940" start="9008" end="9028" title="Islamic architecture" label="Islamic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q28077" start="9119" end="9128" title="Hammam" label="bathhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="9203" end="9222" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="9318" end="9327" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q654057" start="9405" end="9411" title="Tuscan order" label="Tuscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q734649" start="9416" end="9431" title="Composite order" label="Composite order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190797" start="9472" end="9494" title="The Five Orders of Architecture" label="five rather than three"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="9528" end="9548" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="9554" end="9579" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513688" start="9672" end="9688" title="Greek Revival architecture" label="direct influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q264649" start="9763" end="9785" title="Palladian architecture" label="Palladian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="9787" end="9808" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931689" start="9813" end="9833" title="Regency architecture" label="Regency architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400086" start="9865" end="9885" title="Federal architecture" label="Federal architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091252" start="9918" end="9937" title="Stripped Classicism" label="Stripped Classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134543" start="9942" end="9953" title="PWA Moderne" label="PWA Moderne"/>
<link wikidata="Q190996" start="10128" end="10136" title="pediment" label="pediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="10160" end="10166" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="10222" end="10229" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q178813" start="10233" end="10244" title="Herculaneum" label="Herculaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="10303" end="10312" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="10354" end="10370" title="United States Capitol" label="Capitol building"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="10376" end="10387" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q213559" start="10393" end="10409" title="Lincoln Memorial" label="Lincoln Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="10989" end="11006" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="11038" end="11044" title="Marble" label="Marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="11122" end="11130" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q576929" start="11280" end="11305" title="Temple of Hercules Victor" label="Temple of Hercules Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13372" start="11420" end="11427" title="Carrara" label="Carrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052367" start="11565" end="11571" title="Parian marble" label="Parian"/>
<link wikidata="Q187156" start="11573" end="11583" title="Travertine" label="Travertine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="11584" end="11593" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q159605" start="11624" end="11630" title="Tivoli, Lazio" label="Tivoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="11679" end="11688" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055957" start="12178" end="12195" title="Roman brick" label="fired clay bricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090236" start="12264" end="12272" title="mudbrick" label="mudbrick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12578" end="12588" title="Foot (unit of length)#Historical origin" label="Roman feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q686773" start="12841" end="12861" title="Aula Palatina" label="Constantine Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138" start="12865" end="12870" title="Trier" label="Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444830" start="13080" end="13085" title="Imbrex and tegula" label="tiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5063651" start="13191" end="13216" title="ceramic building material" label="ceramic building material"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="13480" end="13492" title="Roman legion" label="Roman legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724341" start="13520" end="13524" title="kiln" label="kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="13794" end="13803" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="13812" end="13825" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817" start="14088" end="14094" title="pillar" label="pillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="14113" end="14117" title="arch" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12493" start="14124" end="14129" title="domes" label="domes"/>
<link wikidata="Q183448" start="14181" end="14191" title="architrave" label="architrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q657100" start="14236" end="14245" title="colonnade" label="colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q18965" start="14388" end="14398" title="floor plan" label="floor plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="14502" end="14511" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232238" start="14563" end="14578" title="De architectura" label="De architectura"/>
<link wikidata="Q610076" start="14679" end="14693" title="Roman concrete" label="Roman concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q546547" start="14846" end="14850" title="Cosa" label="Cosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q911999" start="14914" end="14925" title="lime mortar" label="lime mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q866298" start="14927" end="14936" title="Aggregate (composite)" label="aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17075870" start="14938" end="14947" title="pozzolana" label="pozzolana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="14960" end="14966" title="stones" label="stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q33526" start="15416" end="15422" title="stucco" label="stucco"/>
<link wikidata="Q54831" start="15906" end="15918" title="amphitheatre" label="amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q143912" start="15933" end="15947" title="triumphal arch" label="triumphal arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="15952" end="15960" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q181189" start="16167" end="16172" title="Arles Amphitheatre" label="Arles"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="16205" end="16214" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q482999" start="16243" end="16252" title="gladiator" label="gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q184940" start="16303" end="16312" title="bullfight" label="bullfight"/>
<link wikidata="Q19757" start="16438" end="16452" title="Roman theatre (structure)" label="Roman theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q477396" start="16509" end="16517" title="Roman circus" label="circuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q184949" start="16527" end="16537" title="hippodrome" label="hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="16687" end="16696" title="sport" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="16842" end="16850" title="Augustus" label="Augustan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="17100" end="17106" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q33526" start="17108" end="17114" title="stucco" label="stucco"/>
<link wikidata="Q547870" start="17191" end="17206" title="Venatio" label="animal killings"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="17719" end="17727" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="17945" end="17954" title="town hall" label="town hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="18027" end="18035" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q657100" start="18372" end="18381" title="colonnade" label="colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="18469" end="18473" title="apse" label="apse"/>
<link wikidata="Q580731" start="18693" end="18703" title="clerestory" label="clerestory"/>
<link wikidata="Q810068" start="18745" end="18760" title="Basilica Porcia" label="Basilica Porcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180081" start="18793" end="18807" title="Cato the Elder" label="Cato the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q189851" start="18831" end="18837" title="Roman censor" label="censor"/>
<link wikidata="Q477396" start="19140" end="19152" title="Roman circus" label="Roman circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="19218" end="19230" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="19265" end="19278" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q184949" start="19279" end="19289" title="hippodrome" label="hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q19757" start="19386" end="19394" title="Roman theatre (structure)" label="theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q54831" start="19399" end="19411" title="amphitheatre" label="amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164462" start="19502" end="19516" title="chariot racing" label="chariot racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="19518" end="19528" title="horse race" label="horse race"/>
<link wikidata="Q876274" start="19661" end="19673" title="naval battle" label="naval battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777138" start="19832" end="19842" title="race track" label="race track"/>
<link wikidata="Q477396" start="20103" end="20111" title="carceres" label="carceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="20642" end="20655" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q216568" start="21035" end="21048" title="Imperial fora" label="Imperial fora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062780" start="21169" end="21174" title="Forum (Roman)" label="forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q180212" start="21452" end="21463" title="Roman Forum" label="Roman Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035793" start="21632" end="21637" title="cardo" label="cardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q959042" start="21642" end="21651" title="decumanus" label="decumanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="21767" end="21775" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q279616" start="21954" end="21961" title="horreum" label="horreum"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="22044" end="22049" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q114768" start="22081" end="22090" title="granaries" label="granaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786802" start="22167" end="22180" title="Horrea Galbae" label="Horrea Galbae"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="22232" end="22241" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="22279" end="22285" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q190401" start="22676" end="22683" title="tribune" label="tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q297183" start="22684" end="22698" title="Gaius Gracchus" label="Gaius Gracchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645059" start="23307" end="23337" title="Johns Hopkins University Press" label="Johns Hopkins University Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23339" end="23359" title="The Classical Weekly" label="The Classical Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="23378" end="23393" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q827617" start="24152" end="24159" title="Insula (building)" label="insulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012797" start="24575" end="24580" title="Ostia Antica" label="Ostia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="24608" end="24614" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="24747" end="24751" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="24756" end="24765" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q926419" start="24818" end="24834" title="opus reticulatum" label="opus reticulatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326603" start="24864" end="24877" title="opus incertum" label="opus incertum"/>
<link wikidata="Q468930" start="25158" end="25175" title="trompe-l&amp;#x27;œil" label="trompe-l&amp;#x27;œil"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="25373" end="25381" title="Plebeians" label="plebeius"/>
<link wikidata="Q782970" start="25423" end="25428" title="domus" label="domus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228887" start="26137" end="26143" title="Insula (Roman city)" label="blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060938" start="26228" end="26236" title="tabernae" label="tabernae"/>
<link wikidata="Q39715" start="26985" end="26996" title="lighthouses" label="lighthouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q245151" start="27077" end="27094" title="Tower of Hercules" label="Tower of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q8757" start="27098" end="27106" title="A Coruña" label="A Coruña"/>
<link wikidata="Q179224" start="27190" end="27195" title="Dover" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581615" start="27398" end="27405" title="thermae" label="thermae"/>
<link wikidata="Q282837" start="27962" end="27969" title="strigil" label="strigil"/>
<link wikidata="Q918230" start="28053" end="28059" title="Roman villa" label="villas"/>
<link wikidata="Q782970" start="28061" end="28072" title="domus" label="town houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q88205" start="28077" end="28082" title="castra" label="forts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218676" start="28163" end="28171" title="Roman aqueduct" label="aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="28223" end="28232" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232238" start="28242" end="28257" title="De architectura" label="De architectura"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="28479" end="28501" title="ancient Roman religion" label="ancient Roman religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q827125" start="28614" end="28619" title="cella" label="cella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820111" start="28638" end="28648" title="cult image" label="cult image"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209773" start="28656" end="28661" title="List of Roman deities" label="deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925738" start="28685" end="28694" title="Votum" label="dedicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333686" start="28735" end="28743" title="libation" label="libation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568524" start="29068" end="29109" title="Constantine the Great and Christianity" label="triumph of Christianity under Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170074" start="29115" end="29140" title="Decline of Greco-Roman polytheism" label="decline of Roman religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q159798" start="29259" end="29267" title="Honorius (emperor)" label="Honorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q576929" start="29325" end="29350" title="Temple of Hercules Victor" label="Temple of Hercules Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q849241" start="29376" end="29394" title="Temple of Portunus" label="Temple of Portunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q283650" start="29433" end="29446" title="Forum Boarium" label="Forum Boarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983253" start="29479" end="29494" title="Temple of Janus (Forum Holitorium)" label="Temple of Janus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241176" start="29510" end="29526" title="Forum Holitorium" label="Forum Holitorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q435408" start="29541" end="29554" title="Gaius Duilius" label="Gaius Duilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q277345" start="29586" end="29601" title="Battle of Mylae" label="Battle of Mylae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="29668" end="29683" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Renaissance era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145580" start="29694" end="29715" title="San Nicola in Carcere" label="San Nicola in Carcere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771791" start="29775" end="29783" title="Etruscan architecture" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q267596" start="29882" end="29894" title="Greek temple" label="Greek temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q185600" start="29953" end="29960" title="portico" label="portico"/>
<link wikidata="Q185600" start="29977" end="29984" title="pronaos" label="pronaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q190996" start="30011" end="30019" title="pediment" label="pediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="30107" end="30117" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="30412" end="30426" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon, Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294240" start="30441" end="30444" title="Roman temple of Vic" label="Vic"/>
<link wikidata="Q677659" start="30486" end="30499" title="Maison carrée" label="Maison carrée"/>
<link wikidata="Q883815" start="30619" end="30633" title="engaged column" label="engaged column"/>
<link wikidata="Q523765" start="30899" end="30917" title="Temple of Claudius" label="Temple of Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q217175" start="31042" end="31057" title="classical order" label="classical order"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="31303" end="31312" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="31329" end="31348" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="31483" end="31494" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="31506" end="31522" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian order"/>
<link wikidata="Q734649" start="31543" end="31558" title="Composite order" label="Composite order"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362337" start="31631" end="31648" title="Roman temple of Alcántara" label="that at Alcántara"/>
<link wikidata="Q654057" start="31659" end="31671" title="Tuscan order" label="Tuscan order"/>
<link wikidata="Q47848" start="31824" end="31843" title="sacred architecture" label="sacred architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="31877" end="31882" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="31891" end="31900" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492515" start="31984" end="32004" title="Romano-Celtic temple" label="Romano-Celtic temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="32055" end="32069" title="Western Empire" label="Western Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="32106" end="32119" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q263031" start="32251" end="32266" title="Ancient Celtic religion" label="Celtic religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19757" start="32286" end="32300" title="Roman theatre (structure)" label="Roman theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="32332" end="32338" title="Roman Empire" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429621" start="32700" end="32713" title="scaenae frons" label="scaenae frons"/>
<link wikidata="Q385348" start="32793" end="32804" title="Proscenium" label="proscaenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q60142" start="33027" end="33033" title="podium" label="podium"/>
<link wikidata="Q230752" start="33408" end="33418" title="auditorium" label="auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q23127" start="33427" end="33436" title="Vomitorium" label="Vomitoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q918230" start="33521" end="33532" title="Roman villa" label="Roman villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q782970" start="33594" end="33599" title="domus" label="domus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="33734" end="33740" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="33752" end="33758" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q272777" start="33912" end="33932" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Villa" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q159605" start="33936" end="33942" title="Tivoli, Italy" label="Tivoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347586" start="34056" end="34075" title="Villa of the Papyri" label="Villa of the Papyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q178813" start="34079" end="34090" title="Herculaneum" label="Herculaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q201385" start="34129" end="34142" title="Bay of Naples" label="Bay of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="34175" end="34188" title="country house" label="country house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247128" start="34290" end="34300" title="Fishbourne Roman Palace" label="Fishbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q242839" start="34437" end="34451" title="Campus Martius" label="Campus Martius"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="34540" end="34547" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241298" start="34563" end="34585" title="Villa of the Mysteries" label="Villa of the Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q428382" start="35087" end="35097" title="latifundia" label="latifundia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="35238" end="35244" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q107388" start="35260" end="35274" title="Gospel of Mark" label="Gospel of Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q205333" start="35336" end="35346" title="Gethsemane" label="Gethsemane"/>
<link wikidata="Q322287" start="35508" end="35532" title="Diocletian&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="Diocletian&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q185187" start="35721" end="35730" title="watermill" label="watermill"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="35763" end="35795" title="Hellenistic civilization" label="Hellenized eastern Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q551888" start="35815" end="35847" title="conquests of Alexander the Great" label="conquests of Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35864" end="35898" title="History of science in Classical Antiquity#Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic science and technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q146728" start="36068" end="36079" title="water wheel" label="water wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q966937" start="36358" end="36366" title="Monolithic architecture" label="monolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q183448" start="36669" end="36679" title="architrave" label="architrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817" start="36744" end="36750" title="column" label="column"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074709" start="36877" end="36892" title="obelisk carrier" label="obelisk carrier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36919" end="36933" title="Crane (machine)#History" label="ancient cranes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36980" end="37016" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Column#Construction" label="construction of Trajan&amp;#x27;s Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q170980" start="37040" end="37047" title="obelisk" label="obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q44218" start="37463" end="37476" title="Arles Obelisk" label="Arles Obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q13437" start="37556" end="37565" title="Benevento" label="Benevento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="37597" end="37603" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37642" end="37678" title=":de:Staatliches Museum Ägyptischer Kunst" label="Staatliches Museum Ägyptischer Kunst"/>
<link wikidata="Q259225" start="37680" end="37690" title="Kunstareal" label="Kunstareal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460124" start="37794" end="37807" title="Roman gardens" label="Roman gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460" start="37837" end="37844" title="Persian gardens" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601955" start="37850" end="37855" title="Greek gardens" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048669" start="37889" end="37895" title="Latium" label="Latium"/>
<link wikidata="Q180081" start="37943" end="37957" title="Cato the Elder" label="Cato the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="38051" end="38057" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994840" start="38085" end="38098" title="flower garden" label="flower garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="38199" end="38206" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="38409" end="38415" title="Africa (Roman province)" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q879466" start="38417" end="38421" title="Roman Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="38427" end="38436" title="Roman Britain" label="Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q827617" start="38481" end="38488" title="Insula (building)" label="insulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042902" start="38555" end="38567" title="Flower box" label="window boxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156696" start="38571" end="38582" title="roof garden" label="roof garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q143912" start="38613" end="38627" title="triumphal arch" label="triumphal arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="38673" end="38677" title="arch" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q657438" start="38883" end="38896" title="Roman triumph" label="Roman triumph"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="38908" end="38922" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="39027" end="39036" title="Etruscans" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437" start="39178" end="39185" title="Perugia" label="Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103305" start="39190" end="39198" title="Volterra" label="Volterra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="39351" end="39365" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q187459" start="39547" end="39558" title="entablature" label="entablature"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="39764" end="39779" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q155987" start="40019" end="40027" title="quadriga" label="quadriga"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="40397" end="40410" title="Roman Emperor" label="Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="40411" end="40419" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q723887" start="41004" end="41017" title="Arch of Titus" label="Arch of Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162353" start="41031" end="41056" title="Arch of Septimius Severus" label="Arch of Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5786" start="41075" end="41094" title="Arch of Constantine" label="Arch of Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777218" start="41250" end="41274" title="Triumphal Arch of Orange" label="Triumphal Arch of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q328092" start="41959" end="41966" title="cornice" label="cornice"/>
<link wikidata="Q244556" start="42138" end="42146" title="spandrel" label="spandrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q308902" start="42172" end="42181" title="Victoria (mythology)" label="Victories"/>
<link wikidata="Q640104" start="42426" end="42432" title="coffer" label="coffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q155987" start="42579" end="42587" title="quadriga" label="quadriga"/>
<link wikidata="Q159964" start="42958" end="42968" title="typography" label="typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q194029" start="43084" end="43094" title="Roman road" label="Roman road"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="43242" end="43256" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="43265" end="43277" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974187" start="43338" end="43344" title="Military history of ancient Rome" label="armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008214" start="43426" end="43431" title="Roman commerce" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43686" end="43704" title="#Laws and standards" label="Laws and standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="43995" end="44001" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q18870689" start="44023" end="44032" title="Aqueduct (bridge)" label="aqueducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581615" start="44117" end="44129" title="Thermae" label="public baths"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615741" start="44131" end="44138" title="latrine" label="latrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640469" start="44210" end="44224" title="Sanitation in ancient Rome" label="sewage systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q610559" start="44891" end="44897" title="sluice" label="sluice"/>
<link wikidata="Q278579" start="44998" end="45008" title="Aqua Appia" label="Aqua Appia"/>
<link wikidata="Q283650" start="45062" end="45075" title="Forum Boarium" label="cattle market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249953" start="45140" end="45156" title="List of aqueducts in the city of Rome" label="eleven aqueducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="45608" end="45620" title="early modern" label="early modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="45721" end="45730" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232238" start="45749" end="45764" title="De architectura" label="De architectura"/>
<link wikidata="Q297377" start="45801" end="45810" title="Frontinus" label="Frontinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244884" start="45836" end="45851" title="De aquaeductu" label="official report"/>
<link wikidata="Q244947" start="46008" end="46027" title="Aqueduct of Segovia" label="Aqueduct of Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="46062" end="46076" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="46120" end="46134" title="ancient Romans" label="ancient Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="46232" end="46236" title="arch" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q610076" start="46271" end="46279" title="Roman concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133242" start="46374" end="46386" title="semicircular" label="semicircular"/>
<link wikidata="Q783081" start="46408" end="46417" title="circular segment" label="segmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q967119" start="46427" end="46443" title="Alconétar Bridge" label="Alconétar Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316819" start="46802" end="46810" title="voussoir" label="voussoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218676" start="46905" end="46914" title="Roman aqueducts" label="aqueducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q189764" start="46928" end="46940" title="Pont du Gard" label="Pont du Gard"/>
<link wikidata="Q244947" start="46945" end="46961" title="Segovia Aqueduct" label="Segovia Aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q944688" start="47054" end="47068" title="Pons Fabricius" label="Pons Fabricius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="47192" end="47213" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q610076" start="47254" end="47262" title="Roman concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q996090" start="47487" end="47500" title="Limyra Bridge" label="Limyra Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="47517" end="47523" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q849786" start="47682" end="47702" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s bridge" label="Trajan&amp;#x27;s bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="47712" end="47718" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q588535" start="47981" end="47994" title="Puente Romano" label="Puente Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q14323" start="47998" end="48004" title="Mérida, Spain" label="Mérida"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="48090" end="48100" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481320" start="48102" end="48110" title="drainage" label="drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="48112" end="48128" title="land reclamation" label="land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187968" start="48130" end="48143" title="flood control" label="flood control"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="48148" end="48158" title="navigation" label="navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508736" start="48217" end="48236" title="List of Graeco-Roman geographers" label="ancient geographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775519" start="48264" end="48282" title="modern archaeology" label="modern archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="48325" end="48337" title="water supply" label="water supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q587758" start="48357" end="48394" title="List of aqueducts in the Roman Empire" label="List of aqueducts in the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218676" start="48475" end="48484" title="Roman aqueduct" label="aqueducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q252021" start="48537" end="48557" title="Villa rustica" label="agricultural estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581615" start="48583" end="48590" title="thermae" label="thermae"/>
<link wikidata="Q540867" start="48619" end="48629" title="Roman navy" label="Roman navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671119" start="48693" end="48714" title="History of the Roman Empire" label="early imperial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="48814" end="48826" title="Roman North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="48832" end="48841" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="48847" end="48855" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q913582" start="48956" end="48961" title="Roman Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334588" start="48971" end="48983" title="Subiaco Dams" label="Subiaco Dams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="49004" end="49008" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="49187" end="49203" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244922" start="49261" end="49275" title="embankment dam" label="embankment dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497167" start="49289" end="49300" title="gravity dam" label="gravity dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="49350" end="49360" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187968" start="49362" end="49375" title="flood control" label="flood control"/>
<link wikidata="Q189566" start="49538" end="49544" title="mortar (masonry)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q610076" start="49566" end="49583" title="opus caementicium" label="opus caementicium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361577" start="49597" end="49616" title="Concrete Revolution" label="Concrete Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264477" start="49691" end="49704" title="Lake Homs Dam" label="Lake Homs Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584888" start="49763" end="49774" title="Harbaqa Dam" label="Harbaqa Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="49886" end="49890" title="arch" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q331900" start="49897" end="49905" title="buttress" label="buttress"/>
<link wikidata="Q357679" start="50017" end="50033" title="arch-gravity dam" label="arch-gravity dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q890545" start="50036" end="50044" title="arch dam" label="arch dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355334" start="50047" end="50059" title="buttress dam" label="buttress dam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50066" end="50093" title="Arch dam#Variations" label="multiple-arch buttress dams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773614" start="50227" end="50244" title="Saxon Shore forts" label="Saxon Shore forts"/>
<link wikidata="Q762664" start="50250" end="50267" title="Portus Adurni" label="Porchester Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771791" start="50319" end="50340" title="Etruscan architecture" label="Etruscan architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="50577" end="50581" title="Inca" label="Inca"/>
<link wikidata="Q81618" start="50631" end="50636" title="Agger (ancient Rome)" label="agger"/>
<link wikidata="Q281330" start="50687" end="50699" title="Servian Wall" label="Servian Wall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50858" end="50871" title="Servian Wall#Gates along the Servian Wall" label="16 main gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q36456" start="51059" end="51067" title="Hannibal" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q625149" start="51079" end="51092" title="Aurelian Wall" label="Aurelian Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q15554384" start="51363" end="51370" title="Roman walls of Córdoba" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307168" start="51389" end="51396" title="Chester city walls" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205980" start="51446" end="51450" title="York city walls" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="51522" end="51541" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q210957" start="51561" end="51574" title="Antonine Wall" label="Antonine Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="51674" end="51681" title="Picts" label="Pictish"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="51694" end="51707" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="51808" end="51813" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="51880" end="51895" title="Roman Empire" label="imperial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="51901" end="51907" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219423" start="52114" end="52119" title="mural" label="mural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131329" start="52153" end="52159" title="grotto" label="grotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="52167" end="52176" title="geometric" label="geometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q478798" start="52181" end="52190" title="pictorial" label="pictorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q370670" start="52261" end="52278" title="Opus vermiculatum" label="Opus vermiculatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484793" start="52301" end="52309" title="tesserae" label="tesserae"/>
<link wikidata="Q644084" start="52764" end="52780" title="opus tessellatum" label="opus tessellatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q731794" start="53190" end="53199" title="hypocaust" label="hypocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431222" start="53231" end="53249" title="underfloor heating" label="underfloor heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q513103" start="53394" end="53407" title="Sergius Orata" label="Sergius Orata"/>
<link wikidata="Q843596" start="53634" end="53649" title="central heating" label="central heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581615" start="53702" end="53709" title="thermae" label="thermae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193742" start="53830" end="53842" title="pilae stacks" label="pilae stacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q10715538" start="53996" end="54003" title="Furnace (house heating)" label="furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="54159" end="54172" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q867143" start="54396" end="54403" title="Roman temple" label="temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="54405" end="54413" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q847797" start="54542" end="54553" title="List of Roman domes" label="Roman domes"/>
<link wikidata="Q149495" start="54568" end="54578" title="truss roof" label="truss roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q529806" start="54615" end="54625" title="Flavian Palace" label="Aula Regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="54658" end="54666" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q200642" start="54685" end="54698" title="Palatine Hill" label="Palatine Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q371921" start="55079" end="55100" title="Basilica of Maxentius" label="Basilica of Maxentius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55130" end="55142" title="Stairway#Spiral and helical stairs" label="spiral stair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451751" start="55156" end="55164" title="stairway" label="stairway"/>
<link wikidata="Q201717" start="55191" end="55198" title="helix" label="helical"/>
<link wikidata="Q192784" start="55370" end="55390" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Column" label="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930585" start="55486" end="55502" title="triumphal column" label="triumphal column"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="55530" end="55534" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="55539" end="55553" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q867143" start="55588" end="55595" title="Roman temple" label="temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581615" start="55597" end="55604" title="thermae" label="thermae"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="55606" end="55614" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q625149" start="55709" end="55722" title="Aurelian Wall" label="Aurelian Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="55755" end="55770" title="medieval castle" label="medieval castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650194" start="55812" end="55838" title="Roman military engineering" label="Roman military engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="55843" end="55857" title="late antiquity" label="late antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q721817" start="55940" end="55962" title="Basilica of San Vitale" label="Basilica of San Vitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860334" start="56017" end="56026" title="Church architecture" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q212940" start="56031" end="56051" title="Islamic architecture" label="Islamic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="56290" end="56299" title="Etruscans" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q94936" start="56315" end="56325" title="Marzabotto" label="Marzabotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062780" start="56477" end="56482" title="Forum (Roman)" label="forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256511" start="56540" end="56555" title="Grid plan" label="grid of streets"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="56896" end="56901" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188398" start="57346" end="57355" title="flagstone" label="flagstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228887" start="57512" end="57518" title="Insula (Roman city)" label="insula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348006" start="57559" end="57569" title="city block" label="city block"/>
<link wikidata="Q23391" start="58148" end="58158" title="portcullis" label="portcullis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="58760" end="58766" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q599035" start="58843" end="58858" title="Baths of Trajan" label="Baths of Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581615" start="58882" end="58932" title="thermae" label="&amp;quot;thermae&amp;quot;, a bathing and leisure complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q282162" start="59008" end="59015" title="Kalends" label="Kalends"/>
<link wikidata="Q836108" start="59040" end="59059" title="Baths of Diocletian" label="Baths of Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q502098" start="59165" end="59183" title="Baths of Caracalla" label="Baths of Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="59186" end="59195" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q192784" start="59198" end="59218" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Column" label="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q207808" start="59230" end="59244" title="Circus Maximus" label="Circus Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144512" start="59256" end="59270" title="Curia Hostilia" label="Curia Hostilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q622438" start="59297" end="59308" title="Domus Aurea" label="Domus Aurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q770797" start="59329" end="59346" title="Forum of Augustus" label="Forum of Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q272777" start="59349" end="59369" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Villa" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="59372" end="59380" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q245151" start="59383" end="59400" title="Tower of Hercules" label="Tower of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q932599" start="59403" end="59419" title="Tropaeum Traiani" label="Tropaeum Traiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q641556" start="59422" end="59434" title="Verona Arena" label="Verona Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="59439" end="59445" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598073" start="59448" end="59476" title="Church of St. George, Sofia" label="Rotunda Church of St. George"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014589" start="59478" end="59485" title="Serdika" label="Serdika"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="59487" end="59492" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363208" start="59505" end="59535" title="Roman theatre of Philippopolis" label="Roman theatre of Philippopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205170" start="59557" end="59570" title="Plovdiv Roman Stadium" label="Roman Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q27047924" start="59572" end="59585" title="Philippopolis (Thrace)" label="Philippopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12292389" start="59607" end="59618" title="Roman Thermae (Varna)" label="Roman baths"/>
<link wikidata="Q23583552" start="59620" end="59627" title="Timeline of Varna" label="Odessos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506" start="59629" end="59634" title="Varna, Bulgaria" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655356" start="59647" end="59692" title="Diocletianopolis (Thrace)" label="Roman city walls of Diocletianopolis (Thrace)"/>
<link wikidata="Q239989" start="59694" end="59701" title="Hisarya" label="Hisarya"/>
<link wikidata="Q405153" start="59726" end="59735" title="Primorsko" label="Primorsko"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635722" start="59748" end="59754" title="Tholos (Ancient Rome)" label="Tholos"/>
<link wikidata="Q450348" start="59787" end="59796" title="Alyscamps" label="Alyscamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q200141" start="59801" end="59811" title="necropolis" label="necropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48292" start="59815" end="59820" title="Arles" label="Arles"/>
<link wikidata="Q782970" start="59889" end="59894" title="Domus" label="Domus"/>
<link wikidata="Q741051" start="59897" end="59914" title="Catacombs of Rome" label="Catacombs of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q918230" start="59917" end="59928" title="Roman villa" label="Roman villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q252021" start="59932" end="59945" title="Villa rustica" label="Villa rustica"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="59948" end="59955" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q178813" start="59958" end="59969" title="Herculaneum" label="Herculaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q547910" start="59972" end="59979" title="Stabiae" label="Stabiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413460" start="60008" end="60025" title="Roman engineering" label="Roman engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003878" start="60193" end="60208" title="Roman watermill" label="Roman watermill"/>
<link wikidata="Q88205" start="60241" end="60248" title="Castrum" label="Castrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q210957" start="60251" end="60264" title="Antonine Wall" label="Antonine Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="60267" end="60286" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q707801" start="60289" end="60305" title="Limes Germanicus" label="Limes Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216140" start="60325" end="60348" title="Outline of ancient Rome" label="Outline of ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112558" start="60351" end="60374" title="Outline of architecture" label="Outline of architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q331273" start="60377" end="60403" title="Ancient Greek architecture" label="Ancient Greek architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16488822" start="60406" end="60433" title="Architecture of Mesopotamia" label="Architecture of Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673399" start="60436" end="60459" title="Achaemenid architecture" label="Achaemenid architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q282413" start="60462" end="60478" title="Roman technology" label="Roman technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796398" start="60481" end="60508" title="Agriculture in ancient Rome" label="Agriculture in ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547776" start="60658" end="60675" title="Oxford Art Online" label="Oxford Art Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647445" start="60892" end="60907" title="A. W. Lawrence" label="Lawrence, A. W."/>
<link wikidata="Q61342" start="61003" end="61020" title="Gottfried Semper" label="Semper, Gottfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q552784" start="61265" end="61280" title="Summerson, John" label="Summerson, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723310" start="61288" end="61326" title="The Classical Language of Architecture" label="The Classical Language of Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733669" start="61348" end="61365" title="Thames and Hudson" label="Thames and Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q59527605" start="61412" end="61427" title="Doreen Yarwood" label="Yarwood, Doreen"/>
</links>
</doc>
