<doc id="51572" wikidata="Q2887" url="?curid=51572" title="Santiago">
<text>Santiago (, ; ), also known as Santiago de Chile (), is the capital and largest city of Chile and one of the largest cities in the Americas. It is located in the country&#x27;s central valley and is the center of the Santiago Metropolitan Region, which has a population of seven million, representing 40% of Chile&#x27;s total population. Most of the city is situated between above sea level.

Founded in 1541 by the Spanish conquistador Pedro de Valdivia, Santiago has served as the capital city of Chile since colonial times. The city features a downtown core characterized by 19th-century neoclassical architecture and winding side streets with a mix of art deco, neo-gothic, and other styles. Santiago&#x27;s cityscape is defined by several stand-alone hills and the fast-flowing Mapocho River, which is lined by parks such as Parque Bicentenario, Parque Forestal, and Parque de la Familia. The Andes Mountains are visible from most parts of the city and contribute to a smog problem, particularly during winter due to the lack of rain. The outskirts of the city are surrounded by vineyards, and Santiago is within an hour&#x27;s drive of both the mountains and the Pacific Ocean.

Santiago is the political and financial center of Chile and hosts the regional headquarters of many multinational corporations and organizations. The Chilean government&#x27;s executive and judiciary branches are based in Santiago, while the Congress mostly meets in nearby Valparaíso.
== Etymology ==
In Chile, several entities share the name &quot;Santiago&quot;, which can often lead to confusion. The commune of Santiago, also referred to as &quot;Santiago Centro&quot;, is an administrative division encompassing the area occupied by the city during colonial times. It is governed by the Municipality of Santiago and led by a mayor. This commune is part of Santiago Province, which is headed by a provincial delegate appointed by the President of the Republic, and it is also part of the Santiago Metropolitan Region, governed by a popularly elected governor.

When the term &quot;Santiago&quot; is used without further clarification, it typically refers to &quot;Gran Santiago&quot; (Greater Santiago), the metropolitan area characterized by continuous urban development. This area includes the commune of Santiago and over 40 other communes, encompassing much of Santiago Province and parts of neighboring provinces. The definition of the metropolitan area has evolved over time as the city has expanded, incorporating smaller cities and rural areas.

The name &quot;Santiago&quot; was chosen by the Spanish conqueror Pedro de Valdivia when he founded the city in 1541 as &quot;Santiago del Nuevo Extremo,&quot; in reference to his home region of Extremadura and as a tribute to James the Great, the patron saint of Spain. The saint&#x27;s name appears in various forms in Spanish, such as Diego, Jaime, Jacobo, or Santiago, with the latter derived from the Galician evolution of Vulgar Latin &quot;Sanctu Iacobu&quot;. Allegedly, there was no indigenous name for the area where Santiago is located, but the Mapuche language uses the adapted name &quot;Santiaw&quot;.

Residents of the city and region are referred to as &quot;santiaguinos&quot; (for males) and &quot;santiaguinas&quot; (for females).

==History==
===Prehistory===
Archaeological evidence suggests that the first human groups arrived in the Santiago basin around the 10th millennium BC. These groups were primarily nomadic hunter-gatherers, traveling from the coast to the interior to hunt guanacos during the Andean snowmelt. By around 800 AD, the first permanent settlers established agricultural communities along the Mapocho River, where they cultivated crops such as maize, potatoes, and beans, and domesticated camelids.

The villages of the Picunche people (as they were known to Chileans) or the Promaucae (as referred to by the Incas) were under Inca rule from the late 15th century to the early 16th century. The Incas established a settlement of mitimas in the valley, located in the center of present-day Santiago, with fortifications such as Huaca de Chena and the El Plomo hill sanctuary. According to Chilean historian Armando de Ramón, the area served as a base for failed Inca expeditions to the south and was a junction along the Inca Trail.

===Founding of the city===
Pedro de Valdivia, a conquistador from Extremadura sent by Francisco Pizarro from Peru, arrived in the Mapocho valley on 13 December 1540, after a long journey from Cusco. Valdivia and his party camped by the river on the slopes of the Tupahue hill and gradually began interacting with the Picunche people who lived in the area. Valdivia later called a meeting with the local chiefs, during which he explained his plan to establish a city on behalf of Charles IV of Spain. The city would serve as the capital of his governorship of Nueva Extremadura. 

On 12 February 1541, Valdivia officially founded the city of &quot;Santiago del Nuevo Extremo&quot; (&quot;Santiago of New Extremadura&quot;) in honor of the Apostle James, the patron saint of Spain. The city was established near Huelén, which Valdivia renamed Santa Lucía. He assigned the city&#x27;s layout to master builder Pedro de Gamboa, who designed a grid plan. At its center, Gamboa placed a Plaza Mayor, which became the town&#x27;s central hub. Surrounding the plaza, plots were designated for the cathedral, the jail, and the governor&#x27;s house. The city was divided into eight blocks from north to south and ten blocks from east to west, between the Mapocho River and the &quot;Cañada&quot; with each quarter-block, or &quot;solar&quot;, granted to settlers. The colonial architecture following the grid plan consisted of one or two-story houses, adobe walls, tile roofs, and rooms around interior corridors and patios.

Valdivia left for the south with his troops months later, initiating the Arauco War. Santiago was left vulnerable, and a coalition of Mapuche and Picunche tribes led by chief Michimalonco destroyed the city on 11 September 1541, despite the efforts of a Spanish garrison of 55 soldiers defending the fort. The defense was led by Spanish conquistadora Inés de Suárez. When she realized they were being overpowered, she ordered the execution of all indigenous prisoners, displaying their heads on pikes and throwing some towards the attackers. In response to this brutal act, the indigenous forces dispersed in fear. The city was gradually rebuilt, with the newly established city of Concepción gaining political prominence as the Royal Audiencia of Chile was established there in 1565. However, the ongoing threat of the Arauco War and frequent earthquakes delayed the establishment of the Royal Court in Santiago until 1607, which solidified the city&#x27;s status as the capital.

During the early years of the city, the Spanish suffered from severe shortages of food and other supplies. The Picunches had adopted a strategy of halting cultivation and retreating to more remote locations, which isolated the Spanish and forced them to resort to eating whatever they could find. The shortage of clothing meant that some Spanish had to dress with hides from dogs, cats, sea lions, and foxes.

===Colonial Santiago===
Although Santiago was facing the threat of permanent destruction early on, due to attacks from indigenous peoples, earthquakes, and floods, the city began to grow rapidly. Out of the 126 blocks designed by Pedro de Gamboa in 1558, 40 were occupied. In 1580, the first major buildings in the city started to be erected, marked by the placement of the foundation stone of the first Cathedral in 1561 and the building of the church of San Francisco in 1572. Both of these structures were primarily made of adobe and stone. In addition to the construction of significant buildings, the city began to thrive as the surrounding areas welcomed tens of thousands of livestock.

During the 16th and 17th centuries, the growth of the city was hindered by a series of disasters including an earthquake, a smallpox epidemic in 1575, the Mapocho River floods in 1590, 1608, and 1618, and a devastating earthquake on 13 May 1647 which resulted in the death of over 600 people and affected over 5,000 others. Despite these setbacks, the capital of the Captaincy General of Chile continued to grow, with all the power of the country being centered on the Plaza de Armas in Santiago.

In 1767, the corregidor Luis Manuel de Zañartu launched one of the most significant architectural projects of the colonial period, the Calicanto Bridge, connecting the city to La Chimba on the north side of the Mapocho River. He also began constructing embankments to prevent river overflows. Although the bridge was completed, its piers were frequently damaged by the river. In 1780, Governor Agustín de Jáuregui hired the Italian architect Joaquín Toesca, who designed several important buildings, including the cathedral&#x27;s façade, the Palacio de La Moneda, the San Carlos Canal, and the completion of the embankments during the government of Ambrosio O&#x27;Higgins. These works were officially opened in 1798. The O&#x27;Higgins government also opened the road to Valparaíso in 1791, connecting the capital with the country&#x27;s main port.
===Capital of the Republic===

On September 18, 1810, the First Government Junta was proclaimed in Santiago, marking the beginning of Chile’s path to independence. The city, which became the capital of the newly formed nation, faced various challenges, particularly from military actions in the vicinity.

Although institutions like the Instituto Nacional and the National Library were established during the Patria Vieja, they were shut down after the patriots’ defeat at the Battle of Rancagua in 1814. The royal government continued until 1817, when the Army of the Andes emerged victorious at the Battle of Chacabuco and restored the patriot government in Santiago. However, independence was still uncertain. The Spanish army achieved further victories in 1818 and advanced toward Santiago, but their progress was finally halted at the Battle of Maipú on April 5, 1818, on the Maipo River plains.
With the end of the war, Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins was accepted as Supreme Director and, like his father, undertook several important projects for the city. During the Patria Nueva era, previously closed institutions were reopened. The General Cemetery was inaugurated, work on the San Carlos Canal was completed, and the drying riverbed in the south arm of the Mapocho River, known as La Cañada, which had been used as a landfill for some time, was transformed into an avenue now known as the Alameda de las Delicias.

Two earthquakes struck the city in the 19th century: one on November 19, 1822, and another on February 20, 1835. Despite these disasters, the city continued to grow rapidly. In 1820, the population was recorded as 46,000, but by 1854, it had risen to 69,018. By 1865, the census reported 115,337 residents. This significant increase was due to suburban expansion to the south and west of the capital, as well as the growth of the bustling district of La Chimba, which resulted from the division of old properties in the area. This new peripheral development marked the end of the previous checkerboard structure that had dominated the city center.

===19th century===

During the Republican era, several institutions were founded, including the University of Chile, the Normal School of Preceptors, the School of Arts and Crafts, and the Quinta Normal. The latter comprised the Museum of Fine Arts (now the Museum of Science and Technology) and the National Museum of Natural History. These institutions were established primarily for educational purposes, but also served as examples of public planning during that period. In 1851, the first telegraph system connecting the capital to the Port of Valparaíso was inaugurated.

During the &quot;Liberal Republic&quot; and the administration of Mayor Benjamín Vicuña Mackenna, a new phase in the urban development of the capital was initiated. One of the main projects during this period was the remodeling of Cerro Santa Lucía, which had fallen into disrepair despite its central location. In his effort to transform Santiago, Vicuña Mackenna initiated the construction of the &quot;Camino de Cintura&quot;, a road surrounding the entire city. The redevelopment of Alameda Avenue also took place during this time, turning it into the city&#x27;s main road.

Also during this era, O&#x27;Higgins Park was established with the help of European landscapers in 1873. The public park, known for its large gardens, lakes, and carriage trails, became a landmark in Santiago. Other notable structures were also opened during this period, including the Teatro Municipal opera house and the Club Hípico de Santiago. In addition, the 1875 International Exposition was held in the Quinta Normal grounds.
Santiago emerged as the central hub of the national railway system. On 14 September 1857, the first railway arrived in the city and terminated at the Santiago Estación Central railway station, which was under construction at the time and officially opened in 1884. During this period, rail lines connected Santiago to Valparaíso and regions in northern and southern Chile. The streets of Santiago were also paved, and by 1875, there were 1,107 railway cars in the city, while 45,000 people used trams daily.

===The centennial Santiago===
As the new century began, Santiago underwent various changes due to the rapid growth of industry. Valparaíso, which had previously been the economic center of the country, gradually lost its prominence to the capital. By 1895, 75% of the national manufacturing industry was located in Santiago, while only 28% was in Valparaíso. By 1910, major banks and shops had established themselves in the central streets of Santiago, further diminishing the role of Valparaíso.

The enactment of the Autonomous Municipalities Act empowered municipalities to establish various administrative divisions within the Santiago department, with the goal of enhancing local governance. In 1891, the municipalities of Maipú, Ñuñoa, Renca, Lampa, and Colina were created, followed by Providencia and Barrancas in 1897, and Las Condes in 1901. The La Victoria &quot;departmento&quot; was also divided, leading to the creation of Lo Cañas in 1891, which was then further split into La Granja and Puente Alto in 1892, followed by La Florida in 1899, and La Cisterna in 1925.

The San Cristobal Hill underwent a prolonged process of development during this period. In 1903, an astronomical observatory was established on the hill, and the following year, construction began on a statue of the Virgin Mary. Today, the statue is visible from various points in the city. However, the shrine was not completed until several decades later.

The 1910 Chile Centennial celebrations marked the beginning of several urban development projects. The railway network was expanded, connecting the city and its growing suburbs with a new ring and route to Cajón del Maipo. A new railway station was also built in the north of the city: the Mapocho Station. The Parque Forestal was established on the southern side of the Mapocho river, and new buildings such as the Museum of Fine Arts, the Barros Arana public boarding school, and the National Library were opened. In addition, a sewer system was installed, serving approximately 85% of the city&#x27;s population.

=== Population explosion ===

The 1920 census estimated the population of Santiago to be 507,296 inhabitants, equivalent to 13.6% of the total population of Chile. This represented a growth of 52.5% from the 1907 census, an annual increase of 3.3%, which was almost three times the national average. This growth was mainly due to an influx of farmers from the southern regions who came to work in the factories and railroads that were being built. However, this growth was concentrated in the suburbs and not in the city center.

During this time, the downtown district consolidated as a commercial, financial, and administrative center, with the establishment of various shops and businesses around Ahumada Street and a Civic District in the vicinity of the Palace of La Moneda. The latter project involved the construction of modernist buildings for the offices of the ministries and other public services, as well as the start of the construction of medium-rise buildings. Meanwhile, the traditional residents of the center began to migrate to more rural areas like Providencia and Ñuñoa, which attracted the oligarchy and European immigrant professionals, and San Miguel for middle-class families. Additionally, in the periphery, villas were built by various organizations of the time. Modernity also spread in the city, with the introduction of the first theaters, the expansion of the telephone network, and the opening of Los Cerrillos Airport in 1928, among other advancements.
The perception that the early 20th century was a time of economic prosperity due to technological advancements was in stark contrast to the living conditions of lower social classes. The previous decades of growth resulted in an unprecedented population boom starting in 1929, but was met with tragedy as the Great Depression hit. The collapse of the nitrate industry in the north left 60,000 people unemployed, compounded by a decline in agricultural exports, resulting in an estimated 300,000 unemployed people nationwide. Desperate for survival, many migrants flocked to Santiago and its thriving industry. However, they often found themselves struggling to find housing, with many being forced to live on the streets. The harsh living conditions resulted in widespread diseases like tuberculosis, and took a toll on the homeless population. At the same time, unemployment rates and living costs skyrocketed, while the salaries of the people in Santiago fell.
The situation would change several years later with a new industrial boom fostered by CORFO and the expansion of the state apparatus from the late 1930s. At this time, the aristocracy lost much of its power, and the middle class, composed of merchants, bureaucrats, and professionals, acquired the role of setting national policy. In this context, Santiago began to develop a substantial middle- and lower-class population, while the upper classes sought refuge in the districts of the capital. Thus, the old moneyed class, who previously frequented Cousiño and Alameda Park, lost their hegemony over popular entertainment venues, and the National Stadium emerged in 1938.

=== Greater Santiago ===

In the following decades, Santiago continued to grow at an unprecedented rate. In 1940, the city had a population of 952,075 residents, which increased to 1,350,409 by 1952, and reached 1,907,378 in the 1960 census. This growth was reflected in the urbanization of rural areas on the outskirts of the city, where middle and lower-class families with stable housing were established. In 1930, the urban area covered 6,500 hectares, which increased to 20,900 in 1960 and to 38,296 in 1980. Although growth was mainly concentrated in communities such as Barrancas to the west, Conchalí to the north, and La Cisterna and La Granja to the south, the center of the city lost population, leaving more space for commercial, banking, and government development. The upper class, on the other hand, began to settle in the foothills of Las Condes and the La Reina sector.

The regulation of growth in Santiago only began in the 1960s with the creation of various development plans for Greater Santiago, a concept that reflected the city&#x27;s new reality as a much larger urban center. In 1958, the Intercommunal Plan of Santiago was released, which proposed a limit of 38,600 urban and semi-urban hectares for a maximum population of 3,260,000 residents. The plan also included plans for the construction of new avenues, such as the Américo Vespucio Avenue and Panamericana Route 5, as well as the expansion of &#x27;industrial belts&#x27;. The 1962 World Cup provided a new impetus for city improvement efforts, and in 1966, the Santiago Metropolitan Park was established on Cerro San Cristóbal. The Ministry of Housing and Urbanism (MINVU) also began to eradicate shantytowns and build new homes. Finally, the Edificio Diego Portales was constructed in 1972.
In 1967, the new Pudahuel International Airport was opened, and after years of discussion, construction of the Santiago Metro began in 1969. The first phase of the Metro, which ran beneath the western section of Alameda, was opened in 1975 and soon became one of the most prestigious buildings in the city. Over the following years, the Metro continued to expand, with two perpendicular lines in place by the end of 1978. Building telecommunications infrastructure was also an important development of this period, as reflected in the construction of the Torre Entel, which, since its construction in 1975, has become one of the symbols of the capital and remained the tallest structure in the country for two decades.

After the military coup of 1973 and the establishment of the military regime, significant changes in urban planning did not occur until the 1980s when the government embraced a neoliberal economic model. In 1979, the master plan was revised, expanding the urban area to over 62,000 hectares for real estate development. This led to urban sprawl, particularly in La Florida, causing the city to reach 40,619 hectares in size in the early 1990s. According to the 1992 census, Santiago became the country&#x27;s most populous municipality, with 328,881 residents. Tragically, a powerful earthquake struck the city on 3 March 1985, causing minimal casualties but leaving many homeless and destroying numerous historic buildings.

=== The metropolis in the early twenty-first century ===

With the onset of the transition to democracy in 1990, the city of Santiago surpassed four million inhabitants, with the majority residing in the south, particularly in La Florida, which was the most populous area, followed by Puente Alto and Maipú. The real estate development in these municipalities, as well as in others such as Quilicura and Peñalolén, was largely driven by the construction of housing projects for middle-class families. Meanwhile, high-income families relocated to the foothills, now commonly referred to as &quot;Barrio Alto&quot;, boosting the population of Las Condes and giving rise to young communes, including Lo Barnechea and Vitacura, both established in 1981 and 1991, respectively.

The area around Providencia Avenue became an important commercial hub in the eastern sector. This development extended to the &quot;Barrio Alto&quot;, which became an attractive location for the construction of high-rise buildings. Major companies and financial corporations established themselves in the area, giving rise to a thriving modern business center commonly known as &quot;Sanhattan&quot;. The departure of these companies to &quot;Barrio Alto&quot; and the construction of shopping centers all around the city created a crisis in the city center. To reinvigorate the area, the government transformed the main shopping streets into pedestrian walkways, as it did in the 1970s, and offered tax benefits for the construction of residential buildings, which attracted young adults.

The city faced a series of problems due to disorganized growth. During the winter months, air pollution reached critical levels and a layer of smog blanketed the city. In response, the authorities implemented legislative measures to reduce industrial pollution and placed restrictions on vehicle use. To address the problem of transportation, the metro system underwent significant expansion, with lines being extended and three new lines added between 1997 and 2006 in the southeastern sector. In 2011, a new extension was inaugurated in Maipú, bringing the total length of the metropolitan railway to . In the early 1990s, the bus system also underwent a major reform. In 2007, the master plan known as Transantiago was established, although it has faced various challenges since its implementation.
Entering the 21st century, rapid development continued in Santiago. The Civic District was revitalized with the creation of the Plaza de la Ciudadanía and the construction of the Ciudad Parque Bicentenario, which marked the bicentenary of the Republic. The trend of constructing tall buildings continued in the eastern sector, which was highlighted by the opening of the Titanium La Portada and Gran Torre Santiago skyscrapers in the Costanera Center complex.

On 27 February 2010, a powerful earthquake hit the capital city of Santiago, causing damage to some older buildings and rendering some modern structures uninhabitable. This sparked a heated discussion about the actual implementation of mandatory earthquake standards in the city&#x27;s modern architecture.

Despite urban integration efforts, socioeconomic inequality and geosocial fragmentation remain two of the most important problems, both in the city and in the country. These problems have been considered one of the factors that led to the &quot;Estallido Social&quot;, a series of massive protests and severe riots carried out between 2019 and 2020. The protests led to a serious civil confrontation, which led to thousands of arrests and accusations of human rights violations. Meanwhile, the demonstrations registered serious episodes of violence against public and private infrastructure, mainly in the surroundings of Plaza Baquedano, with the Santiago Metro being one of the most affected by these episodes: more than half of its stations registered damage (several being partially set on fire) and only eleven months later the network returned to full normal service.

==Geography==
The city lies in the center of the &quot;Santiago Basin&quot;, a large bowl-shaped valley consisting of broad and fertile lands surrounded by mountains. The city has a varying elevation, gradually increasing from in the western areas to more than in the eastern areas. Santiago&#x27;s international airport, in the west, lies at an altitude of . Plaza Baquedano, near the center, lies at . Estadio San Carlos de Apoquindo, at the eastern edge of the city, has an elevation of .

The Santiago Basin is part of the Intermediate Depression and is remarkably flat, interrupted only by a few &quot;island hills;&quot; among them are Cerro Renca, Cerro Blanco, and Cerro Santa Lucía. The basin is approximately in a north–south direction and from east to west. The Mapocho River flows through the city.

The city is flanked by the main chain of the Andes to the east and the Chilean Coastal Range to the west. On the north, it is bordered by the &quot;Cordón de Chacabuco&quot;, a mountain range of the Andes. At the southern border lies the &quot;Angostura de Paine&quot;, an elongated spur of the Andes that almost reaches the coast.

The mountain range immediately bordering the city on the east is known as the Sierra de Ramón, which was formed due to tectonic activity of the San Ramón Fault. This range reaches 3296 meters at Cerro de Ramón. The Sierra de Ramón represents the &quot;Precordillera&quot; of the Andes. further east is the even larger Cordillera of the Andes, which has mountains and volcanoes that exceed and on which some glaciers are present. The tallest is the Tupungato mountain at . Other mountains include Tupungatito, San José, and Maipo. Cerro El Plomo is the highest mountain visible from Santiago&#x27;s urban area.

During recent decades, urban growth has outgrown the boundaries of the city, expanding to the east up the slopes of the Andean Precordillera. In areas such as La Dehesa, Lo Curro, and El Arrayan, urban development is present at over 1,000 meters of altitude.

The natural vegetation of Santiago is made up of a thorny woodland of &quot;Vachellia caven&quot; (also known as &quot;Acacia caven&quot; and espinillo) and &quot;Prosopis chilensis&quot; in the west and an association of &quot;Vachellia caven&quot; and Baccharis paniculata in the east around the Andean foothills.

===Climate===
Santiago has a cool semi-arid climate (&quot;BSk&quot; according to the Köppen climate classification), with Mediterranean (&quot;Csb&quot;) patterns, while the eastern areas, being closer to the mountain range, have a true Mediterranean climate (Csb): warm dry summers (October to March) with temperatures reaching up to on the hottest days; winters (April to September) are cool with cool to cold mornings; typical daily maximum temperatures of , and low temperatures near . In climate station of Quinta Normal (near downtown) the precipitation average is 286.3 mm, and in climate station of Quebrada de Macul between the communes of Peñalolén and La Florida (in higher grounds near the Andes mountains) the precipitation average is 438 mm.

In the airport area of Pudahuel, mean rainfall is per year, about 80% of which occurs during the winter months (May to September), varying between of rainfall during these months. That amount contrasts with a very sunny season during the summer months between December and March, when rainfall does not exceed on average, caused by an anticyclonic dominance continued for about seven or eight months. There is significant variation within the city, with rainfall at the lower-elevation Pudahuel site near the airport being about 20 percent lower than at the older Quinta Normal site near the city center.

Santiago&#x27;s rainfall is highly variable and heavily influenced by the El Niño Southern Oscillation cycle, with rainy years coinciding with El Niño events and dry years with La Niña events. The wettest year since records began in 1866 was 1900 with – part of a &quot;pluvial&quot; from 1898 to 1905 that saw an average of over eight years incorporating the second wettest year in 1899 with – and the driest 1924 with . Typically there are lengthy dry spells even in the rainiest of winters, intercepted with similarly lengthy periods of heavy rainfall. For instance, in 1987, the fourth wettest year on record with , there was only in the 36 days between 3 June and 8 July, followed by in the 38 days between 9 July and 15 August.

Precipitation is usually only rain, as snowfall only occurs in the Andes and Precordillera, being rare in eastern districts, and extremely rare in the central and western districts of the city. In winter, the snow line is about , and it ranges from .
The city is affected only occasionally by snowfall. The period between 2000 and 2017 has been registered 9 snowfalls and only two have been measured in the central sector (2007 and 2017). The amount of snow registered in Santiago on 15 July 2017 ranged between 3.0 cm in Quinta Normal and 10.0 cm in La Reina (Tobalaba).

Temperatures vary throughout the year from an average of in January to in June and July. In the summer days are very warm to hot, often reaching over and a record high close to , while nights are very pleasant and cool, at . During autumn and winter the temperature drops, and is slightly lower than . The temperature may even drop to , especially during the morning. The historic low of was in July 1976.

Santiago&#x27;s location within a watershed is one of the most important factors determining the climate of the city. The coastal mountain range serves as a screen that stops the spread of maritime influence, contributing to the increase in annual and daily thermal oscillation (the difference between the maximum and minimum daily temperatures can reach 14 °C) and maintaining low relative humidity, close to an annual average of 70%. It also prevents the entry of air masses, with the exception of some coastal low clouds that penetrate to the basin through the river valleys.

Prevailing winds are from the southwest, with an average of , especially during the summer; the winter is less windy.



===Natural disasters===
Santiago is located on the Pacific Ring of Fire, where two tectonic plates, the Nazca and South American Plates, collide. This results in a high frequency of earthquakes. The first recorded earthquake to hit Santiago was in 1575, just 34 years after its founding. The most devastating earthquake in the city&#x27;s history took place in 1647, inspiring the novel &quot;The Earthquake In Chile&quot; by Heinrich von Kleist.

In response to the destructive earthquakes of 1960 (Valdivia) and 1985 (Algarrobo), Santiago implemented strict building codes to minimize damage from future earthquakes. In 2010, Chile was hit by the sixth largest recorded earthquake with a magnitude of 8.8 on the moment magnitude scale. The earthquake caused the death of 525 people, 13 of whom were in Santiago, and resulted in an estimated cost of 15–30 billion US dollars. Although many homes were damaged, the stricter building codes prevented the scale of destruction seen in the Haiti earthquake of the same year, in which over 100,000 people lost their lives. While large earthquakes pose a threat, smaller earthquakes from local faults in and around Santiago are also a significant risk. In particular, the San Ramón and El Arrayán faults in the east and north of the city are considered to be particularly dangerous.

The eastern neighborhoods of Santiago are also susceptible to landslides, especially of the debris flow type, which pose a significant hazard to the area.

==Environmental issues==
Santiago has a serious air pollution problem. Despite a decrease in air pollution in the 1990s, the level of pollution has not significantly improved since 2000. In fact, a study conducted by a Chilean university in 2010 showed that the pollution levels in Santiago had doubled since 2002. Particulate matter air pollution, specifically PM2.5 and PM10, frequently exceeds the standards set by the US Environmental Protection Agency and the World Health Organization, posing a significant threat to public health.

One of the major sources of air pollution in Santiago is the El Teniente copper mine smelter, which operates year-round. The government typically does not classify it as a local pollution source, as it is located just outside the reporting area of the Santiago Metropolitan Region, 110 kilometers from downtown.During the winter months, thermal inversion can trap and concentrate smog and air pollution in the Central Valley.

Santiago has made progress in treating its wastewater, with the Mapocho Wastewater Treatment Plant starting operations in March 2012. This increased the city&#x27;s wastewater treatment capacity to 100%, making Santiago the first capital city in Latin America to treat all of its municipal sewage.

Stray dogs are a common sight in Santiago, but the country as a whole has a low incidence of rabies.

==Demographics==
According to data collected in the 2002 census by the National Institute of Statistics, the Santiago metropolitan area population reached 5,428,590 inhabitants, equivalent to 35.9% of the national total and 89.6% of total regional inhabitants. This figure reflects broad growth in the population of the city during the 20th century: it had 383,587 inhabitants in 1907; 1,010,102 in 1940; 2,009,118 in 1960; 3,899,619 in 1982; and 4,729,118 in 1992. (percentage of total population, 2007)

The growth of Santiago has undergone several changes over the course of its history. In its early years, the city had a rate of growth 2.9% annually until the 17th century, then down to less than 2% per year until the early 20th century figures. During the 20th century, Santiago experienced a demographic explosion as it absorbed migration from mining camps in northern Chile during the economic crisis of the 1930s. The population surged again via migration from rural sectors between 1940 and 1960. This migration was coupled with high fertility rates, and annual growth reached 4.9% between 1952 and 1960. Growth has declined, reaching 1.4% in the early 2000s. The size of the city expanded constantly; The 20,000 hectares Santiago covered in 1960 doubled by 1980, reaching 64,140 hectares in 2002. The population density in Santiago is 8,464 inhabitants/km2.

The population of Santiago has seen a steady increase in recent years. In 1990 the total population under 20 years was 38.0% and 8.9% were over 60. Estimates in 2007 show that 32.9% of men and 30.7% of women were less than 20 years old, while 10.2% of men and 13.4% of women were over 60 years. For the year 2020, it is estimated that the figures will be 26.7% and 16.8%.

4,313,719 people in Chile say they were born in one of the communes of the Santiago Metropolitan Region, which, according to the 2002 census, amounts to 28.5% of the national total. 67.6% of the inhabitants of Santiago claim to have been born in one of the communes of the metropolitan area. In communes such as Santiago Centro and Independencia, according to 2017 census, 1/3 of residents is a Latin American immigrant (28% and 31% of the population of these communes, respectively). Other communes of Greater Santiago with high numbers of immigrants are Estación Central (17%) and Recoleta (16%).

==Economy==
Santiago is the industrial and financial center of Chile, and generates 45% of the country&#x27;s GDP. Some international institutions, such as ECLAC (Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean), have their offices in Santiago. The strong economy and low government debt is attracting migrants from Europe and the United States.

Santiago&#x27;s steady economic growth over the past few decades has transformed it into a modern metropolis. The city is now home to a growing theater and restaurant scene, extensive suburban development, dozens of shopping centers, and a rising skyline, including the second tallest building in Latin America, the Gran Torre Santiago. It includes several major universities, and has developed a modern transportation infrastructure, including a free flow toll-based, partly underground urban freeway system and the Metro de Santiago, South America&#x27;s most extensive subway system.

Santiago is an economically divided city (Gini coefficient of 0.47). The western half (&quot;zona poniente&quot;) of the city is, on average, much poorer than the eastern communes, where the high-standard public and private facilities are concentrated.

===Commercial development===

The Costanera Center, a mega project in Santiago&#x27;s Financial District, includes a mall, a tower, two office towers of each, and a hotel tall. In January 2009 the retailer in charge, Cencosud, said in a statement that the construction of the mega-mall would gradually be reduced until financial uncertainty is cleared. In January 2010, Cencosud announced the restart of the project, and this was taken generally as a symbol of the country&#x27;s success despite the Great Recession. Close to Costanera Center another skyscraper is already in use, Titanium La Portada, tall. Although these are the two biggest projects, there are many other office buildings under construction in Santiago, as well as hundreds of high rise residential buildings. In February 2011, Gran Torre Santiago, part of the Costanera Center project, located in the called Sanhattan district, reached the 300-meter mark, officially becoming the tallest structure in Latin America.

===Commerce===

Santiago is Chile&#x27;s retail capital. Falabella, Paris, Johnson, Ripley, La Polar, and several other department stores dot the mall landscape of Chile. The east side neighborhoods like Vitacura, La Dehesa, and Las Condes are home to Santiago&#x27;s Alonso de Cordova street, and malls like Parque Arauco, Alto Las Condes, Mall Plaza (a chain of malls present in Chile and other Latin American countries) and Costanera Center are known for their luxurious shopping. Alonso de Cordova, Santiago&#x27;s equivalent to Rodeo Drive or Rua Oscar Freire in São Paulo, has exclusive stores like Louis Vuitton, Hermès, Emporio Armani, Salvatore Ferragamo, Ermenegildo Zegna, Swarovski, MaxMara, Longchamp, and others. Alonso de Cordova also houses some of Santiago&#x27;s most famous restaurants, art galleries, wine showrooms and furniture stores. The Costanera Center has stores like Armani Exchange, Banana Republic, Façonnable, Hugo Boss, Swarovski, and Zara. There are plans for a Saks Fifth Avenue in Santiago. Several mercados in the city such as the Mercado Central de Santiago sell local goods. Barrio Bellavista and Barrio Lastarria have some of the most exclusive night clubs, chic cafés and restaurants.

==Transport==

===Air===
Arturo Merino Benítez International Airport (IATA: SCL) is Santiago&#x27;s national and international airport and the principal hub of LATAM Airlines, Sky Airline, Aerocardal and JetSmart. The airport is located in the western commune of Pudahuel. The largest airport in Chile, it is ranked sixth in passenger traffic among Latin American airports, with 14,168,282 passengers served in 2012 – a 17% increase over 2011. It is located from the city center.

Peldehue airport in Colina began operations on 13 December 2021. It will be able to service up to 25 flights each hour.
Santiago is also served by Eulogio Sánchez Airport (ICAO: SCTB), a small, privately owned general aviation airport in the commune of La Reina.

===Rail===

Trains operated by Chile&#x27;s national railway company, Empresa de los Ferrocarriles del Estado (EFE), connect Santiago to several cities in the south-central part of the country: Rancagua, San Fernando, Talca (connected to the coastal city of Constitución by a different train service), Linares and Chillán. All such trains arrive and depart from the Estación Central railway station (Central Station), which can be accessed by bus or subway. The proposed Santiago–Valparaíso railway line would connect Santiago with Valparaíso in 45 minutes, and expansions of the commuter rail network to Melipilla and Batuco are under discussion.

===Inter-urban buses===

Bus companies provide passenger transportation from Santiago to most areas of the country as well as to foreign destinations, while some also provide parcel shipping and delivery services.

There are several bus terminals in Santiago:

* Terminal San Borja: located in Estación Central metro station. Provides buses to all destinations in Chile and to some towns around Santiago.
* Terminal Alameda: located in Universidad de Santiago metro station. Provides buses to all destinations in Chile.
* Terminal Santiago: located one block west of Terminal Alameda. Provides buses to all destinations in Chile as well as to destinations in most countries in South America, except Bolivia.
* Terrapuerto Los Héroes: located two blocks east of Los Héroes metro station. Provides buses to south of Chile and some northern cities, as well as Argentina (Mendoza and Buenos Aires) and Paraguay (Asunción).
* Terminal Pajaritos: located in Pajaritos metro station. Provides buses to the international airport, inter-regional services to Valparaíso, Viña del Mar and several other coastal cities and towns.
* Terminal La Cisterna: located in La Cisterna metro station. Provides buses to towns around southern Santiago, Viña del Mar, Temuco and Puerto Montt.
* Terminal La Paz: located about two blocks away from La Vega Central Market; the closest Metro station is Puente Cal y Canto. It connects the rural areas north of Santiago.

===Highways===
A network of free flow toll highways connects the various areas of the city. They include the Vespucio Norte and Vespucio Sur highways, which surround the city completing a nearly full circle; Autopista Central, the section of the Pan American highway crossing the city from north to south, divided in two highways apart; and the Costanera Norte, running next to the Mapocho River and connecting the international airport with the downtown and with the wealthier areas of the city to the east, where it divides into two highways.

Other non-free flow toll roads connecting Santiago to other cities, include: Rutas del Pacífico (Ruta 68), the continuation of the &quot;Alameda&quot; Libertador General Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins Avenue to the west, provides direct access to Valparaíso and Viña del Mar; Autopista del Sol (Ruta 78), connects Melipilla and the port of San Antonio with the capital; Autopista Ruta del Maipo (a.k.a. &quot;Acceso Sur&quot;) is an alternative to the Pan American highway to access the various localities south of Santiago; Autopista Los Libertadores provides access to the main border crossing to Argentina, via Colina and Los Andes; and Autopista Nororiente, which provides access to the suburban development known as Chicureo, north of the capital.

===Public transport===

Santiago has 37% of Chile&#x27;s vehicles, totaling 991,838, of which 979,346 are motorized. An extensive network of streets and avenues crisscrosses Santiago, facilitating travel between the different communities that make up the metropolitan area.

In the 1990s, the government attempted to reorganize the public transport system. New routes were introduced in 1994, and the buses were painted yellow. However, the system faced significant issues such as route overlaps, high levels of air and noise pollution, and safety concerns for both riders and drivers. To address these problems, a new transport system called Transantiago was devised. It was officially launched on February 10, 2007, combining core services across the city with the subway and local feeder routes, all under a unified payment system using a contactless smartcard called &quot;Tarjeta bip!&quot;

The change was not well received by users, who complained of a lack of buses, excessive transfers between buses, and reduced coverage. While some of these issues were eventually addressed, the system developed a poor reputation that it struggled to overcome. As of 2011, fare evasion remained persistently high.

In 2019, the government rebranded the public transport system as RED, aiming to distance it from the problematic Transantiago brand.

In recent years, many cycle paths have been constructed, but their number remains limited, and the routes are poorly connected. Most cyclists ride on the streets, and despite helmet and light use being mandatory, compliance is not widespread.

====Metro====
Santiago Metro has seven operating lines (1, 2, 3, 4, 4A, 5 and 6), extending over and connecting 143 stations. The system carries around 2,400,000 passengers per day. Two underground lines (Line 4 and 4A) and an extension of Line 2 were inaugurated in 2005 and 2006, while an extension of Line 5 was inaugurated in 2011. Line 6 was inaugurated in 2017, adding 10 stations to the network and approximately of track. Line 3 opened on 22 January 2019, with 18 new stations.

====Commuter rail====

EFE provides suburban rail service under the brandname of Metrotren. There are 2 southbound routes. The most popular is the Metrotren Nos service, between the Central Station of Santiago and Nos station, in San Bernardo. This line, inaugurated in 2017, serves 8 million people per year, with 12 trains serving 10 stations with a frequency of 6 minutes during rush hours, and 12 during the rest of the time. The other route is the Metrotren Rancagua service, between the Central Station of Santiago and the Rancagua station, connecting Santiago with the regional capital of O&#x27;Higgins.

====Bus====

Red (formerly known as Transantiago) is the name of Santiago&#x27;s comprehensive public transportation system. It operates by integrating local feeder bus lines, main bus lines, EFE commuter trains, and the metro network. The system features an integrated fare system that enables passengers to make transfers between bus, metro, and train services using a single, contactless smartcard known as &quot;Bip!&quot;. Additionally, it offers reduced fares for senior citizens, high school students, and university students.

====Vehicles for hire====
Taxicabs are prevalent in Santiago and are easily recognizable by their black bodies and yellow roofs, as well as their orange license plates. Another type of taxi called &quot;radiotaxis&quot; can be ordered by phone and can come in any make, model, or color, but must always have the orange license plates. &quot;Colectivos&quot; are shared taxis that follow a specific route and charge a fixed fee for the ride.

Cabify, Uber and DiDi are also available in Santiago, though authorities warn they currently operate outside the law.

====Public transportation statistics====
The average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Santiago - to and from work, for example - on a weekday is 53 min. Just 4,3% of public transit riders ride for more than 2 hours every day while . The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit (considering transfers) is 14 min, while 17,4% of riders wait less than 5 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 8.03 km, while 18% travel for over 12 km in a single direction.

=== Internal transport ===

As of 2006, Santiago was home to 992,000 vehicles, 979,000 of which were motorized. This made up 37.3% of Chile&#x27;s total vehicle count. 805,000 cars passed through the city, which is 37.6% of the national total or one car for every seven people.

The main road is the Avenida Libertador General Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins, better known as Alameda Avenue, which runs northeast and southwest. From north to south, it is crossed by Autopista Central and the Independencia, Gran Avenida, Recoleta, Santa Rosa, Vicuña Mackenna and Tobalaba avenues. Other major roads include the Avenida Los Pajaritos to the west and Providencia Avenue and Apoquindo Avenue to the east. Finally, the Américo Vespucio Avenue acts as a ring road.

During the 2000s, several urban highways were built through Santiago in order to improve the situation for vehicles. The road General Velásquez and sections of the Pan-American Highway in Santiago were converted into the Autopista Central, while Américo Vespucio became variously the highways Vespucio Norte Express and Vespucio Sur, as well as Vespucio Oriente in the future. Following the edge of the Mapocho River, Costanera Norte was built to link the northeast of the capital to the airport and the downtown area. All these highways, totaling 210 km in length, have a free flow toll system.
==Administrative divisions==

Greater Santiago lacks a metropolitan government for its administration, which is distributed between authorities, complicating the operation of the city as a single entity. The highest authorities in Santiago are considered to be the governor of the Santiago Metropolitan Region, who is popularly elected to the office, now held by Claudio Orrego, and the regional presidential delegate of Santiago Metropolitan Region, an official appointed by the president of Chile.

The conurbation of Greater Santiago does not fit perfectly into any administrative division, as it extends into four different provinces and 35 communes plus 11 satellite communes which together make the Santiago Metropolitan Area. The majority of its (as of 2002) lie within Santiago Province, with some peripheral areas contained in the provinces of Cordillera, Maipo, and Talagante.

Although there is no official consensus in this regard, the communes of the city are usually grouped into seven sectors: north, center, northeast, southeast, south, southeast and southwest.


==Culture==

Only a few historical buildings from the Spanish colonial period remain in the city, because – like the rest of the country – Santiago is regularly hit by earthquakes. Extant buildings include the Casa Colorada (1769), the San Francisco Church (1586), and Posada del Corregidor (1750).

The cathedral on the central square (Plaza de Armas) is a sight that ranks as high as the Palacio de La Moneda, the Presidential Palace. The original building was built between 1784 and 1805, and architect Joaquín Toesca was in charge of its construction. Other buildings surrounding the Plaza de Armas are the Central Post Office Building, which was finished in 1882, and the Palacio de la Real Audiencia de Santiago, built between 1804 and 1807. It houses the Chilean National History Museum, with 12,000 objects that can be exhibited. On the southeast corner of the square stands the green cast-iron Commercial Edwards building, which was built in 1893. East of that is the colonial building of the Casa Colorada (1769), which houses the Museum of Santiago. Close by is the Municipal Theatre of Santiago, which was built in 1857 by the French architect Brunet of Edward Baines. It was badly damaged by an earthquake in 1906. Not far from the theater is the Subercaseaux Mansion and the National Library, one of the largest libraries of South America.

The Former National Congress Building, the Justice Palace, and the Royal Customs Palace (&quot;Palacio de la Real Aduana de Santiago&quot;) are located close to each other. The latter houses the Museum of pre-Columbian art. A fire destroyed the building of the Congress in 1895, which was then rebuilt in a neoclassical style and reopened in 1901. The Congress was deposed under the military dictatorship (1973–89) of Augusto Pinochet, and after the dictatorship was newly constituted on 11 March 1990, in Valparaíso.

The building of the Justice Palace (Palacio de Tribunales) is located on the south side of the Montt Square. It was designed by the architect Emilio Doyére and built between 1907 and 1926. The building is home to the Supreme Court of Chile. The panel of 21 judges is the highest judicial power in Chile. The building is also the headquarters of the Court of Appeals of Santiago.

Bandera street leads toward the building of the Santiago Stock Exchange (the &quot;Bolsa de Comercio&quot;), completed in 1917, the Club de la Unión (opened in 1925), the Universidad de Chile (1872), and toward the oldest churchhouse in the city, the San Francisco Church (constructed between 1586 and 1628), with its Marian statue of the &quot;Virgen del Socorro&quot; (&quot;Our Lady of Help&quot;), which was brought to Chile by Pedro de Valdivia. North of the &quot;Plaza de Armas&quot; (&quot;Square of Arms&quot;, where the colonial militia was mustered) are the Paseo Puente, the Santo Domingo Church (1771), and the Central Market (Mercado Central), an ornamental iron building. Also in downtown Santiago is the Torre Entel, a 127.4-meter-high television tower with observation deck completed in 1974; the tower serves as a communication center for the communications company, ENTEL Chile.

The Costanera Center was completed in 2009, and includes housing, shopping, and entertainment venues. The project, with a total area of 600,000 square meters, includes the 300-meter high Gran Torre Santiago (South America&#x27;s tallest building) and other commercial buildings. The four office towers are served by highway and subway connections.

=== Heritage and monuments ===
Within the metropolitan area of Santiago, there are 174 heritage sites in the custody of the National Monuments Council, among which are archeological, architectural and historical monuments, neighborhoods and typical areas. Of these, 93 are located within the commune of Santiago, considered the historic center of the city. Although no santiaguino monument has been declared a World Heritage Site by Unesco three have already been proposed by the Chilean government: the Incan sanctuary of El Plomo, the church and convent of San Francisco and the palace of La Moneda.

In the center of Santiago are several buildings built during the Spanish domination and that mostly correspond to, as the Metropolitan Cathedral and the aforementioned church of San Francisco Catholic churches. Buildings of the period are those located on the sides of Plaza de Armas, as the seat of Real Audiencia, the Post Office or the Casa Colorada.

During the nineteenth century and the advent of independence, new architectural works began to be erected in the capital of the young republic. The aristocracy built small palaces for residential use, mainly around the neighborhood Republica and preserved until today. To this other structures adopted artistic trends from Europe, as the Equestrian Club of Santiago, the head offices of the University of Chile and the Catholic University, Central Station and the Mapocho Station, Mercado Central, join the National Library, Museum of Fine Arts and the Barrio París-Londres, among others.

Various green areas in the city contain within and around various sites of heritage character. Among the most important are the fortifications of Santa Lucia hill, the shrine of the Virgin Mary on the summit of San Cristobal hill, the lavish crypt of the General Cemetery, Parque Forestal, the O&#x27;Higgins Park and the Quinta Normal Park.

=== Cultural activities and entertainment ===
In Santiago&#x27;s major theater companies are located, hosting several national and international projects, with the highest expression during the International Theatre Festival known as Santiago a Mil, which takes place every January since 1994 and has gathered more than one million spectators. Also is the Planetarium at the University of Santiago de Chile.

To carry out various cultural, artistic and musical events, there are several precincts within which highlight the Mapocho Cultural Center, 100 Matucana Cultural Center, the Gabriela Mistral Cultural Center, Centro Cultural Palacio de La Moneda, the Movistar Arena and the Caupolican Theater. On the other hand, the opera and ballet performances are permanently accepted by the Municipal Theatre of Santiago, located in the heart of the city and which has a capacity of 1500 spectators.

There are 18 cinemas in the capital with a total of 144 rooms and over 32,000 seats, the projection centers than 5 arthouse add.

For children and teenagers, there are several entertainment venues, such as amusement park Fantasilandia, the National Zoo or the Buin Zoo on the outskirts of the city. The Bellavista, Brasil, Manuel Montt, Plaza Ñuñoa and Suecia account for most of the nightclubs, restaurants and bars in the city, the main evening entertainment centers in the capital. In order to promote the economic development of other regions, the law prohibits the construction of a casino in the metropolitan region, but nearby are the casino from the coastal city of Vina del Mar, 120 km from distance from Santiago, and Monticello Grand Casino in Mostazal, 56 kilometers south of Santiago, which opened in 2008.

=== Museums and libraries ===
Santiago has a wealth of museums of different kinds, among which are three of &#x27;National&#x27; class administered by the Directorate of Libraries, Archives and Museums (DIBAM): the National History Museum, National Museum of Fine Arts and the National Museum of Natural History.

Most of the museums are located in the historic city center, occupying the old buildings of colonial origin, such as with the National History Museum, which is located in the Palacio de la Real Audiencia. La Casa Colorada houses the Museum of Santiago, while the Colonial Museum is housed in a wing of the Church of San Francisco and the Museum of Pre-Columbian Art occupies part of the old Palacio de la Aduana. The Museum of Fine Arts, though it is located in the city center, was built in the early twentieth century, especially for housing the museum and in the back of the building was laid in 1947, the Museum of Contemporary Art, under the Faculty of Arts of the University of Chile.

Quinta Normal Park also has several museums, among which are the already mentioned Natural History, Artequin Museum, the Museum of Science and Technology, and the Museo Ferroviario. In 2010, the Museum of Memory and Human Rights was inaugurated, which commemorates the victims of human rights violations committed during the country&#x27;s military dictatorship.

In other parts of the city there are some museums such as the Aeronautical Museum in Cerrillos, Museum of Tajamares in Providence and the Museo Interactivo Mirador in La Granja. The latter opened in 2000 and designed mainly for children and youth has been visited by more than 2.8 million visitors, making it the busiest museum in the country.

The most important public library is the National Library located in downtown Santiago. Its origins date back to 1813, when it was created by the nascent Republic and was moved to its current premises a century later, also home to the headquarters of the National Archives. In order to provide more closeness to the population, incorporating new technologies and complement the services provided by public libraries and the National Library was opened in 2005 the Library of Santiago at Barrio Matucana.

===Music===
Santiago has two symphony orchestras:
* &quot;Orquesta Filarmónica de Santiago&quot; (&quot;Santiago Philharmonic Orchestra&quot;), which performs in the &quot;Teatro Municipal&quot; (Municipal Theatre of Santiago)
* &quot;Orquesta Sinfónica de Chile&quot; (&quot;Chile Symphony Orchestra&quot;), part of the Universidad de Chile, performs in its theater.

There are a number of jazz establishments, some of them, including &quot;El Perseguidor&quot;, &quot;Thelonious&quot;, and &quot;Le Fournil Jazz Club&quot;, are located in Bellavista, one of Santiago&#x27;s &quot;hippest&quot; neighborhoods, though &quot;Club de Jazz de Santiago&quot;, the oldest and most traditional one, is in Ñuñoa. Annual festivals featured in Santiago include Lollapalooza and the Maquinaria festival.

===Newspapers===
The most widely circulated newspapers in Chile are published by and &quot;Copesa&quot; and have earned more than the 91% of revenues generated in printed advertizing in Chile.

Some newspapers available in Santiago are:

* &quot;The Santiago Times&quot;
* &quot;La Tercera&quot;
* &quot;La Cuarta&quot;
* &quot;The Clinic&quot;
* &quot;Las Últimas Noticias&quot;

===Media===
Santiago is home to the major Chilean television networks including the public broadcaster TVN and the privately held Canal 13, Chilevisión, La Red and Mega. In addition, the radio stations ADN Radio Chile, Radio Agricultura, Radio Concierto, Radio Cooperativa, Radio Pudahuel and Radio Rock &amp; Pop are located in the city.

===Sports===
Santiago is home to some of Chile&#x27;s most successful football clubs. Colo-Colo, founded on 19 April 1925, has a long tradition, and has played continuously in the highest league since the establishment of the first Chilean league in 1933. The club&#x27;s wins include 30 national titles, 10 Copa Chile successes, and champions of the Copa Libertadores tournament in 1991, the only Chilean team to have won this tournament. The club hosts its home games in the Estadio Monumental in the commune of Macul.
Universidad de Chile has 18 national titles and 5 Copa Chile wins. In 2011 they were champions of Copa Sudamericana, the only Chilean team to have won this tournament. The club was founded on 24 May 1927, under the name Club Deportivo Universitario as a union of Club Náutico and Federación Universitaria. The founders were students of the University of Chile. In 1980, the organization separated from the University of Chile and the club is now completely independent. The team plays its home games in the Estadio Nacional de Chile in the commune of Ñuñoa.

Club Deportivo Universidad Católica (UC) was founded on 21 April 1937. It consists of fourteen different departments. This team plays its home games in Estadio San Carlos de Apoquindo. Universidad Católica has 13 national titles, making it the third most successful football club in the country. It has played the Copa Libertadores more than 20 times, reaching the final in 1993, losing to São Paulo FC.

Several other football clubs are based in Santiago, including Unión Española, Audax Italiano, Palestino, Santiago Morning, Magallanes and Barnechea. In addition to football, several sports are played in the city, tennis and basketball being the main ones. The Club Hípico de Santiago and the Hipódromo Chile are the two horseracing tracks in the city.

Santiago hosted the final stages of the official 1959 Basketball World Cup, where Chile won the bronze medal.

The city held a round of the all-electric FIA Formula E Championship on 3 February 2018, on a temporary street circuit incorporating the Plaza Baquedano and Parque Forestal. It was the first FIA sanctioned race in the country.

The 2023 Pan American Games were held in Santiago.

The 2027 Special Olympics World Summer Games will be held in Santiago. This will mark the first time that a Spanish speaking country, the southern hemisphere and Latin America has ever hosted the Special Olympics World Games.

===Recreation===

There is an extensive network of bicycle trails in the city, especially in the Providencia commune. The longest section is the Americo Vespuccio road, which contains a very wide dirt path with many trees through the center of a street used by motorists on both sides. The next longest path is along the Mapocho River along Andrés Bello Avenue. Many people use folding bicycles to commute to work.

The city&#x27;s main parks are:
* 150-hectare Santiago Metropolitan Park, which covers the San Cristóbal Hill and includes the Chilean National Zoo and the Santiago Cable Car.
* Parque Bicentenario, a 30-hectare park alongside the Mapocho river in Vitacura
* O&#x27;Higgins Park
* Quinta Normal Park
* Forestal Park, park located at the city center alongside Mapocho river
* Santa Lucia Hill
* Parque Araucano in Las Condes, adjacent to the Parque Arauco shopping mall contains 30 hectares of gardens.
* Parque Inés de Suarez in Providencia
* Parque Padre Hurtado, also known as Parque Intercomunal.
* Parque de la Familia
* Parque Mapocho Río

There are ski resorts to the east of the city (Valle Nevado, La Parva, El Colorado) and wineries in the plains west of the city.

Cultural venues include:
* Museo de Bellas Artes – Fine Arts Museum
*Museo Violeta Parra, an art museum dedicated to Chilean folk artist Violeta Parra [opened in 2015]
* Barrio Bellavista, cultural and bohemian neighborhood
* Central Station, railway station designed by Gustave Eiffel
* Víctor Jara Stadium
* Ex National Congress
* Plaza de Armas, central square
* Palacio de La Moneda, government palace.
* Teatro Municipal (Municipal Theatre of Santiago), the principal opera house of the country.

The main sport venues are Estadio Nacional (site of the 1962 World Cup final), Estadio Monumental David Arellano, Estadio Santa Laura, and Estadio San Carlos de Apoquindo.

===Religion===
As in most of Chile, the majority of the population of Santiago is Catholic. According to the National Census, carried out in 2002 by the National Statistics Bureau (INE), in the Santiago Metropolitan Region, 3,129,249 people 15 and older identified themselves as Catholics, equivalent to 68.7% of the total population, while 595,173 (13.1%) described themselves as Evangelical Protestants. Around 1.2% of the population declared themselves as being Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, while 2.0% identified themselves as Latter-day Saints (Mormons), 0.3% as Jewish, 0.1% as Eastern Orthodox and 0.1% as Muslim. Approximately 10.4% of the population of the Metropolitan Region stated that they were atheist or agnostic, while 5.4% declared that they followed other religions.
In 2010 construction was initiated on the Santiago Bahá&#x27;í Temple, serving as the Baháʼí House of Worship for South America, in the commune of Peñalolen. Construction at the site was completed and the temple was dedicated in October 2016.

==Education==
The city is home to numerous universities, colleges, research institutions, and libraries.

The largest university and one of the oldest in the Americas is Universidad de Chile. The roots of the university date back to the year 1622, as on 19 August the first university in Chile under the name of Santo Tomás de Aquino was founded. On 28 July 1738, it was named the Real Universidad de San Felipe in honor of King Philip V of Spain. In the vernacular, it is also known as Casa de Bello (Spanish: House of Bello – after their first Rector, Andrés Bello). On 17 April 1839, after Chile&#x27;s independence from the Kingdom of Spain, it was renamed the Universidad de Chile, and reopened on 17 September 1843.

The Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile (PUC) was founded in June 1888 and was ranked as the best school in Latin America in 2014. On 11 February 1930 it was declared a university by a decree of Pope Pius XI. It received recognition by the Chilean government as an appointed Pontifical University in 1931. Joaquín Larraín Gandarillas (1822–1897), Archbishop of Anazarba, was the founder and first rector of the PUC. The PUC is a modern university; the campus of San Joaquin has a number of contemporary buildings and offers many parks and sports facilities. Several courses are conducted in English. Ex-president, Sebastián Piñera, minister Ricardo Raineri, and minister Hernán de Solminihac all attended PUC as students and worked in PUC as professors. In the 2010 admission process, approximately 48% of the students who achieved the best score in the Prueba de Selección Universitaria matriculated in the UC.

===Higher education===

====Traditional====
* Universidad de Chile (U or UCH)
* Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile (PUC)
* Universidad de Santiago de Chile (USACH)
* Universidad Metropolitana de Ciencias de la Educación (UMCE)
* Universidad Tecnológica Metropolitana (UTEM)
* Universidad Técnica Federico Santa María (UTFSM)

====Non-traditional====
* Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez (UAI)
* Universidad del Desarrollo (UDD)
* Universidad Diego Portales (UDP)
* Universidad Alberto Hurtado (UAH)
* Universidad Central de Chile (Ucen)
* Universidad Nacional Andrés Bello (Unab)
* Universidad Academia de Humanismo Cristiano (UAHC)
* Universidad Mayor (UM)
* Universidad Finis Terrae
* Universidad de Los Andes
* Universidad Gabriela Mistral (UGM)
* Universidad del Pacífico
* Universidad de las Américas
* Universidad de Artes, Ciencias y Comunicación (UNIACC)
* Universidad San Sebastián (USS)
* Universidad Bolivariana

====Other====
* Ruprecht Karls University of Heidelberg&#x27;s &quot;Postgraduierten- und Weiterbildungszentrum der Universität Heidelberg&quot; in Santiago 
* David Rockefeller Center for Latin American Studies (DRCLAS) Regional Office in Santiago 
* Stanford Faculty in Santiago 
* Diplomatic Academy of Chile

==International relations==

===Twin towns – sister cities===

Santiago is twinned with:

* Beijing, China
* Buenos Aires, Argentina
* Guangzhou, China
* Kyiv, Ukraine
* London, England, United Kingdom
* Madrid, Spain
* Miami, United States
* Minneapolis, United States
* Riga, Latvia
* São Paulo, Brasil
* Tangier, Morocco
===Cooperation and friendship===
* Paris, France
* Tunis, Tunisia

===Union of Ibero-American Capital Cities===
Santiago is part of the Union of Ibero-American Capital Cities from 12 October 1982.

== See also ==
* List of people from Santiago
* Criollo people

== References ==
==Bibliography==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="0" end="8" title="Santiago" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="31" end="48" title="Santiago" label="Santiago de Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="60" end="67" title="capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="88" end="93" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489234" start="109" end="139" title="largest cities in the Americas" label="largest cities in the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031793" start="177" end="191" title="Chilean Central Valley" label="central valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131" start="217" end="245" title="Santiago Metropolitan Region" label="Santiago Metropolitan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="376" end="391" title="above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q203534" start="438" end="455" title="Pedro de Valdivia" label="Pedro de Valdivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139493" start="745" end="762" title="Inselberg" label="stand-alone hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q738973" start="784" end="797" title="Mapocho River" label="Mapocho River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6062028" start="831" end="850" title="Parque Bicentenario" label="Parque Bicentenario"/>
<link wikidata="Q42898085" start="852" end="867" title="Parque Forestal" label="Parque Forestal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16616350" start="873" end="893" title="Parque de la Familia" label="Parque de la Familia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="899" end="914" title="Andes" label="Andes Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="975" end="979" title="smog" label="smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="1286" end="1311" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="1317" end="1330" title="International organization" label="organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q33986" start="1460" end="1470" title="Valparaíso" label="Valparaíso"/>
<link wikidata="Q188002" start="1591" end="1610" title="Santiago (commune)" label="commune of Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365122" start="1667" end="1690" title="Administrative divisions of Chile" label="administrative division"/>
<link wikidata="Q45632" start="1848" end="1865" title="Santiago Province, Chile" label="Santiago Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q107303008" start="2023" end="2049" title="Governor of the Santiago Metropolitan Region" label="popularly elected governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="2199" end="2216" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q188002" start="2287" end="2306" title="Santiago (commune)" label="commune of Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q45632" start="2356" end="2373" title="Santiago Province, Chile" label="Santiago Province"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2378" end="2408" title="Santiago#Administrative divisions" label="parts of neighboring provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q203534" start="2611" end="2628" title="Pedro de Valdivia" label="Pedro de Valdivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5777" start="2740" end="2751" title="Extremadura" label="Extremadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q43999" start="2772" end="2787" title="James the Great" label="James the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="2793" end="2805" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2809" end="2814" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579048" start="2883" end="2888" title="Diego" label="Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605834" start="2890" end="2895" title="Jaime" label="Jaime"/>
<link wikidata="Q97672270" start="2897" end="2903" title="Jacobo" label="Jacobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422956" start="2908" end="2916" title="Santiago (name)" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="2951" end="2959" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="2973" end="2985" title="Vulgar Latin" label="Vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33730" start="3101" end="3117" title="Mapuche language" label="Mapuche language"/>
<link wikidata="Q738973" start="3681" end="3694" title="Mapocho River" label="Mapocho River"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="3732" end="3737" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="3739" end="3747" title="Potato" label="potatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="3753" end="3758" title="Bean" label="beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q955728" start="3808" end="3816" title="Picunche" label="Picunche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249673" start="3864" end="3873" title="Promaucae" label="Promaucae"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="3915" end="3924" title="Inca Empire" label="Inca rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q931781" start="4017" end="4024" title="Mitma" label="mitimas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647895" start="4115" end="4129" title="Huaca de Chena" label="Huaca de Chena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324530" start="4138" end="4151" title="Cerro El Plomo" label="El Plomo hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5704681" start="4194" end="4210" title="Armando de Ramón" label="Armando de Ramón"/>
<link wikidata="Q948975" start="4308" end="4318" title="Inca road system" label="Inca Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q203534" start="4348" end="4365" title="Pedro de Valdivia" label="Pedro de Valdivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5777" start="4387" end="4398" title="Extremadura" label="Extremadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q44741" start="4407" end="4424" title="Francisco Pizarro" label="Francisco Pizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="4430" end="4434" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582862" start="4513" end="4518" title="Cusco" label="Cusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q181523" start="4584" end="4596" title="San Cristóbal Hill" label="Tupahue hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q955728" start="4638" end="4653" title="Picunche people" label="Picunche people"/>
<link wikidata="Q183226" start="4800" end="4819" title="Charles IV of Spain" label="Charles IV of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q677487" start="4880" end="4897" title="Nueva Extremadura" label="Nueva Extremadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q43999" start="5059" end="5072" title="James the Great" label="Apostle James"/>
<link wikidata="Q107467990" start="5228" end="5243" title="Pedro de Gamboa" label="Pedro de Gamboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256511" start="5260" end="5269" title="grid plan" label="grid plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q602232" start="5302" end="5313" title="Plaza de Armas (Santiago)" label="Plaza Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15042373" start="5410" end="5419" title="Santiago Metropolitan Cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757478" start="5439" end="5460" title="Royal Governor of Chile" label="governor&amp;#x27;s house"/>
<link wikidata="Q65072277" start="5680" end="5701" title="Architecture of Chile" label="colonial architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q737988" start="5829" end="5835" title="Patio" label="patios"/>
<link wikidata="Q431806" start="5911" end="5921" title="Arauco War" label="Arauco War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837909" start="6013" end="6025" title="Michimalonco" label="Michimalonco"/>
<link wikidata="Q12162592" start="6026" end="6044" title="Destruction of Santiago" label="destroyed the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="6175" end="6188" title="Conquistador" label="conquistadora"/>
<link wikidata="Q262936" start="6189" end="6203" title="Inés Suárez" label="Inés de Suárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880" start="6520" end="6530" title="Concepción, Chile" label="Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q16075040" start="6567" end="6591" title="Real Audiencia of Concepción" label="Royal Audiencia of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q955728" start="6931" end="6940" title="Picunche" label="Picunches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291230" start="7184" end="7189" title="hide (skin)" label="hides"/>
<link wikidata="Q333649" start="7207" end="7216" title="South American sea lion" label="sea lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q132687" start="7222" end="7227" title="South American fox" label="foxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413975" start="7676" end="7699" title="Iglesia de San Francisco, Santiago de Chile" label="church of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348911" start="8034" end="8044" title="1575 Valdivia earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="8048" end="8056" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551488" start="8143" end="8153" title="1647 Santiago earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q763808" start="8291" end="8317" title="Captaincy General of Chile" label="Captaincy General of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q602232" start="8393" end="8407" title="Plaza de Armas (Santiago)" label="Plaza de Armas"/>
<link wikidata="Q89366" start="8675" end="8686" title="Starling (architecture)" label="embankments"/>
<link wikidata="Q399516" start="8816" end="8835" title="Agustín de Jáuregui" label="Agustín de Jáuregui"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206546" start="8864" end="8878" title="Joaquín Toesca" label="Joaquín Toesca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146881" start="8965" end="8985" title="Palacio de La Moneda" label="Palacio de La Moneda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5746729" start="8991" end="9007" title="San Carlos Canal" label="San Carlos Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388469" start="9072" end="9095" title="Ambrosio O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="Ambrosio O&amp;#x27;Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q33986" start="9195" end="9205" title="Valparaíso" label="Valparaíso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290938" start="9331" end="9353" title="Government Junta of Chile (1810)" label="First Government Junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072889" start="9407" end="9435" title="Independence of Chile" label="Chile’s path to independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072889" start="9544" end="9560" title="Chilean War of Independence" label="military actions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422271" start="9610" end="9628" title="Instituto Nacional General José Miguel Carrera" label="Instituto Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901485" start="9637" end="9653" title="National Library of Chile" label="National Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145245" start="9682" end="9694" title="Old Fatherland" label="Patria Vieja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310755" start="9750" end="9768" title="Battle of Rancagua" label="Battle of Rancagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620773" start="9782" end="9798" title="Reconquest (Chile)" label="royal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q490279" start="9830" end="9847" title="Army of the Andes" label="Army of the Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425658" start="9874" end="9893" title="Battle of Chacabuco" label="Battle of Chacabuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073849" start="10113" end="10128" title="Battle of Maipú" label="Battle of Maipú"/>
<link wikidata="Q28930" start="10199" end="10222" title="Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155734" start="10239" end="10255" title="Supreme Director of Chile" label="Supreme Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q929693" start="10340" end="10352" title="New Fatherland" label="Patria Nueva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053309" start="10408" end="10424" title="Santiago General Cemetery" label="General Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088670" start="10666" end="10689" title="Avenida Libertador General Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="Alameda de las Delicias"/>
<link wikidata="Q232141" start="11437" end="11456" title="University of Chile" label="University of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363897" start="11530" end="11543" title="Quinta Normal Park" label="Quinta Normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064279" start="11641" end="11675" title="Chilean National Museum of Natural History" label="National Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896307" start="11991" end="12015" title="Benjamín Vicuña Mackenna" label="Benjamín Vicuña Mackenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055993" start="12150" end="12167" title="Cerro Santa Lucía" label="Cerro Santa Lucía"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088670" start="12406" end="12420" title="Alameda Avenue" label="Alameda Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071826" start="12521" end="12540" title="Parque O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="O&amp;#x27;Higgins Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936293" start="12785" end="12801" title="Municipal Theater of Santiago" label="Teatro Municipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136270" start="12822" end="12845" title="Club Hípico de Santiago" label="Club Hípico de Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685904" start="12869" end="12893" title="Chilean International Exhibition" label="International Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163126" start="13083" end="13124" title="Santiago Estación Central railway station" label="Santiago Estación Central railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q16918" start="14170" end="14175" title="Maipú, Chile" label="Maipú"/>
<link wikidata="Q201076" start="14177" end="14182" title="Ñuñoa" label="Ñuñoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q56119" start="14184" end="14189" title="Renca" label="Renca"/>
<link wikidata="Q14477" start="14191" end="14196" title="Lampa, Chile" label="Lampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841" start="14202" end="14208" title="Colina, Chile" label="Colina"/>
<link wikidata="Q51587" start="14235" end="14246" title="Providencia, Chile" label="Providencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51591" start="14251" end="14260" title="Pudahuel" label="Barrancas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14484" start="14274" end="14284" title="Las Condes" label="Las Condes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14461" start="14431" end="14440" title="La Granja, Chile" label="La Granja"/>
<link wikidata="Q51594" start="14445" end="14456" title="Puente Alto" label="Puente Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q14460" start="14478" end="14488" title="La Florida, Chile" label="La Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q14456" start="14502" end="14513" title="La Cisterna" label="La Cisterna"/>
<link wikidata="Q181523" start="14528" end="14546" title="San Cristóbal Hill" label="San Cristobal Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q62832" start="14624" end="14648" title="astronomical observatory" label="astronomical observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="14740" end="14751" title="Virgin Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018033" start="15089" end="15104" title="Cajón del Maipo" label="Cajón del Maipo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400037" start="15173" end="15188" title="Estación Mapocho" label="Mapocho Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q42898085" start="15194" end="15209" title="Parque Forestal" label="Parque Forestal"/>
<link wikidata="Q775376" start="15299" end="15318" title="Chilean National Museum of Fine Arts" label="Museum of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919042" start="15324" end="15359" title="Internado Nacional Barros Arana" label="Barros Arana public boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901485" start="15369" end="15385" title="Biblioteca Nacional de Chile" label="National Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141895" start="16200" end="16214" title="Paseo Ahumada" label="Ahumada Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q55593474" start="16371" end="16381" title="Ministries of Chile" label="ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447149" start="16626" end="16644" title="Immigration to Chile" label="European immigrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q187862" start="16664" end="16674" title="San Miguel, Chile" label="San Miguel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="17295" end="17311" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135552" start="18035" end="18040" title="CORFO" label="CORFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q594994" start="18588" end="18604" title="Estadio Nacional Julio Martínez Prádanos" label="National Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851" start="19223" end="19231" title="Conchalí" label="Conchalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q14466" start="19493" end="19501" title="La Reina, Chile" label="La Reina"/>
<link wikidata="Q625532" start="19973" end="19996" title="Américo Vespucio Avenue" label="Américo Vespucio Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098655" start="20001" end="20021" title="Chile Route 5" label="Panamericana Route 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q160813" start="20085" end="20099" title="1962 FIFA World Cup" label="1962 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q251343" start="20170" end="20196" title="Santiago Metropolitan Park" label="Santiago Metropolitan Park"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20275" end="20280" title=":es:Ministerio de Vivienda y Urbanismo de Chile" label="MINVU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767917" start="20306" end="20317" title="Campamento (Chile)" label="shantytowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062803" start="20352" end="20375" title="Centro Cultural Gabriela Mistral" label="Edificio Diego Portales"/>
<link wikidata="Q127671" start="20418" end="20448" title="Arturo Merino Benítez International Airport" label="Pudahuel International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q913314" start="20512" end="20526" title="Santiago Metro" label="Santiago Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421270" start="20956" end="20967" title="Torre Entel" label="Torre Entel"/>
<link wikidata="Q856670" start="21140" end="21152" title="1973 Chilean coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup of 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704093" start="21182" end="21197" title="Military dictatorship of Chile (1973–90)" label="military regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="21298" end="21308" title="Neoliberalism" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="21453" end="21465" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q14460" start="21483" end="21493" title="La Florida, Chile" label="La Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240757" start="21705" end="21715" title="1985 Algarrobo earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q748015" start="21927" end="21950" title="Chilean transition to democracy" label="transition to democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14502" start="22544" end="22556" title="Lo Barnechea" label="Lo Barnechea"/>
<link wikidata="Q201036" start="22561" end="22569" title="Vitacura" label="Vitacura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252509" start="22637" end="22655" title="Providencia Avenue" label="Providencia Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372287" start="23005" end="23014" title="Sanhattan" label="Sanhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="23106" end="23122" title="Shopping mall" label="shopping centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="23502" end="23515" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="23555" end="23559" title="smog" label="smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q20747255" start="23684" end="23696" title="Road space rationing" label="restrictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q954223" start="24117" end="24129" title="Transantiago" label="Transantiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q9060973" start="24342" end="24364" title="Plaza de la Ciudadanía" label="Plaza de la Ciudadanía"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903577" start="24438" end="24449" title="Bicentennial of Chile" label="bicentenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4250563" start="24585" end="24604" title="Titanium La Portada" label="Titanium La Portada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542408" start="24609" end="24628" title="Gran Torre Santiago" label="Gran Torre Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q906170" start="24648" end="24664" title="Costanera Center" label="Costanera Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q151835" start="24698" end="24717" title="2010 Chile earthquake" label="powerful earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q71500435" start="25228" end="25244" title="Estallido Social" label="Estallido Social"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415377" start="25605" end="25620" title="Plaza Baquedano" label="Plaza Baquedano"/>
<link wikidata="Q913314" start="25631" end="25645" title="Santiago Metro" label="Santiago Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q127671" start="26157" end="26178" title="Arturo Merino Benítez International Airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415377" start="26218" end="26233" title="Plaza Baquedano" label="Plaza Baquedano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369627" start="26262" end="26293" title="Estadio San Carlos de Apoquindo" label="Estadio San Carlos de Apoquindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031793" start="26385" end="26408" title="Intermediate Depression" label="Intermediate Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064982" start="26500" end="26511" title="Cerro Renca" label="Cerro Renca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064864" start="26513" end="26525" title="Cerro Blanco" label="Cerro Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055993" start="26531" end="26548" title="Cerro Santa Lucía" label="Cerro Santa Lucía"/>
<link wikidata="Q738973" start="26631" end="26644" title="Mapocho River" label="Mapocho River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="26715" end="26720" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q174761" start="26741" end="26762" title="Chilean Coastal Range" label="Chilean Coastal Range"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27081" end="27096" title="Sierra de Ramón" label="Sierra de Ramón"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415240" start="27147" end="27162" title="San Ramón Fault" label="San Ramón Fault"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27198" end="27212" title="Cerro de Ramón" label="Cerro de Ramón"/>
<link wikidata="Q10354801" start="27255" end="27268" title="Precordillera" label="Precordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="27339" end="27344" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q756244" start="27451" end="27460" title="Tupungato" label="Tupungato"/>
<link wikidata="Q943045" start="27499" end="27510" title="Tupungatito" label="Tupungatito"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467823" start="27512" end="27520" title="San José (volcano)" label="San José"/>
<link wikidata="Q906358" start="27526" end="27531" title="Maipo (volcano)" label="Maipo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324530" start="27533" end="27547" title="Cerro El Plomo" label="Cerro El Plomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10354801" start="27741" end="27754" title="Precordillera" label="Precordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276571" start="27925" end="27940" title="Chilean matorral" label="thorny woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15544357" start="27950" end="27965" title="Vachellia caven" label="Vachellia caven"/>
<link wikidata="Q11700799" start="28037" end="28055" title="Prosopis chilensis" label="Prosopis chilensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28128" end="28148" title="Baccharis paniculata" label="Baccharis paniculata"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="28225" end="28242" title="semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="28277" end="28306" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="28314" end="28327" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q51100" start="28841" end="28850" title="Peñalolén" label="Peñalolén"/>
<link wikidata="Q14460" start="28855" end="28865" title="La Florida, Chile" label="La Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="29629" end="29657" title="El Niño Southern Oscillation" label="El Niño Southern Oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="30357" end="30362" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10354801" start="30367" end="30380" title="Precordillera" label="Precordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q740358" start="30499" end="30508" title="snow line" label="snow line"/>
<link wikidata="Q56113" start="30812" end="30825" title="Quinta Normal" label="Quinta Normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14466" start="30841" end="30849" title="La Reina" label="La Reina"/>
<link wikidata="Q18783" start="32022" end="32042" title="Pacific Ring of Fire" label="Pacific Ring of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q538867" start="32075" end="32080" title="Nazca Plate" label="Nazca"/>
<link wikidata="Q119490" start="32085" end="32105" title="South American Plate" label="South American Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348911" start="32219" end="32223" title="1575 Valdivia earthquake" label="1575"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551488" start="32332" end="32336" title="1647 Santiago earthquake" label="1647"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167748" start="32364" end="32387" title="The Earthquake In Chile" label="The Earthquake In Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q28494" start="32397" end="32416" title="Heinrich von Kleist" label="Heinrich von Kleist"/>
<link wikidata="Q212618" start="32465" end="32480" title="1960 Valdivia earthquake" label="1960 (Valdivia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240757" start="32485" end="32501" title="1985 Algarrobo earthquake" label="1985 (Algarrobo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q151835" start="32643" end="32653" title="2010 Chile earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q201605" start="32685" end="32707" title="moment magnitude scale" label="moment magnitude scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q43777" start="32957" end="32973" title="2010 Haiti earthquake" label="Haiti earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q727990" start="33045" end="33061" title="megathrust earthquake" label="large earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415240" start="33187" end="33196" title="San Ramón Fault" label="San Ramón"/>
<link wikidata="Q109941348" start="33201" end="33211" title="El Arrayán Fault" label="El Arrayán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817963" start="33391" end="33402" title="debris flow" label="debris flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="33503" end="33516" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="33877" end="33911" title="US Environmental Protection Agency" label="US Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="33920" end="33945" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q529024" start="34055" end="34066" title="El Teniente" label="El Teniente"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="34331" end="34348" title="Inversion (meteorology)" label="thermal inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124833" start="34720" end="34730" title="Free-ranging dog" label="Stray dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131" start="36641" end="36669" title="Santiago Metropolitan Region" label="Santiago Metropolitan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q188002" start="36878" end="36893" title="Santiago Centro" label="Santiago Centro"/>
<link wikidata="Q14437" start="36898" end="36911" title="Independencia, Chile" label="Independencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13045" start="37122" end="37138" title="Estación Central" label="Estación Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q56117" start="37149" end="37157" title="Recoleta, Chile" label="Recoleta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="37276" end="37279" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q32874" start="37322" end="37327" title="ECLAC" label="ECLAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542408" start="37837" end="37856" title="Gran Torre Santiago" label="Gran Torre Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072952" start="37968" end="37977" title="free flow" label="free flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q913314" start="38038" end="38055" title="Metro de Santiago" label="Metro de Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="38124" end="38144" title="Economic inequality" label="economically divided"/>
<link wikidata="Q162455" start="38151" end="38167" title="Gini coefficient" label="Gini coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q906170" start="38397" end="38413" title="Costanera Center" label="Costanera Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053372" start="38580" end="38588" title="Cencosud" label="Cencosud"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="38863" end="38878" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q4250563" start="38944" end="38963" title="Titanium La Portada" label="Titanium La Portada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542408" start="39160" end="39179" title="Gran Torre Santiago" label="Gran Torre Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q906170" start="39193" end="39209" title="Costanera Center" label="Costanera Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372287" start="39241" end="39250" title="Sanhattan" label="Sanhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="39334" end="39347" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374824" start="39407" end="39416" title="S.A.C.I. Falabella" label="Falabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433040" start="39434" end="39440" title="Ripley S.A." label="Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053377" start="39442" end="39450" title="La Polar" label="La Polar"/>
<link wikidata="Q201036" start="39554" end="39562" title="Vitacura" label="Vitacura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6462194" start="39564" end="39573" title="La Dehesa" label="La Dehesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14484" start="39579" end="39589" title="Las Condes" label="Las Condes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366007" start="39659" end="39672" title="Parque Arauco" label="Parque Arauco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39674" end="39689" title="Alto Las Condes" label="Alto Las Condes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743966" start="39691" end="39701" title="Mallplaza" label="Mall Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q906170" start="39777" end="39793" title="Costanera Center" label="Costanera Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q191485" start="39955" end="39968" title="Louis Vuitton" label="Louis Vuitton"/>
<link wikidata="Q843887" start="39970" end="39976" title="Hermès" label="Hermès"/>
<link wikidata="Q635484" start="39978" end="39992" title="Emporio Armani" label="Emporio Armani"/>
<link wikidata="Q981342" start="39994" end="40013" title="Salvatore Ferragamo" label="Salvatore Ferragamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355904" start="40015" end="40032" title="Ermenegildo Zegna Group" label="Ermenegildo Zegna"/>
<link wikidata="Q611115" start="40034" end="40043" title="Swarovski" label="Swarovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q635484" start="40245" end="40260" title="Armani Exchange" label="Armani Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q806085" start="40262" end="40277" title="Banana Republic" label="Banana Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399212" start="40279" end="40289" title="Façonnable" label="Façonnable"/>
<link wikidata="Q491627" start="40291" end="40300" title="Hugo Boss" label="Hugo Boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q611115" start="40302" end="40311" title="Swarovski" label="Swarovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q147662" start="40317" end="40321" title="Zara (retailer)" label="Zara"/>
<link wikidata="Q9031616" start="40417" end="40444" title="Mercado Central de Santiago" label="Mercado Central de Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863718" start="40463" end="40480" title="Barrio Bellavista" label="Barrio Bellavista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156435" start="40485" end="40501" title="Barrio Lastarria" label="Barrio Lastarria"/>
<link wikidata="Q127671" start="40601" end="40644" title="Arturo Merino Benítez International Airport" label="Arturo Merino Benítez International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q19755" start="40646" end="40650" title="IATA" label="IATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811588" start="40729" end="40732" title="airline hub" label="hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q649178" start="40736" end="40750" title="LATAM Chile" label="LATAM Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427299" start="40752" end="40763" title="Sky Airline" label="Sky Airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q381400" start="40765" end="40775" title="Aerocardal" label="Aerocardal"/>
<link wikidata="Q30106175" start="40780" end="40788" title="JetSmart" label="JetSmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q51591" start="40839" end="40847" title="Pudahuel" label="Pudahuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409457" start="41204" end="41227" title="Eulogio Sánchez Airport" label="Eulogio Sánchez Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q14466" start="41310" end="41318" title="La Reina" label="La Reina"/>
<link wikidata="Q679910" start="41391" end="41430" title="Empresa de los Ferrocarriles del Estado" label="Empresa de los Ferrocarriles del Estado"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582" start="41515" end="41523" title="Rancagua" label="Rancagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q187807" start="41525" end="41537" title="San Fernando, Chile" label="San Fernando"/>
<link wikidata="Q4469" start="41539" end="41544" title="Talca" label="Talca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3862" start="41579" end="41591" title="Constitución, Chile" label="Constitución"/>
<link wikidata="Q14494" start="41623" end="41630" title="Linares, Chile" label="Linares"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774" start="41635" end="41642" title="Chillán" label="Chillán"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163126" start="41687" end="41719" title="Estación Central railway station" label="Estación Central railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5860760" start="41792" end="41824" title="Santiago–Valparaíso railway line" label="Santiago–Valparaíso railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q33986" start="41853" end="41863" title="Valparaíso" label="Valparaíso"/>
<link wikidata="Q16302025" start="41926" end="41935" title="Melitrén" label="Melipilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q63980739" start="41940" end="41946" title="Santiago-Batuco commuter rail" label="Batuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244875" start="42264" end="42294" title="Estación Central metro station" label="Estación Central metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249675" start="42406" end="42443" title="Universidad de Santiago metro station" label="Universidad de Santiago metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682858" start="42731" end="42755" title="Los Héroes metro station" label="Los Héroes metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311190" start="42922" end="42945" title="Pajaritos metro station" label="Pajaritos metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q127671" start="42969" end="42990" title="Arturo Merino Benítez International Airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q33986" start="43019" end="43029" title="Valparaíso" label="Valparaíso"/>
<link wikidata="Q184345" start="43031" end="43043" title="Viña del Mar" label="Viña del Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250941" start="43123" end="43148" title="La Cisterna metro station" label="La Cisterna metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465657" start="43293" end="43315" title="La Vega Central Market" label="La Vega Central Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248987" start="43346" end="43364" title="Puente Cal y Canto metro station" label="Puente Cal y Canto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="43452" end="43464" title="toll highway" label="toll highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826925" start="43622" end="43639" title="Autopista Central" label="Autopista Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175012" start="43759" end="43774" title="Costanera Norte" label="Costanera Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072952" start="43970" end="43979" title="free flow" label="free flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098656" start="44057" end="44064" title="Chile Route 68" label="Ruta 68"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088670" start="44091" end="44160" title="Avenida Libertador General Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="&amp;quot;Alameda&amp;quot; Libertador General Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q51032" start="44267" end="44276" title="Melipilla" label="Melipilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q56135" start="44293" end="44304" title="San Antonio, Chile" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841" start="44567" end="44573" title="Colina, Chile" label="Colina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16903" start="44578" end="44587" title="Los Andes, Chile" label="Los Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q954223" start="45350" end="45362" title="Transantiago" label="Transantiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220021" start="45549" end="45570" title="Contactless smart card" label="contactless smartcard"/>
<link wikidata="Q954223" start="45982" end="45985" title="Red Metropolitana de Movilidad" label="RED"/>
<link wikidata="Q913314" start="46309" end="46323" title="Santiago Metro" label="Santiago Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825390" start="46863" end="46872" title="Metrotren" label="Metrotren"/>
<link wikidata="Q954223" start="47408" end="47411" title="Red Metropolitana de Movilidad" label="Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q26235033" start="48372" end="48378" title="Cabify" label="Cabify"/>
<link wikidata="Q780442" start="48380" end="48384" title="Uber" label="Uber"/>
<link wikidata="Q21190510" start="48389" end="48393" title="DiDi" label="DiDi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088670" start="49381" end="49431" title="Avenida Libertador General Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="Avenida Libertador General Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826925" start="49539" end="49556" title="Autopista Central" label="Autopista Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q5713719" start="49565" end="49578" title="Independencia Avenue (Santiago de Chile)" label="Independencia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49580" end="49592" title="Gran Avenida José Miguel Carrera" label="Gran Avenida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49594" end="49602" title="Avenida Recoleta" label="Recoleta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49604" end="49614" title="Avenida Santa Rosa" label="Santa Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383556" start="49616" end="49631" title="Vicuña Mackenna Avenue" label="Vicuña Mackenna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49636" end="49644" title="Tobalaba Avenida" label="Tobalaba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49684" end="49705" title="Avenida Los Pajaritos" label="Avenida Los Pajaritos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252509" start="49722" end="49740" title="Providencia Avenue" label="Providencia Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780530" start="49745" end="49761" title="Apoquindo Avenue" label="Apoquindo Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q625532" start="49788" end="49811" title="Américo Vespucio Avenue" label="Américo Vespucio Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q510662" start="49822" end="49831" title="ring road" label="ring road"/>
<link wikidata="Q271839" start="49998" end="50018" title="Pan-American Highway" label="Pan-American Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q107303008" start="50695" end="50739" title="governor of the Santiago Metropolitan Region" label="governor of the Santiago Metropolitan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q85870414" start="50748" end="50779" title="Regional Governor (Chile)" label="popularly elected to the office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5772063" start="50793" end="50807" title="Claudio Orrego" label="Claudio Orrego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153408" start="51058" end="51067" title="Provinces of Chile" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840161" start="51075" end="51083" title="Communes of Chile" label="communes"/>
<link wikidata="Q691960" start="51092" end="51110" title="Satellite city" label="satellite communes"/>
<link wikidata="Q45632" start="51207" end="51224" title="Santiago Province, Chile" label="Santiago Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q201331" start="51283" end="51293" title="Cordillera Province, Chile" label="Cordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q721450" start="51295" end="51300" title="Maipo Province" label="Maipo"/>
<link wikidata="Q569435" start="51306" end="51315" title="Talagante Province" label="Talagante"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51439" end="51444" title="North zone of Santiago de Chile" label="north"/>
<link wikidata="Q188002" start="51446" end="51452" title="Santiago (commune)" label="center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5837167" start="51454" end="51463" title="Northeastern zone of Santiago de Chile" label="northeast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51465" end="51474" title="Southeastern zone of Santiago de Chile" label="southeast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51476" end="51481" title="South zone of Santiago de Chile" label="south"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51483" end="51492" title="Northwestern zone of Santiago de Chile" label="southeast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51497" end="51506" title="Southwestern zone of Santiago de Chile" label="southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304620" start="51720" end="51733" title="Casa Colorada" label="Casa Colorada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413975" start="51746" end="51766" title="San Francisco Church, Santiago de Chile" label="San Francisco Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q15141930" start="51779" end="51800" title="Posada del Corregidor" label="Posada del Corregidor"/>
<link wikidata="Q602232" start="51847" end="51861" title="Plaza de Armas (Santiago)" label="Plaza de Armas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061695" start="52121" end="52149" title="Central Post Office Building (Santiago)" label="Central Post Office Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126324" start="52187" end="52227" title="Palacio de la Real Audiencia de Santiago" label="Palacio de la Real Audiencia de Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126324" start="52272" end="52303" title="Chilean National History Museum" label="Chilean National History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304620" start="52512" end="52525" title="Casa Colorada" label="Casa Colorada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936293" start="52587" end="52616" title="Municipal Theatre of Santiago" label="Municipal Theatre of Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901485" start="52799" end="52815" title="Biblioteca Nacional de Chile" label="National Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595661" start="52869" end="52902" title="Former National Congress Building" label="Former National Congress Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126333" start="52908" end="52922" title="Palacio de los Tribunales de Justicia de Santiago" label="Justice Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q517430" start="53060" end="53087" title="Museo Chileno de Arte Precolombino" label="Museum of pre-Columbian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q368" start="53283" end="53299" title="Augusto Pinochet" label="Augusto Pinochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q374398" start="53601" end="53623" title="Supreme Court of Chile" label="Supreme Court of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q891561" start="53812" end="53835" title="Santiago Stock Exchange" label="Santiago Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q58413509" start="53896" end="53912" title="Club de la Unión (Chile)" label="Club de la Unión"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54333" end="54345" title="Paseo Puente" label="Paseo Puente"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420511" start="54351" end="54371" title="Santo Domingo Church, Santiago de Chile" label="Santo Domingo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9031616" start="54388" end="54402" title="Mercado Central de Santiago" label="Central Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421270" start="54484" end="54495" title="Torre Entel" label="Torre Entel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542408" start="54850" end="54869" title="Gran Torre Santiago" label="Gran Torre Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974386" start="55099" end="55113" title="National Monuments of Chile" label="heritage sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q188002" start="55304" end="55323" title="Santiago (commune)" label="commune of Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="55422" end="55441" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="55445" end="55451" title="Unesco" label="Unesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324530" start="55535" end="55543" title="Cerro El Plomo" label="El Plomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413975" start="55545" end="55584" title="San Francisco Church, Santiago de Chile" label="the church and convent of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146881" start="55593" end="55612" title="palace of La Moneda" label="palace of La Moneda"/>
<link wikidata="Q15042373" start="55737" end="55759" title="Santiago Metropolitan Cathedral" label="Metropolitan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q602232" start="55884" end="55898" title="Plaza de Armas (Santiago)" label="Plaza de Armas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126324" start="55915" end="55929" title="Palacio de la Real Audiencia de Santiago" label="Real Audiencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061695" start="55935" end="55946" title="Central Post Office Building (Santiago)" label="Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304620" start="55954" end="55967" title="Casa Colorada" label="Casa Colorada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136270" start="56308" end="56335" title="Club Hípico de Santiago" label="Equestrian Club of Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q232141" start="56361" end="56380" title="University of Chile" label="University of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129925" start="56389" end="56408" title="Pontifical Catholic University of Chile" label="Catholic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163126" start="56410" end="56425" title="Estación Central (railway station)" label="Central Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400037" start="56434" end="56449" title="Estación Mapocho" label="Mapocho Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q9031616" start="56451" end="56466" title="Mercado Central de Santiago" label="Mercado Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901485" start="56477" end="56493" title="Biblioteca Nacional de Chile" label="National Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q775376" start="56495" end="56514" title="Chilean National Museum of Fine Arts" label="Museum of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863744" start="56523" end="56543" title="Barrio París-Londres" label="Barrio París-Londres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055993" start="56706" end="56722" title="Santa Lucía Hill" label="Santa Lucia hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q251353" start="56728" end="56753" title="Sanctuary on San Cristóbal Hill" label="shrine of the Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q181523" start="56771" end="56789" title="San Cristóbal Hill" label="San Cristobal hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053309" start="56815" end="56831" title="Cementerio General de Santiago" label="General Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q42898085" start="56833" end="56848" title="Parque Forestal" label="Parque Forestal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071826" start="56854" end="56873" title="O&amp;#x27;Higgins Park" label="O&amp;#x27;Higgins Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363897" start="56882" end="56900" title="Quinta Normal Park" label="Quinta Normal Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="56974" end="56981" title="theater" label="theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087874" start="57137" end="57151" title="Santiago a Mil International Theater Festival" label="Santiago a Mil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259453" start="57278" end="57309" title="University of Santiago de Chile" label="University of Santiago de Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400037" start="57427" end="57450" title="Estación Mapocho" label="Mapocho Cultural Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5761161" start="57452" end="57480" title="Centro Cultural Matucana 100" label="100 Matucana Cultural Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062803" start="57486" end="57518" title="Centro Cultural Gabriela Mistral" label="Gabriela Mistral Cultural Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062811" start="57520" end="57556" title="Centro Cultural Palacio de La Moneda" label="Centro Cultural Palacio de La Moneda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302708" start="57562" end="57576" title="Movistar Arena (Santiago)" label="Movistar Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q60368" start="57585" end="57603" title="Teatro Caupolicán" label="Caupolican Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="57628" end="57633" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q41425" start="57638" end="57644" title="ballet" label="ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936293" start="57690" end="57719" title="Municipal Theatre of Santiago" label="Municipal Theatre of Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066554" start="58021" end="58034" title="Fantasilandia" label="Fantasilandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098753" start="58040" end="58052" title="Chilean National Zoo" label="National Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58060" end="58068" title="Buin Zoo" label="Buin Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863718" start="58103" end="58113" title="Barrio Bellavista" label="Bellavista"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863722" start="58115" end="58121" title="Barrio Brasil" label="Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58123" end="58135" title="Barrio Manuel Montt" label="Manuel Montt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203723" start="58137" end="58148" title="Plaza Ñuñoa" label="Plaza Ñuñoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863752" start="58153" end="58159" title="Barrio Suecia" label="Suecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184345" start="58474" end="58486" title="Vina del Mar" label="Vina del Mar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58528" end="58551" title="Monticello Grand Casino" label="Monticello Grand Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="58676" end="58682" title="museum" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58776" end="58822" title="Directorate of Libraries, Archives and Museums" label="Directorate of Libraries, Archives and Museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126324" start="58836" end="58859" title="National History Museum (Santiago, Chile)" label="National History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q775376" start="58861" end="58889" title="Chilean National Museum of Fine Arts" label="National Museum of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064279" start="58898" end="58932" title="Chilean National Museum of Natural History" label="National Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126324" start="59110" end="59138" title="Palacio de la Real Audiencia de Santiago" label="Palacio de la Real Audiencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304620" start="59143" end="59156" title="Casa Colorada" label="Casa Colorada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413975" start="59241" end="59264" title="San Francisco Church, Santiago de Chile" label="Church of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q517430" start="59273" end="59300" title="Museo Chileno de Arte Precolombino" label="Museum of Pre-Columbian Art"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59326" end="59346" title="Palacio de la Real Aduana de Santiago" label="Palacio de la Aduana"/>
<link wikidata="Q605703" start="59544" end="59570" title="Santiago Museum of Contemporary Art" label="Museum of Contemporary Art"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59582" end="59624" title="Faculty of Arts of the University of Chile" label="Faculty of Arts of the University of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363897" start="59627" end="59645" title="Quinta Normal Park" label="Quinta Normal Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59727" end="59742" title="Artequin Museum" label="Artequin Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59748" end="59780" title="Museum of Science and Technology, Santiago" label="Museum of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59790" end="59807" title="Museo Ferroviario" label="Museo Ferroviario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940940" start="59822" end="59855" title="Museum of Memory and Human Rights" label="Museum of Memory and Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q9046877" start="60053" end="60072" title="Museo Nacional Aeronáutico y del Espacio" label="Aeronautical Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60087" end="60106" title="Tajamares del Mapocho" label="Museum of Tajamares"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60129" end="60154" title="Museo Interactivo Mirador" label="Museo Interactivo Mirador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901485" start="60377" end="60393" title="Biblioteca Nacional de Chile" label="National Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970429" start="60591" end="60608" title="National Archives of Chile" label="National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q8247576" start="60800" end="60819" title="Library of Santiago" label="Library of Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60823" end="60838" title="Barrio Matucana" label="Barrio Matucana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936293" start="61037" end="61066" title="Municipal Theatre of Santiago" label="Municipal Theatre of Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="61593" end="61605" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61614" end="61633" title="Maquinaria festival" label="Maquinaria festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168546" start="61727" end="61733" title="Copesa" label="Copesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577262" start="61882" end="61900" title="The Santiago Times" label="The Santiago Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601390" start="61915" end="61925" title="La Tercera" label="La Tercera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208005" start="61940" end="61949" title="La Cuarta" label="La Cuarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q10695465" start="61964" end="61974" title="The Clinic (newspaper)" label="The Clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6492760" start="61989" end="62009" title="Las Últimas Noticias" label="Las Últimas Noticias"/>
<link wikidata="Q597933" start="62120" end="62123" title="Televisión Nacional de Chile" label="TVN"/>
<link wikidata="Q600805" start="62147" end="62155" title="Canal 13 (Chilean TV channel)" label="Canal 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q600815" start="62157" end="62168" title="Chilevisión" label="Chilevisión"/>
<link wikidata="Q369153" start="62170" end="62176" title="La Red (Chilean TV channel)" label="La Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q597946" start="62181" end="62185" title="Mega (Chilean TV channel)" label="Mega"/>
<link wikidata="Q5653556" start="62219" end="62234" title="ADN Radio Chile" label="ADN Radio Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550654" start="62236" end="62253" title="Radio Agricultura" label="Radio Agricultura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096244" start="62255" end="62270" title="Radio Concierto" label="Radio Concierto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416625" start="62272" end="62289" title="Radio Cooperativa (Chile)" label="Radio Cooperativa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096557" start="62291" end="62305" title="Radio Pudahuel" label="Radio Pudahuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9070115" start="62310" end="62330" title="Rock &amp;amp; Pop (Chilean radio)" label="Radio Rock &amp;amp; Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q207373" start="62443" end="62452" title="Colo-Colo" label="Colo-Colo"/>
<link wikidata="Q606832" start="62645" end="62660" title="Primera División de Chile" label="national titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130037" start="62665" end="62675" title="Copa Chile" label="Copa Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q184795" start="62708" end="62725" title="Copa Libertadores" label="Copa Libertadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369435" start="62834" end="62852" title="Estadio Monumental David Arellano" label="Estadio Monumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q737753" start="62878" end="62898" title="Club Universidad de Chile" label="Universidad de Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q60585" start="62976" end="62993" title="Copa Sudamericana" label="Copa Sudamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q232141" start="63218" end="63237" title="University of Chile" label="University of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q594994" start="63385" end="63410" title="Estadio Nacional de Chile" label="Estadio Nacional de Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q427446" start="63437" end="63472" title="Club Deportivo Universidad Católica" label="Club Deportivo Universidad Católica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129059" start="63904" end="63918" title="Unión Española" label="Unión Española"/>
<link wikidata="Q758689" start="63920" end="63934" title="Audax Italiano" label="Audax Italiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q719719" start="63936" end="63945" title="Club Deportivo Palestino" label="Palestino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023222" start="63947" end="63963" title="Santiago Morning" label="Santiago Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q515425" start="63965" end="63975" title="Deportes Magallanes" label="Magallanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542721" start="63980" end="63989" title="A.C. Barnechea" label="Barnechea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136270" start="64102" end="64125" title="Club Hípico de Santiago" label="Club Hípico de Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q9003960" start="64134" end="64149" title="Hipódromo Chile" label="Hipódromo Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777138" start="64162" end="64180" title="Race track" label="horseracing tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q220952" start="64244" end="64269" title="1959 Basketball World Cup" label="1959 Basketball World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533541" start="64277" end="64282" title="Chile national basketball team" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q319565" start="64348" end="64374" title="FIA Formula E" label="FIA Formula E Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="64497" end="64500" title="Fédération Internationale de l&amp;#x27;Automobile" label="FIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16585569" start="64538" end="64561" title="2023 Pan American Games" label="2023 Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q122574061" start="64590" end="64630" title="2027 Special Olympics World Summer Games" label="2027 Special Olympics World Summer Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q251343" start="65275" end="65301" title="Santiago Metropolitan Park" label="Santiago Metropolitan Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q181523" start="65320" end="65338" title="Cerro San Cristóbal" label="San Cristóbal Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098753" start="65356" end="65376" title="Chilean National Zoo" label="Chilean National Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140507" start="65385" end="65403" title="Santiago Cable Car" label="Santiago Cable Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q6062028" start="65407" end="65426" title="Parque Bicentenario" label="Parque Bicentenario"/>
<link wikidata="Q201036" start="65477" end="65485" title="Vitacura" label="Vitacura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071826" start="65488" end="65507" title="Parque O&amp;#x27;Higgins, Chile" label="O&amp;#x27;Higgins Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363897" start="65510" end="65528" title="Quinta Normal Park" label="Quinta Normal Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q42898085" start="65531" end="65544" title="Parque Forestal, Chile" label="Forestal Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q738973" start="65588" end="65595" title="Mapocho" label="Mapocho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055993" start="65604" end="65620" title="Cerro Santa Lucía" label="Santa Lucia Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051592" start="65921" end="65933" title="Valle Nevado" label="Valle Nevado"/>
<link wikidata="Q6464300" start="65935" end="65943" title="La Parva" label="La Parva"/>
<link wikidata="Q994889" start="65945" end="65956" title="El Colorado" label="El Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q775376" start="66031" end="66052" title="Museo de Bellas Artes (Santiago)" label="Museo de Bellas Artes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66073" end="66092" title="Museo Violeta Parra" label="Museo Violeta Parra"/>
<link wikidata="Q230499" start="66141" end="66154" title="Violeta Parra" label="Violeta Parra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863718" start="66174" end="66191" title="Barrio Bellavista" label="Barrio Bellavista"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163126" start="66230" end="66245" title="Estación Central railway station" label="Central Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q20882" start="66275" end="66289" title="Gustave Eiffel" label="Gustave Eiffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058826" start="66292" end="66311" title="Estadio Víctor Jara, Chile" label="Víctor Jara Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595661" start="66314" end="66334" title="Ex Congreso Nacional" label="Ex National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q602232" start="66337" end="66351" title="Plaza de Armas (Santiago)" label="Plaza de Armas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146881" start="66370" end="66390" title="Palacio de La Moneda" label="Palacio de La Moneda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936293" start="66431" end="66460" title="Municipal Theatre of Santiago" label="Municipal Theatre of Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q594994" start="66532" end="66548" title="Estadio Nacional de Chile" label="Estadio Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q160813" start="66562" end="66576" title="1962 FIFA World Cup" label="1962 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369435" start="66585" end="66618" title="Estadio Monumental David Arellano" label="Estadio Monumental David Arellano"/>
<link wikidata="Q788867" start="66620" end="66639" title="Estadio Santa Laura" label="Estadio Santa Laura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369627" start="66645" end="66676" title="Estadio San Carlos de Apoquindo" label="Estadio San Carlos de Apoquindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="66761" end="66769" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288549" start="66860" end="66863" title="National Statistics Institute (Chile)" label="INE"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="67060" end="67083" title="Evangelicals" label="Evangelical Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="67144" end="67168" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="67206" end="67223" title="Latter-day Saints" label="Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="67243" end="67249" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="67259" end="67275" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="67288" end="67294" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="67383" end="67390" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="67394" end="67402" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908448" start="67502" end="67529" title="Santiago Bahá&amp;#x27;í Temple" label="Santiago Bahá&amp;#x27;í Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568313" start="67546" end="67569" title="Baháʼí House of Worship" label="Baháʼí House of Worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="67862" end="67870" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q232141" start="67874" end="67894" title="Universidad de Chile" label="Universidad de Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q43675" start="68105" end="68115" title="Philip the Apostle" label="San Felipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q170467" start="68133" end="68150" title="Philip V of Spain" label="Philip V of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q439195" start="68258" end="68270" title="Andrés Bello" label="Andrés Bello"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="68332" end="68348" title="Kingdom of Spain" label="Kingdom of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129925" start="68431" end="68471" title="Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile" label="Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="68632" end="68639" title="Pius XI" label="Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351322" start="68738" end="68765" title="Joaquín Larraín Gandarillas" label="Joaquín Larraín Gandarillas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68779" end="68801" title="Archbishop of Anazarba" label="Archbishop of Anazarba"/>
<link wikidata="Q306" start="69046" end="69062" title="Sebastián Piñera" label="Sebastián Piñera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677599" start="69073" end="69088" title="Ricardo Raineri" label="Ricardo Raineri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5896316" start="69103" end="69123" title="Hernán de Solminihac" label="Hernán de Solminihac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614477" start="69286" end="69319" title="Prueba de Selección Universitaria" label="Prueba de Selección Universitaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q232141" start="69391" end="69411" title="Universidad de Chile (university)" label="Universidad de Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129925" start="69425" end="69465" title="Pontifical Catholic University of Chile" label="Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259453" start="69474" end="69506" title="Universidad de Santiago de Chile" label="Universidad de Santiago de Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825306" start="69517" end="69570" title="Universidad Metropolitana de Ciencias de la Educación" label="Universidad Metropolitana de Ciencias de la Educación"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825309" start="69580" end="69617" title="Universidad Tecnológica Metropolitana" label="Universidad Tecnológica Metropolitana"/>
<link wikidata="Q457793" start="69627" end="69667" title="Universidad Técnica Federico Santa María" label="Universidad Técnica Federico Santa María"/>
<link wikidata="Q611995" start="69703" end="69728" title="Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez" label="Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778689" start="69737" end="69763" title="Universidad del Desarrollo" label="Universidad del Desarrollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316229" start="69772" end="69798" title="Universidad Diego Portales" label="Universidad Diego Portales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712073" start="69807" end="69834" title="Universidad Alberto Hurtado" label="Universidad Alberto Hurtado"/>
<link wikidata="Q662422" start="69843" end="69871" title="Universidad Central de Chile" label="Universidad Central de Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348434" start="69881" end="69914" title="Universidad Nacional Andrés Bello" label="Universidad Nacional Andrés Bello"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374234" start="69924" end="69967" title="Academy of Christian Humanism University" label="Universidad Academia de Humanismo Cristiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q29731" start="69977" end="69994" title="Universidad Mayor" label="Universidad Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812621" start="70002" end="70026" title="Universidad Finis Terrae" label="Universidad Finis Terrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q940031" start="70029" end="70053" title="University of the Andes, Chile" label="Universidad de Los Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515968" start="70056" end="70084" title="Universidad Gabriela Mistral" label="Universidad Gabriela Mistral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247805" start="70093" end="70117" title="University of the Pacific (Chile)" label="Universidad del Pacífico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896686" start="70120" end="70147" title="Universidad de las Américas (Chile)" label="Universidad de las Américas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895000" start="70150" end="70195" title="Universidad de Artes, Ciencias y Comunicación" label="Universidad de Artes, Ciencias y Comunicación"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631474" start="70207" end="70232" title="Universidad San Sebastián" label="Universidad San Sebastián"/>
<link wikidata="Q638434" start="70241" end="70264" title="Universidad Bolivariana" label="Universidad Bolivariana"/>
<link wikidata="Q151510" start="70282" end="70321" title="Ruprecht Karls University of Heidelberg" label="Ruprecht Karls University of Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239155" start="70426" end="70477" title="David Rockefeller Center for Latin American Studies" label="David Rockefeller Center for Latin American Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="70518" end="70526" title="Stanford" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655621" start="70550" end="70577" title="Diplomatic Academy of Chile" label="Diplomatic Academy of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="70654" end="70661" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="70671" end="70678" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="70688" end="70700" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="70714" end="70723" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="70733" end="70737" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="70749" end="70755" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="70783" end="70789" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="70799" end="70804" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="70822" end="70833" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="70851" end="70855" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="70866" end="70875" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="70886" end="70893" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="70938" end="70943" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="70954" end="70959" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886609" start="71039" end="71077" title="Union of Ibero-American Capital Cities" label="Union of Ibero-American Capital Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878176" start="71118" end="71146" title="List of people from Santiago" label="List of people from Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242047" start="71149" end="71163" title="Criollo people" label="Criollo people"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51578" wikidata="Q312284" url="?curid=51578" title="Tabebuia">
<text>Tabebuia is a genus of flowering plants in the family Bignoniaceae. &quot;Tabebuia&quot; consists almost entirely of trees, but a few are often large shrubs. A few species produce timber, but the genus is mostly known for those that are cultivated as flowering trees.

==Etymology==
The genus name is derived from the Tupi words for &quot;ant&quot; and &quot;wood&quot;, referring to the fact that many &quot;Tabebuia&quot; species have twigs with soft pith which forms hollows within which ants live, defending the trees from other herbivores. The ants are attracted to the plants by special extra-floral nectar glands on at the apex of the petioles. The common name &quot;roble&quot; is sometimes found in English. &quot;Tabebuias&quot; have been called &quot;trumpet trees&quot;, but this name is usually applied to other trees and has become a source of confusion and misidentification.

==Distribution==
&quot;Tabebuia&quot; is native to the American tropics and subtropics from Mexico and the Caribbean to Argentina. Most of the species known are from the islands of Cuba and Hispaniola. It is commonly cultivated and often naturalized or adventive beyond its natural range. It easily escapes cultivation because of its numerous, air-borne seeds.

==Taxonomy==
In 1992, a revision of &quot;Tabebuia&quot; described 99 species and one hybrid. Phylogenetic studies of DNA sequences later showed that &quot;Tabebuia&quot;, as then circumscribed, was polyphyletic. In 2007, it was divided into three separate genera. Primavera (&quot;Roseodendron donnell-smithii&quot;) and a related species with no unique common name (&quot;Roseodendron chryseum&quot;) were transferred to &quot;Roseodendron&quot;. Those species known as &quot;ipê&quot; and &quot;pau d&#x27;arco&quot; (in Portuguese) or poui were transferred to &quot;Handroanthus&quot;. Sixty-seven species remained in &quot;Tabebuia&quot;. The former genus and polyphyletic group of 99 species described by Gentry in 1992 is now usually referred to as &quot;&quot;Tabebuia&quot; sensu lato&quot;.

===Species===

All of the species in the first two columns below were recognized and described by Gentry in 1992. Listed in the third column are species names that have been used recently, but were not accepted by Gentry. The currently accepted synonym for each is in parentheses.

Some recently used names in &quot;Tabebuia&quot; that were not recognized by Gentry are not listed in the third column below because they apply to species that are now in &quot;Handroanthus&quot;. &quot;Tabebuia spectabilis&quot; is an obsolete name for &quot;Handroanthus chrysanthus&quot; subsp. &quot;meridionalis&quot;. &quot;Tabebuia ecuadorensis&quot; is now synonymized under &quot;Handroanthus billbergii&quot;. &quot;Tabebuia heteropoda&quot; is now synonymized under &quot;Handroanthus ochraceus&quot;.

No species that is now assigned to &quot;Roseodendron&quot; or to &quot;Handroanthus&quot; is listed below.

Authorities are cited for some of the names below. These can be found in Gentry (1992) or at the International Plant Names Index.
===Taxonomic history===

The name &quot;Tabebuia&quot; entered the botanical literature in 1803, when António Bernardino Gomes used it as a common name for &quot;Tabebuia uliginosa&quot;, now a synonym for &quot;Tabebuia cassinoides&quot;, which he described as a species of &quot;Bignonia&quot;. &quot;Tabebuia&quot; is an abbreviation of &quot;tacyba bebuya&quot;, a Tupi name meaning &quot;ant wood&quot;. Among the Indigenous peoples in Brazil, similar names exist for various species of &quot;Tabebuia&quot;.

&quot;Tabebuia&quot; was first used as a generic name by Augustin Pyramus de Candolle in 1838. The type species for the genus is &quot;Tabebuia uliginosa&quot;, which is now a synonym for &quot;Tabebuia cassinoides&quot;. Confusion soon ensued over the meaning of &quot;Tabebuia&quot; and what to include within it. Most of the misunderstanding was cleared up by Nathaniel Lord Britton in 1915. Britton revived the concept of &quot;Tabebuia&quot; that had been originated in 1876 by Bentham and Hooker, consisting of species with either simple or palmately compound leaves. Similar plants with pinnately compound leaves were placed in &quot;Tecoma&quot;. This is the concept of &quot;Tabebuia&quot; that was usually followed until 2007.

The genus &quot;Roseodendron&quot; was established by Faustino Miranda González in 1965 for the two species now known as &quot;Roseodendron donnell-smithii&quot; and &quot;Roseodendron chryseum&quot;. These species had been placed in &quot;Cybistax&quot; by Russell J. Seibert in 1940, but were returned to &quot;Tabebuia&quot; by Alwyn H. Gentry in 1992.

&quot;Handroanthus&quot; was established by Joáo Rodrigues de Mattos in 1970. Gentry did not agree with the segregation of &quot;Handroanthus&quot; from &quot;Tabebuia&quot; and warned against &quot;succumbing to further paroxysms of unwarranted splitting&quot;. In 1992, Gentry published a revision of &quot;Tabebuia&quot; in Flora Neotropica, in which he described 99 species and one hybrid, including those species placed by some authors in &quot;Roseodendron&quot; or &quot;Handroanthus&quot;. Gentry divided &quot;Tabebuia&quot; into ten &quot;species groups&quot;, some of them intentionally artificial. &quot;Tabebuia&quot;, as currently circumscribed, consists of groups 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. Group 1 is now the genus &quot;Roseodendron&quot;. Groups 3, 4, and 5 compose the genus &quot;Handroanthus&quot;.

In 2007, a molecular phylogenetic study found &quot;Handroanthus&quot; to be closer to a certain group of four genera than to &quot;Tabebuia&quot;. This group consists of &quot;Spirotecoma&quot;, &quot;Parmentiera&quot;, &quot;Crescentia&quot;, and &quot;Amphitecna&quot;. A phylogenetic tree can be seen at Bignoniaceae. &quot;Handroanthus&quot; was duly resurrected and 30 species were assigned to it, with species boundaries the same as those of Gentry (1992).

&quot;Roseodendron&quot; was resolved as sister to a clade consisting of &quot;Handroanthus&quot; and four other genera. This result had only weak statistical support, but &quot;Roseodendron&quot; clearly did not group with the remainder of &quot;Tabebuia&quot;. Consequently, &quot;Roseodendron&quot; was resurrected in its original form. The remaining 67 species of &quot;Tabebuia&quot; formed a strongly supported clade that is sister to &quot;Ekmanianthe&quot;, a genus of two species from Cuba and Hispaniola. &quot;Tabebuia&quot; had been traditionally placed in the tribe Tecomeae, but that tribe is now defined much more narrowly than it had been, and it now excludes &quot;Tabebuia&quot;. &quot;Tabebuia&quot; is now one of 12 to 14 genera belonging to a group that is informally called the &quot;Tabebuia&quot; alliance. This group has not been placed at any particular taxonomic rank.

Cladistic analysis of DNA data has strongly supported &quot;Tabebuia&quot; by Bayesian inference and maximum parsimony. Such studies have so far revealed almost nothing about relationships within the genus, placing nearly all of the sampled species in a large polytomy.

==Description==

The description below is excerpted from Grose and Olmstead (2007).
*Trees or shrubs. Evergreen or dry season deciduous.
*Wood lacking lapachol; not especially dense or hard. Heartwood light brown to reddish brown, not distinct from sapwood.
*Leaves sometimes simple; usually palmately 3 to 7(9)-foliate; with stalked or sessile lepidote scales.
*Inflorescences usually few-flowered panicles, dichotomously branching, without a well-developed, central rachis.
*Calyx coriaceous, spathaceous; irregularly 2 to 3-labiate, rarely 5-dentate.
*Corolla yellow in two species (&quot;T. aurea&quot; and &quot;T. nodosa&quot;); otherwise white to pink, rarely red, often with a yellow throat.
*Stamens didynamous; staminode small.
*Ovary linear, bilocular.
*Ovules in two or three series in each locule.
*Fruit a dehiscent capsule, usually linear, sometimes ribbed, glabrous except for lepidote scales.
*Seeds thin, with two wings; wings hyaline, membranaceous, and sharply demarcated from the seed body.
&quot;Tabebuia&quot; is distinguished from &quot;Handroanthus&quot; by wood that is not especially hard or heavy, and not abruptly divided into heartwood and sapwood. Lapachol is absent. Scales are present, but no hair. The calyx is usually spathaceous in &quot;Tabebuia&quot;, but never so in &quot;Handroanthus&quot;. Only two species of &quot;Tabebuia&quot; are yellow-flowered, but most species of &quot;Handroanthus&quot; are.

Unlike &quot;Roseodendron&quot;, the calyx of &quot;Tabebuia&quot; is always distinctly harder and thicker than the corolla. &quot;Tabebuia&quot; always has a dichotomously branched inflorescence; never a central rachis as in &quot;Roseodendron&quot;. Some species of &quot;Tabebuia&quot; have ribbed fruit, but not as conspicuously so as the two species of &quot;Roseodendron&quot;.
==Uses==
The wood of &quot;Tabebuia&quot; is light to medium in weight. &quot;Tabebuia rosea&quot; (including &quot;T. pentaphylla&quot;) is an important timber tree of tropical America. &quot;Tabebuia heterophylla&quot; and &quot;Tabebuia angustata&quot; are the most important timber trees of some of the Caribbean islands. Their wood is of medium weight and is exceptionally durable in contact with salt water.

The swamp species of &quot;Tabebuia&quot; have wood that is unusually light in weight. The most prominent example of these is &quot;Tabebuia cassinoides&quot;. Its roots produce a soft and spongy wood that is used for floats, razor strops, and the inner soles of shoes.

In spite of its use for lumber, &quot;Tabebuia&quot; is best known as an ornamental flowering tree. &quot;Tabebuia aurea&quot;, &quot;Tabebuia rosea&quot;, &quot;Tabebuia pallida&quot;, &quot;Tabebuia berteroi&quot;, and &quot;Tabebuia heterophylla&quot; are cultivated throughout the tropics for their showy flowers. &quot;Tabebuia dubia&quot;, &quot;Tabebuia haemantha&quot;, &quot;Tabebuia obtusifolia&quot;, &quot;Tabebuia nodosa&quot;, and &quot;Tabebuia roseo-alba&quot; are also known in cultivation and are sometimes locally abundant.

Some species of &quot;Tabebuia&quot; have been grown as honey plants by beekeepers.

==Ecology==
The nectar of &quot;Tabebuia&quot; flowers is an important food source for several species of bees and hummingbirds.

==Symbolism==
&quot;Tabebuia rosea&quot; is the national tree of El Salvador and the state tree of Cojedes, Venezuela.

==Gallery of &quot;Tabebuia&quot; flowers==
==References==
==Sources==
* (1992): &quot;Árvores brasileiras: manual de identificação e cultivo de plantas arbóreas nativas do Brasil.&quot;

==External links==
*HTML fulltext &quot;Flora of the Venezuelan Guayana&quot;
*CRC World Dictionary of Plant Names: R-Z Botany &amp; Plant Science Life Science CRC Press
*&quot;Tabebuia&quot; Plant Names IPNI
*&quot;Tabebuia&quot; Index Nominum Genericorum References NMNH Department of Botany Research and Collections Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History
*Molecular Phylogeny of Tabebuia and Allied Genera PDF Volume 32, Issue 3 List of Issues
* (2007): &quot;Taxonomic Revisions in the Polyphyletic Genus Tabebuia s. l. (Bignoniaceae)&quot;. In: &quot;Systematic Botany&quot;, volume 32, issue 3, pp. 660–670.
*&quot;Taxonomic Revisions in the Polyphyletic Genus Tabebuia s. l. (Bignoniaceae)&quot;
*Bignoniaceae &quot;Genera Plantarum&quot; vol. 2 part 2 (Bentham &amp; Hooker) View Record Titles beginning with &quot;G&quot; Titles Biodiversity Heritage Library
*Bignoniaceae At: Advanced Search At: Search Tool At: iplants
*&quot;Tabebuia&quot; (exact) Names At: Tropicos At: Science and Conservation At: Missouri Botanical Garden
*Species Records At: &quot;Tabebuia&quot; At: List of Genera At: Bignoniaceae At: List of Families At: Families and Genera in GRIN At: Queries At: GRIN taxonomy for plants 
*Digitifolieae Bignoniaceae Lamiales lamiids Embryophyta Streptophytina Streptophyta Viridiplantae Eukaryota Taxonomy UniProt</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="14" end="19" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="23" end="38" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="47" end="53" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q213453" start="54" end="66" title="Bignoniaceae" label="Bignoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="117" end="121" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="150" end="155" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="164" end="171" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="180" end="186" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q124946" start="237" end="247" title="Gardening" label="cultivated"/>
<link wikidata="Q120684" start="318" end="322" title="Tupi people" label="Tupi"/>
<link wikidata="Q502895" start="656" end="667" title="common name" label="common name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="708" end="715" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039217" start="872" end="889" title="Identification (biology)" label="misidentification"/>
<link wikidata="Q169480" start="933" end="939" title="Indigenous (ecology)" label="native"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="947" end="955" title="Americas" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="956" end="963" title="tropics" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="968" end="978" title="subtropics" label="subtropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="984" end="990" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755298" start="999" end="1008" title="Caribbean basin" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="1012" end="1021" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="1073" end="1077" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="1082" end="1092" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="1109" end="1119" title="Horticulture" label="cultivated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878495" start="1130" end="1141" title="Naturalisation (biology)" label="naturalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="1145" end="1154" title="Adventive species" label="adventive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="1166" end="1173" title="Nature" label="natural"/>
<link wikidata="Q4257161" start="1174" end="1179" title="Range (biology)" label="range"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041929" start="1191" end="1198" title="Colonisation (biology)" label="escapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q943313" start="1236" end="1245" title="Anemochory" label="air-borne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361864" start="1311" end="1320" title="Species description" label="described"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="1340" end="1346" title="hybrid (biology)" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="1348" end="1360" title="Phylogenetic" label="Phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="1361" end="1368" title="Research" label="studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q863908" start="1372" end="1384" title="DNA sequence" label="DNA sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121761" start="1434" end="1447" title="Circumscription (taxonomy)" label="circumscribed"/>
<link wikidata="Q217743" start="1453" end="1465" title="polyphyletic" label="polyphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15551903" start="1536" end="1564" title="Roseodendron donnell-smithii" label="Roseodendron donnell-smithii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1628" end="1649" title="Roseodendron chryseum" label="Roseodendron chryseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368623" start="1683" end="1695" title="Roseodendron" label="Roseodendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="1778" end="1788" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647550" start="1824" end="1836" title="Handroanthus" label="Handroanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q449930" start="1965" end="1971" title="Alwyn Howard Gentry" label="Gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087319" start="2037" end="2047" title="sensu lato" label="sensu lato"/>
<link wikidata="Q449930" start="2154" end="2160" title="Alwyn Howard Gentry" label="Gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="2201" end="2213" title="species name" label="species name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="2301" end="2308" title="Synonym (taxonomy)" label="synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647550" start="2515" end="2527" title="Handroanthus" label="Handroanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15549607" start="2598" end="2622" title="Handroanthus chrysanthus" label="Handroanthus chrysanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="2629" end="2635" title="Subspecies" label="subsp."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2727" end="2750" title="Handroanthus billbergii" label="Handroanthus billbergii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2821" end="2843" title="Handroanthus ochraceus" label="Handroanthus ochraceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q922063" start="3058" end="3089" title="International Plant Names Index" label="International Plant Names Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q281801" start="3120" end="3124" title="Botanical name" label="name"/>
<link wikidata="Q12042160" start="3158" end="3178" title="Scientific literature" label="botanical literature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3193" end="3217" title="António Bernardino Gomes" label="António Bernardino Gomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q502895" start="3231" end="3242" title="common name" label="common name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="3285" end="3292" title="Synonym (taxonomy)" label="synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="3340" end="3349" title="Diagnosis (taxonomy)" label="described"/>
<link wikidata="Q794756" start="3372" end="3380" title="Bignonia" label="Bignonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363781" start="3510" end="3538" title="Indigenous peoples in Brazil" label="Indigenous peoples in Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3647" end="3659" title="Genus#Generic name" label="generic name"/>
<link wikidata="Q123057" start="3663" end="3691" title="Augustin Pyramus de Candolle" label="Augustin Pyramus de Candolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q252730" start="3705" end="3717" title="type species" label="type species"/>
<link wikidata="Q553714" start="3969" end="3991" title="Nathaniel Lord Britton" label="Nathaniel Lord Britton"/>
<link wikidata="Q731808" start="4089" end="4096" title="George Bentham" label="Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q157501" start="4101" end="4107" title="Joseph Dalton Hooker" label="Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756157" start="4200" end="4207" title="pinnate" label="pinnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307801" start="4247" end="4253" title="Tecoma" label="Tecoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4398" end="4423" title="Faustino Miranda" label="Faustino Miranda González"/>
<link wikidata="Q15551903" start="4471" end="4499" title="Roseodendron donnell-smithii" label="Roseodendron donnell-smithii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4516" end="4537" title="Roseodendron chryseum" label="Roseodendron chryseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197884" start="4584" end="4592" title="Cybistax" label="Cybistax"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4602" end="4620" title="Russell J. Seibert" label="Russell J. Seibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q449930" start="4675" end="4690" title="Alwyn Howard Gentry" label="Alwyn H. Gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647550" start="4707" end="4719" title="Handroanthus" label="Handroanthus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4745" end="4769" title="Joáo Rodrigues de Mattos" label="Joáo Rodrigues de Mattos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446323" start="4809" end="4820" title="Segregate (taxonomy)" label="segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563892" start="5028" end="5044" title="Flora Neotropica" label="Flora Neotropica"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="5087" end="5093" title="hybrid (biology)" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="5529" end="5551" title="molecular phylogenetic" label="molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="5552" end="5557" title="Research" label="study"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="5615" end="5620" title="Clade" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235950" start="5695" end="5706" title="Spirotecoma" label="Spirotecoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223475" start="5720" end="5731" title="Parmentiera" label="Parmentiera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321860" start="5745" end="5755" title="Crescentia" label="Crescentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748379" start="5773" end="5783" title="Amphitecna" label="Amphitecna"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="5793" end="5810" title="phylogenetic tree" label="phylogenetic tree"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5826" end="5838" title="Bignoniaceae#Phylogeny" label="Bignoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="6024" end="6030" title="sister taxon" label="sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="6036" end="6041" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170431" start="6130" end="6149" title="Resampling (statistics)" label="statistical support"/>
<link wikidata="Q8772796" start="6430" end="6441" title="Ekmanianthe" label="Ekmanianthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q227936" start="6556" end="6561" title="Tribe (biology)" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317457" start="6562" end="6570" title="Tecomeae" label="Tecomeae"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="6747" end="6752" title="Taxon" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q25202922" start="6804" end="6812" title="alliance (taxonomy)" label="alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="6863" end="6877" title="taxonomic rank" label="taxonomic rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="6880" end="6889" title="Cladistic" label="Cladistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="6902" end="6905" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="6906" end="6910" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q812535" start="6958" end="6976" title="Bayesian inference" label="Bayesian inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805805" start="6981" end="6998" title="maximum parsimony" label="maximum parsimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q485146" start="7113" end="7120" title="Sample (material)" label="sampled"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227113" start="7140" end="7148" title="polytomy" label="polytomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="7236" end="7240" title="Tree" label="Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="7245" end="7250" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="7253" end="7262" title="Evergreen" label="Evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="7266" end="7276" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="7277" end="7286" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="7289" end="7293" title="Wood" label="Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q739601" start="7302" end="7310" title="lapachol" label="lapachol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7342" end="7351" title="Wood#Heartwood and sapwood" label="Heartwood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7400" end="7407" title="Glossary of botanical terms#sapwood" label="sapwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="7410" end="7416" title="Leaf" label="Leaves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7427" end="7433" title="Leaf#Divisions of the blade" label="simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537257" start="7443" end="7452" title="Leaf shape" label="palmately"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7463" end="7470" title="Leaf#Divisions of the blade" label="foliate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480592" start="7488" end="7495" title="Sessility (botany)" label="sessile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7496" end="7504" title="Glossary of botanical terms#lepidote" label="lepidote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493164" start="7505" end="7511" title="Indumentum" label="scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="7514" end="7527" title="Inflorescence" label="Inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q148600" start="7550" end="7557" title="panicle" label="panicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049965" start="7560" end="7583" title="dichotomous branching" label="dichotomously branching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641175" start="7619" end="7625" title="rachis" label="rachis"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="7628" end="7633" title="Calyx (botany)" label="Calyx"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7634" end="7644" title="Glossary of botanical terms#coriaceous" label="coriaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q729496" start="7646" end="7657" title="Spathe" label="spathaceous"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7678" end="7685" title="Glossary of botanical terms#labiate" label="labiate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7696" end="7703" title="Glossary of botanical terms#dentate" label="dentate"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="7706" end="7713" title="Corolla (flower)" label="Corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="7852" end="7858" title="Stamen" label="Stamen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7860" end="7870" title="Stamen#Descriptive terms" label="didynamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348006" start="7872" end="7881" title="staminode" label="staminode"/>
<link wikidata="Q148515" start="7890" end="7895" title="Ovary (plants)" label="Ovary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7896" end="7902" title="Glossary of botanical terms#linear" label="linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q380138" start="7916" end="7921" title="Ovule" label="Ovule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818113" start="7954" end="7960" title="locule" label="locule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="7963" end="7968" title="Fruit" label="Fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704821" start="7971" end="7980" title="Dehiscence (botany)" label="dehiscent"/>
<link wikidata="Q147768" start="7981" end="7988" title="Capsule (fruit)" label="capsule"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8024" end="8032" title="Glossary of botanical terms#glabrous" label="glabrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="8062" end="8066" title="Seed" label="Seed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8083" end="8088" title="Glossary of botanical terms#wing" label="wings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8096" end="8103" title="Glossary of botanical terms#hyaline" label="hyaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="8993" end="8997" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="9134" end="9140" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834414" start="9287" end="9304" title="List of islands in the Caribbean" label="Caribbean islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="9399" end="9404" title="swamp" label="swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="9739" end="9749" title="Ornamental plant" label="ornamental"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="10257" end="10262" title="Horticulture" label="grown"/>
<link wikidata="Q28194733" start="10266" end="10277" title="honey plant" label="honey plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q852389" start="10282" end="10291" title="beekeeper" label="beekeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="10311" end="10317" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="10401" end="10405" title="bees" label="bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q43624" start="10410" end="10421" title="hummingbird" label="hummingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695281" start="10445" end="10459" title="Tabebuia rosea" label="Tabebuia rosea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235701" start="10473" end="10486" title="List of national trees" label="national tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="10490" end="10501" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985554" start="10510" end="10520" title="List of state trees of Venezuela" label="state tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q205460" start="10524" end="10531" title="Cojedes (state)" label="Cojedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="10533" end="10542" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51579" wikidata="Q2751106" url="?curid=51579" title="Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz">
<text>The Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz was a duchy in Northern Germany consisting of the eastern fifth of the historic Mecklenburg region, roughly corresponding with the present-day Mecklenburg-Strelitz district (the former Lordship of Stargard), and the western Principality of Ratzeburg exclave (the former Prince-Bishopric of Ratzeburg), which lay mostly in the west of the modern district. At the time of its establishment, the main part of the duchy bordered on the territory of Swedish Pomerania in the north and of Brandenburg in the south; Ratzeburg bordered Saxe-Lauenburg and the Free City of Lübeck.

==History==
After more than five years of dispute over succession to the House of Mecklenburg, the duchy was established in 1701 in the territory of the former duchy of Mecklenburg-Güstrow. The Güstrow branch of the House of Mecklenburg had died out with the death of Duke Gustav Adolph in 1695. Duke Frederick William of Mecklenburg-Schwerin claimed heirship, but he had to deal with the demands of his uncle Adolphus Frederick, husband of Mary of Mecklenburg-Güstrow, the daughter of Gustav Adolph. The emissaries of the Lower Saxon Circle finally negotiated a compromise on March 8, 1701. The agreement created the final, definitive division of Mecklenburg and was sealed with the 1701 Treaty of Hamburg. Section 2 of the treaty established Mecklenburg-Strelitz as a duchy in its own right and assigned it to Adolphus Frederick, together with the Principality of Ratzeburg on the western border of Mecklenburg south of Lübeck, the Herrschaft Stargard in the southeast of Mecklenburg, with the cities of Neubrandenburg, Friedland, Woldegk, Strelitz, Burg Stargard, Fürstenberg/Havel and Wesenberg, and the commandries of Mirow and Nemerow. At the same time the principle of primogeniture was reasserted, and the right to summon the joint Landtag was reserved to the Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin. The 1701 provisions were maintained with minor changes until the end of the monarchy. Both parties continued to call themselves Dukes of Mecklenburg; Adolphus Frederick took his residence at Strelitz.

The Strelitz duchy remained one of the most backward regions of the Empire. Nevertheless, its princesses achieved prominent marriages: Princess Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, sister of Duke Adolphus Frederick IV, married King George III in 1761, thus becoming queen consort of Great Britain. Her niece Princess Louise of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, daughter of Duke Charles II, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg, married Frederick William III of Hohenzollern in 1793 and became queen consort of Prussia in 1797. Her other niece, Louise&#x27;s sister, Princess Friederike of Mecklenburg-Strelitz married in 1815 Prince Ernest Augustus, Duke of Cumberland, who, in 1837, became King of Hanover, making her queen consort of Hanover.

Mecklenburg-Strelitz adopted the constitution of the sister duchy in September 1755. In 1806 it was spared the infliction of a French occupation through the good offices of the king of Bavaria. In 1808 its duke, Charles, joined the Confederation of the Rhine, but in 1813 he withdrew from it. The Congress of Vienna recognized both Mecklenburg-Strelitz and Mecklenburg-Schwerin as grand duchies and members of the German Confederation.

==References==

==External links==
*Grand Ducal House of Mecklenburg-Strelitz</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2751106" start="4" end="33" title="Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q154547" start="40" end="45" title="duchy" label="duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46613" start="49" end="65" title="Northern Germany" label="Northern Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q109057" start="114" end="125" title="Mecklenburg" label="Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q559552" start="177" end="206" title="Mecklenburg-Strelitz (district)" label="Mecklenburg-Strelitz district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504700" start="219" end="239" title="Lordship of Stargard" label="Lordship of Stargard"/>
<link wikidata="Q315657" start="258" end="283" title="Principality of Ratzeburg" label="Principality of Ratzeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="284" end="291" title="Enclave and exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q113758139" start="304" end="333" title="Prince-Bishopric of Ratzeburg" label="Prince-Bishopric of Ratzeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q682318" start="479" end="496" title="Swedish Pomerania" label="Swedish Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="517" end="528" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q313175" start="562" end="576" title="Saxe-Lauenburg" label="Saxe-Lauenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q950240" start="585" end="604" title="Free City of Lübeck" label="Free City of Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q700158" start="680" end="700" title="House of Mecklenburg" label="House of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q552822" start="776" end="795" title="Mecklenburg-Güstrow" label="Mecklenburg-Güstrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q700158" start="823" end="843" title="House of Mecklenburg" label="House of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q570596" start="880" end="893" title="Gustav Adolph, Duke of Mecklenburg-Güstrow" label="Gustav Adolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024667" start="929" end="949" title="Duchy of Mecklenburg-Schwerin" label="Mecklenburg-Schwerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q361684" start="1017" end="1035" title="Adolphus Frederick II, Duke of Mecklenburg" label="Adolphus Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q616195" start="1130" end="1148" title="Lower Saxon Circle" label="Lower Saxon Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573186" start="1291" end="1313" title="Treaty of Hamburg (1701)" label="1701 Treaty of Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q315657" start="1457" end="1482" title="Principality of Ratzeburg" label="Principality of Ratzeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843" start="1529" end="1535" title="Lübeck" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504700" start="1541" end="1560" title="Herrschaft Stargard" label="Herrschaft Stargard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958" start="1613" end="1627" title="Neubrandenburg" label="Neubrandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q46009" start="1629" end="1638" title="Friedland, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern" label="Friedland"/>
<link wikidata="Q50945" start="1640" end="1647" title="Woldegk" label="Woldegk"/>
<link wikidata="Q559552" start="1649" end="1657" title="Mecklenburg-Strelitz (district)" label="Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q45888" start="1659" end="1672" title="Burg Stargard" label="Burg Stargard"/>
<link wikidata="Q311539" start="1674" end="1691" title="Fürstenberg/Havel" label="Fürstenberg/Havel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20329" start="1696" end="1705" title="Wesenberg, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern" label="Wesenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434544" start="1715" end="1726" title="Commandry (feudalism)" label="commandries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684694" start="1730" end="1735" title="Commandry of Mirow" label="Mirow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781052" start="1740" end="1747" title="Commandry of Nemerow" label="Nemerow"/>
<link wikidata="Q320501" start="1847" end="1854" title="Landtag" label="Landtag"/>
<link wikidata="Q20352" start="2096" end="2104" title="Neustrelitz" label="Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q161159" start="2251" end="2284" title="Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q361706" start="2301" end="2322" title="Adolphus Frederick IV, Duke of Mecklenburg" label="Adolphus Frederick IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="2332" end="2347" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188270" start="2371" end="2401" title="List of British royal consorts" label="queen consort of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q156723" start="2422" end="2452" title="Louise of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Louise of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q213601" start="2471" end="2508" title="Charles II, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg" label="Charles II, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q37134" start="2518" end="2555" title="Frederick William III of Prussia" label="Frederick William III of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201537" start="2575" end="2588" title="List of Prussian consorts" label="queen consort"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="2592" end="2599" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q237990" start="2657" end="2691" title="Frederica of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Friederike of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q162302" start="2715" end="2750" title="Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover" label="Ernest Augustus, Duke of Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16852400" start="2773" end="2788" title="King of Hanover" label="King of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687492" start="2801" end="2825" title="List of Hanoverian consorts" label="queen consort of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389210" start="3005" end="3020" title="king of Bavaria" label="king of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q154741" start="3060" end="3086" title="Confederation of the Rhine" label="Confederation of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="3125" end="3143" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="3242" end="3262" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51580" wikidata="Q11365" url="?curid=51580" title="Grunge">
<text>Grunge (sometimes referred to as the Seattle sound) is an alternative rock genre and subculture which emerged during the in the U.S. state of Washington, particularly in Seattle and nearby towns. Grunge fuses elements of punk rock and heavy metal. The genre featured the distorted electric guitar sound used in both genres, although some bands performed with more emphasis on one or the other. Like these genres, grunge typically uses electric guitar, bass guitar, drums and vocals. Grunge also incorporates influences from indie rock bands such as Sonic Youth. Lyrics are typically angst-filled and introspective, often addressing themes such as social alienation, self-doubt, abuse, neglect, betrayal, social and emotional isolation, addiction, psychological trauma and a desire for freedom.

The early grunge movement revolved around Seattle&#x27;s independent record label Sub Pop and the region&#x27;s underground music scene, with local bands such as Green River, the Melvins and Mudhoney playing key roles in the genre&#x27;s development. Sub Pop marketed the style shrewdly, encouraging media outlets to describe the Seattle sound as &quot;grunge&quot;; the style became known as a hybrid of punk and metal. By the early 1990s, its popularity had spread, with grunge bands appearing in California, then emerging in other parts of the United States and in Australia, building strong followings and signing major record deals. Grunge was commercially successful in the early-to-mid-1990s due to releases such as Nirvana&#x27;s &quot;Nevermind&quot;, Pearl Jam&#x27;s &quot;Ten&quot;, Soundgarden&#x27;s &quot;Badmotorfinger&quot;, Alice in Chains&#x27; &quot;Dirt&quot;, and Stone Temple Pilots&#x27; &quot;Core&quot;. The success of these bands boosted the popularity of alternative rock and made grunge the most popular form of rock music.

Several factors contributed to grunge&#x27;s decline in prominence. During the , many grunge bands broke up or became less visible. Nirvana&#x27;s Kurt Cobain, labeled by &quot;Time&quot; as &quot;the John Lennon of the swinging Northwest&quot;, struggled with an addiction to heroin before his suicide in 1994. Although most grunge bands had disbanded or faded from view by the late 1990s, they influenced modern rock music, as their lyrics brought socially conscious issues into pop culture and added introspection and an exploration of what it means to be true to oneself. Grunge was also an influence on later genres such as post-grunge.

==Origin of the term==
The word &quot;grunge&quot; is American slang for &quot;someone or something that is repugnant&quot; and also for &quot;dirt&quot;. The word was first recorded as being applied to Seattle musicians in July 1987 when Bruce Pavitt described Green River&#x27;s &quot;Dry as a Bone&quot; EP in a Sub Pop record company catalogue as &quot;gritty vocals, roaring Marshall amps, ultra-loose GRUNGE that destroyed the morals of a generation&quot;. Although the word &quot;grunge&quot; has been used to describe bands since the 1960s, this was the first association of grunge with the grinding, sludgy sound of Seattle. It is expensive and time-consuming to get a recording to sound clean, so for those northwestern bands just starting out it was cheaper for them to leave the sound dirty and just turn up their volume. This dirty sound, due to low budgets, unfamiliarity with recording, and a lack of professionalism may be the origin of the term &quot;grunge&quot;.

The &quot;Seattle scene&quot; refers to a regional Pacific Northwest alternative music movement that was linked to the University of Washington in Seattle, and the Evergreen State College in Olympia. Evergreen is a progressive college which does not use a conventional grading system and has its own radio station, KAOS. Seattle&#x27;s remoteness from Los Angeles led to a perceived purity of its music. The music of these bands, many of which had recorded with Seattle&#x27;s independent record label Sub Pop, became labeled as &quot;grunge&quot;. Nirvana&#x27;s frontman Kurt Cobain, in one of his final interviews, credited Jonathan Poneman, cofounder of Sub Pop, with coining the term &quot;grunge&quot; to describe the music.

The term &quot;Seattle sound&quot; became a marketing ploy for the music industry. In September 1991, the Nirvana album &quot;Nevermind&quot; was released, bringing mainstream attention to the music of Seattle. Cobain loathed the word &quot;grunge&quot; and despised the new scene that was developing, feeling that record companies were signing old &quot;cock-rock&quot; bands who were pretending to be grunge and claiming to be from Seattle.

Some bands associated with the genre, such as Soundgarden, Pearl Jam and Alice in Chains, have not been receptive to the label, preferring instead to be referred to as &quot;rock and roll&quot; bands. Ben Shepherd from Soundgarden stated that he &quot;hates the word&quot; grunge and hates &quot;being associated with it.&quot; Seattle musician Jeff Stetson states that when he visited Seattle in the late 1980s and early 1990s as a touring musician, the local musicians did not refer to themselves as &quot;grunge&quot; performers or their style as &quot;grunge&quot; and they were not flattered that their music was being called &quot;grunge&quot;.

&quot;Rolling Stone&quot; noted the genre&#x27;s lack of a clear definition. Robert Loss acknowledges the challenges of defining &quot;grunge&quot;; he stated that, while he can recount stories about grunge, they do not serve to provide a useful definition. Roy Shuker states that the term &quot;obscured a variety of styles.&quot; Stetson states that grunge was not a movement, &quot;monolithic musical genre&quot;, or a way to react to 1980s-era metal pop; he calls the term a misnomer mostly based on hype. Stetson states that prominent bands considered to be grunge (Nirvana, Pearl Jam, Soundgarden, Alice in Chains, Mudhoney and Hammerbox) all sound different. Mark Yarm, author of &quot;Everybody Loves Our Town: An Oral History of Grunge&quot;, pointed out vast differences between grunge bands, with some being punk and others being metal-based.

Chris Cornell, in a 1994 interview with &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; noted the limitation of the &quot;Seattle scene&quot;:

... the rest of the country and the world and probably a lot of the bands that play in Seattle now think that what the Seattle scene was about is Soundgarden, Pearl Jam, Nirvana and Alice in Chains — guitar-based rock with punk influences and ’70s influences. Period. End of story. And that’s so far from what was going on. What was left out was the completely experimental music, from free jazz to theatrical bands to a lot of very Gothic-bent bands.

==Musical style==

In 1984, the punk rock band Black Flag toured small towns across the US to bring punk to the more remote parts of the country. By this time, their music had become slow and sludgy, less like the Sex Pistols and more like Black Sabbath. Krist Novoselic, later the bassist with Nirvana, recalled going with the Melvins to see one of these shows, after which Melvins frontman Buzz Osborne began writing &quot;slow and heavy riffs&quot; to form a dirge-like music that was the beginning of northwest grunge. The Melvins were the most influential of the early grunge bands. Sub Pop producer Jack Endino described grunge as &quot;seventies-influenced, slowed-down punk music&quot;.

Leighton Beezer, who played with Mark Arm and Steve Turner in the Thrown Ups, state that when he heard Green River play &quot;Come On Down&quot;, he realized that they were playing punk rock backwards. He noted that the diminished fifth note was used by Black Sabbath to produce an ominous feeling but it is not used in punk rock. In the 1996 grunge film documentary &quot;Hype!&quot;, Beezer demonstrated on guitar the difference between punk and grunge. First he played the riff from &quot;Rockaway Beach&quot; by the Ramones that ascends the neck of the guitar, then &quot;Come On Down&quot; by Green River that descends the neck. The two pieces are only a few notes apart but sound unalike. He took the same rhythm with the same chord, however descending the neck made it sound darker, and therefore grunge. Early grunge bands would also copy a riff from metal and slow it down, play it backwards, distort it and bury it in feedback, then shout lyrics with little melody over the top of it.

Grunge fuses elements of punk rock (specifically American hardcore punk such as Black Flag) and heavy metal (especially traditional, earlier heavy metal groups such as Black Sabbath), although some bands performed with more emphasis on one or the other. Alex DiBlasi feels that indie rock was a third key source, with the most important influence coming from Sonic Youth&#x27;s &quot;free-form&quot; noise. Grunge shares with punk a raw, lo fi sound and similar lyrical concerns, and it also used punk&#x27;s haphazard and untrained approach to playing and performing. However, grunge was &quot;deeper and darker&quot;-sounding than punk rock and it decreased the &quot;adrenaline&quot;-fueled tempos of punk to a slow, &quot;sludgy&quot; speed, and used more dissonant harmonies. Seattle music journalist Charles R. Cross defines &quot;grunge&quot; as distortion-filled, down-tuned and riff-based rock that uses loud electric guitar feedback and heavy, &quot;ponderous&quot; basslines to support its song melodies. Robert Loss calls grunge a melding of &quot;violence and speed, muscularity and melody&quot;, where there is space for all people, including women musicians. VH1 writer Dan Tucker feels that different grunge bands were influenced by different genres; that while Nirvana drew on punk, Pearl Jam was influenced by classic rock, and that &quot;sludgy, dark, heavy bands&quot; such as Soundgarden and Alice in Chains had a sinister metal tone.

Grunge music has what has been called an &quot;ugly&quot; aesthetic, both in the roar of the distorted electric guitars and in the darker lyrical topics. This approach was chosen both to counter the &quot;slick&quot; elegant sound of the then-predominant mainstream rock and because grunge artists wanted to mirror the &quot;ugliness&quot; they saw around them and shine a light on unseen &quot;depths and depravity&quot; of the real world. Some key individuals in the development of the grunge sound, including Sub Pop producer Jack Endino and the Melvins, described grunge&#x27;s incorporation of heavy rock influences such as Kiss as &quot;musical provocation&quot;. Grunge artists considered these bands &quot;cheesy&quot; but nonetheless enjoyed them; Buzz Osborne of the Melvins described it as an attempt to see what ridiculous things bands could do and get away with. In the early-1990s, Nirvana&#x27;s signature &quot;stop-start&quot; song format and alternating between soft and loud sections became a genre convention.

In the book &quot;Accidental Revolution: The Story of Grunge&quot;, Kyle Anderson wrote:

== Instrumentation ==
=== Electric guitar ===

Grunge guitarists like Kurt Cobain often used &quot;offset&quot; guitars like the Fender Jaguar, Fender Jazzmaster, or Mustang. They used primarily offset guitars because at the time they were unpopular enough to offer a new image as opposed to more frequently seen Gibson Les Pauls or Fender Stratocaster and Telecaster used by mainstream pop &amp; rock bands. Being unpopular when grunge started, offset guitars also offered excellent value for money. 
Grunge is generally characterized by a sludgy electric guitar sound with a thick middle register and rolled-off treble tone and a high level of distortion and fuzz, typically created with small 1970s-style stompbox pedals, with some guitarists chaining several fuzz pedals together and plugging them into a tube amplifier and speaker cabinet. Grunge guitarists use very loud Marshall guitar amplifiers and some used powerful Mesa-Boogie amplifiers, including Kurt Cobain and Dave Grohl (the latter in early, grunge-oriented Foo Fighters songs). Grunge has been called the rock genre with the most &quot;lugubrious sound&quot;; the use of heavy distortion and loud amps has been compared to a massive &quot;buildup of sonic fog&quot;. or even dismissed as &quot;noise&quot; by one critic. As with metal and punk, a key part of grunge&#x27;s sound is very distorted power chords played on the electric guitar.

Whereas metal guitarists&#x27; overdriven sound generally comes from a combination of overdriven amplifiers and distortion pedals, grunge guitarists typically got all of their &quot;dirty&quot; sound from overdrive and fuzz pedals, with the amp just used to make the sound louder. Grunge guitarists tended to use the Fender Twin Reverb and the Fender Champion 100 combo amps (Cobain used both of these amps). The use of pedals by grunge guitarists was a move away from the expensive, studio-grade rackmount effects units used in other rock genres. The positive way that grunge bands viewed stompbox pedals can be seen in Mudhoney&#x27;s use of the name of two overdrive pedals, the Univox Super-Fuzz and the Big Muff, in the title of their debut EP &quot;Superfuzz Bigmuff&quot;. In the song &quot;Mudride&quot;, the band&#x27;s guitars were said to have &quot;growled malevolently&quot; through its &quot;Cro-magnon slog&quot;.

Other key pedals used by grunge bands included four brands of distortion pedals (the Big Muff, DOD, and Boss DS-2 and Boss DS-1 distortion pedals) and the Small Clone chorus effect, used by Kurt Cobain on &quot;Come As You Are&quot; and by the Screaming Trees on &quot;Nearly Lost You&quot;. The DS-1 (later DS-2) distortion pedal played a key role in Cobain&#x27;s switching from quiet to loud and back to quiet approach to songwriting. The use of small pedals by grunge guitarists helped to start off the revival of interest in boutique, hand-soldered, 1970s-style analog pedals. The other effect that grunge guitarists used was one of the most low-tech effects devices, the wah-wah pedal. Both &quot;[Kim] Thayil and Alice in Chains&#x27; Jerry Cantrell ... were great advocates of the wah wah pedal.&quot; Wah was also used by the Screaming Trees, Pearl Jam, Soundgarden, Mudhoney and Dinosaur Jr.

Grunge guitarists played loud, with Kurt Cobain&#x27;s early guitar sound coming from an unusual set-up of four 800 watt PA system power amplifiers. Guitar feedback effects, in which a highly amplified electric guitar is held in front of its speaker, were used to create high-pitched, sustained sounds that are not possible with regular guitar technique. Grunge guitarists were influenced by the raw, primitive sound of punk, and they favored &quot;... energy and lack of finesse over technique and precision&quot;; key guitar influences included the Sex Pistols, the Dead Boys, Celtic Frost, King&#x27;s X, Voivod, Neil Young (&quot;Rust Never Sleeps&quot;, side two), the Replacements, Hüsker Dü, Black Flag, and the Melvins. Grunge guitarists often downtuned their instruments for a lower, heavier sound. Soundgarden&#x27;s guitarist, Kim Thayil, did not use a regular guitar amplifier; instead, he used a bass combo amp equipped with a 15-inch speaker as he played low riffs, and the bass amp gave him a deeper tone.

=== Guitar solos ===

Grunge guitarists &quot;flatly rejected&quot; the virtuoso &quot;shredding&quot; guitar solos that had become the centerpiece of heavy metal songs, instead opting for melodic, blues-inspired solos – focusing &quot;on the song, not the guitar solo&quot;. Jerry Cantrell of Alice in Chains stated that solos should be to serve the song, rather than to show off a guitarist&#x27;s technical skill. In place of the strutting guitar heroes of metal, grunge had &quot;guitar anti-heroes&quot; like Cobain, who showed little interest in mastering the instrument.

In Will Byers&#x27; article &quot;Grunge committed a crime against music—it killed the guitar solo&quot; in &quot;The Guardian&quot;, he states that while the guitar solo managed to survive through the punk rock era, it was weakened by grunge. He also states that when Kurt Cobain played guitar solos that were a restatement of the main vocal melody, fans realized that they did not need to be a Jimi Hendrix-level virtuoso to play the instrument; he then says this approach helped to make music feel accessible by fans in a way not seen since the 1960s folk music movement. The producer of Nirvana&#x27;s &quot;Nevermind&quot;, Butch Vig, stated that this album and Nirvana &quot;killed the guitar solo&quot;. Soundgarden guitarist Kim Thayil stated he feels in part to be responsible for the &quot;death of the guitar solo&quot;; he said that his punk rocker aspects made him feel that he did not want to solo, so in the 1980s, he preferred to make noise and do feedback during the guitar solo. Baeble Music calls the grunge guitar solos of the 1990s &quot;raw&quot;, &quot;sloppy&quot;, and &quot;basic&quot;.

Not all sources support the &quot;grunge killed the guitar solo&quot; argument. Sean Gonzalez states that Pearl Jam has plentiful examples of guitar solos. Michael Azerrad praises the guitar playing of Mudhoney&#x27;s Steve Turner, calling him the &quot;Eric Clapton of grunge&quot;, a reference to the British blues guitarist who &quot;Time&quot; magazine has named as number five in their list of &quot;The 10 Best Electric Guitar Players&quot;. Pearl Jam guitarist Mike McCready has been praised for his blues-influenced, rapid licks. The Smashing Pumpkins&#x27; guitarist Billy Corgan has been called the &quot;arena rock genius of the &#x27;90s&quot; for pioneering guitar playing techniques and showing through his playing skill that grunge guitarists do not have to be sloppy players to rebel against mainstream music. Thayil stated that when other major grunge bands, such as Nirvana, were reducing their guitar solos, Soundgarden responded by bringing back the solos.

=== Bass guitar ===
The early Seattle grunge album &quot;Skin Yard&quot; recorded in 1987 by the band of the same name included fuzz bass (overdriven bass guitar) played by Jack Endino and Daniel House. Some grunge bassists, such as Ben Shepherd, layered power chords with distorted low-end density by adding a fifth and an octave-higher note to a bass note.

An example of the powerful, loud bass amplifier systems used in grunge is Alice in Chains bassist Mike Inez&#x27;s setup. He uses four powerful Ampeg SVT-2 PRO tube amplifier heads, two of them plugged into four 1×18&quot; subwoofer cabinets for the low register, and the other two plugged into two 8×10&quot; cabinets. Krist Novoselic and Jeff Ament are also known for using Ampeg SVT tube amplifiers. Ben Shepherd uses a 300 watt all-tube Ampeg SVT-VR amp and a 600 watt Mesa/Boogie Carbine M6 amplifier. Ament uses four 6×10&quot; speaker cabinets.

=== Drums ===

In contrast to the &quot;massive drum kits&quot; used in 1980s pop metal, grunge drummers used relatively smaller drum kits. One example is the drumkit used by Soundgarden drummer Matt Cameron&#x27;s set-up. He uses a six-piece kit (this way of describing drumkits counts only the wooden drums, and does not count the cymbals), including a &quot;12×8-inch rack tom; 13×9-inch rack tom; 16×14-inch floor tom; 18×16-inch floor tom; 24×14-inch bass drum&quot; and a snare drum and, for cymbals, Zildjian instruments, including &quot;... 14-inch K Light [Hi-]hats; 17-inch K Custom Dark crash [cymbal] and 18-inch K Crash Ride; 19-inch Projection crash; a 20-inch Rezo crash; ... and a ... 22-inch A Medium ride [cymbal]&quot;.

A second example is Nirvana drummer Dave Grohl&#x27;s set-up during 1990 and 1991. He used a four-piece Tama drumset, with an 8&quot; × 14&quot; birch snare drum, a 14&quot; × 15&quot; rack tom, a 16&quot; × 18&quot; floor tom, and a 16&quot; × 24&quot; bass drum (this kit &quot;was demolished at the Cabaret Metro, Chicago, 10/12/91&quot;). Like Matt Cameron, Dave Grohl used Zildjian cymbals. Grohl used the company&#x27;s A Series Medium cymbals, including an 18&quot; and a 20&quot; crash cymbal, a 22&quot; ride cymbal, and a pair of 15&quot; hi-hat cymbals.

=== Other instruments ===
Although other instruments are generally not included in grunge, Seattle band Gorilla created controversy by breaking the &quot;guitars only&quot; approach and using a 1960s-style Vox organ in their group.
In 2002, Pearl Jam added a keyboard player, Kenneth &quot;Boom&quot; Gaspar, who played piano, Hammond organ, and other keyboards; the addition of a keyboardist to the band would have been &quot;inconceivable&quot; in the band&#x27;s &quot;grungy&quot; early years, but it shows how a group&#x27;s sound can change over time.

=== Vocals ===

The grunge singing style was similar to the &quot;outburst&quot; of loud, heavily distorted electric guitar in tone and delivery; Kurt Cobain used a &quot;gruff, slurred articulation and gritty timbre&quot; and Eddie Vedder of Pearl Jam made use of a &quot;wide, powerful vibrato&quot; to show his &quot;depth of expression.&quot; Layne Staley voiced lyrics with a &quot;heaviness&quot; and tremolo. In general, grunge singers used a &quot;deeper vocal style&quot; which matched the lower-sounding, downtuned guitars and the darker-themed lyrical messages used in the style. Grunge singers used &quot;gravelly, raspy&quot; vocals, &quot;... growls, moans, screams and mumbles&quot; and &quot;plaintive groans&quot;; this range of singing styles was used to communicate the &quot;varied emotions&quot; of the lyrics. Cobain&#x27;s reaction to the &quot;bad times&quot; and discontent of the era was that he screamed his lyrics. In general, grunge songs were sung &quot;simply, often somewhat unintelligibly&quot;; the virtuoso &quot;operatics of hair-metal were shunned.&quot; Grunge singing has been characterized as &quot;borderline out-of-tune vocals&quot;.

== Lyrics and themes ==
Grunge lyrics are typically dark, nihilistic, wretched, angst-filled and anguished, often addressing themes such as social alienation, self-doubt, abuse, assault, neglect, betrayal, social isolation/emotional isolation, psychological trauma, and a desire for freedom.

An article by MIT states that grunge &quot;lyrics [were] obsessed with disenfranchisement&quot; and described a mood of &quot;resigned despair&quot;. Catherine Strong, in her book &quot;Grunge: Music and Memory,&quot; states that grunge songs were usually about &quot;negative experiences or feelings&quot;, with the main themes being alienation and depression, but with an &quot;ironic sneer.&quot; Grunge artists expressed &quot;strong feelings&quot; in their lyrics about &quot;societal ills&quot;, including a &quot;desire to &#x27;crucify the insincere, an approach which fans appreciated for its authenticity. Grunge lyrics have been criticized as &quot;violent and often obscene.&quot; In 1996, conservative columnist Rich Lowry wrote an essay criticizing grunge, entitled &quot;Our Hero, Heroin&quot;; he called it a music that is mostly &quot;... shorn of ideals and the impulse for political action&quot;.

A number of factors influenced the focus on such subject matter. Many grunge musicians displayed a general disenchantment with the state of society, as well as a discomfort with social prejudices. Grunge lyrics contained &quot;explicit political messages and ... questioning about ... society and how it might be changed.&quot; While grunge lyrics were less overtly political than punk songs, grunge songs still indicated a concern for social issues, particularly those affecting young people. The main themes in grunge were &quot;tolerance of difference&quot;, &quot;support of women&quot;, &quot;mistrust of authority&quot; and &quot;cynicism towards big corporations.&quot; Grunge song themes bear similarities to those addressed by punk rock musicians. In 1992, music critic Simon Reynolds said that &quot;there&#x27;s a feeling of burnout in the culture at large. Kids are depressed about the future&quot;. The topics of grunge lyrics–homelessness, suicide, rape, &quot;broken homes, drug addiction and self-loathing&quot;–contrasted sharply to the glam metal lyrics of bands like Poison, which described &quot;life in the fast lane&quot;, partying, and hedonism.

Grunge lyrics developed as part of &quot;Generation X malaise&quot;, reflecting that demographic&#x27;s feelings of &quot;disillusionment and uselessness&quot;. Grunge songs about love were usually about &quot;failed, boring, doomed or destructive relationships&quot; (e.g., &quot;Black&quot; by Pearl Jam). The Alice in Chains songs &quot;Sickman&quot;, &quot;Junkhead&quot;, &quot;God Smack&quot;, and &quot;Hate to Feel&quot; have references to heroin. Grunge lyrics tended to be more introspective and aimed to enable the listener to see into &quot;hidden&quot; personal issues and examine the &quot;depravity&quot; of the world. This approach can be seen in Mudhoney&#x27;s song &quot;Touch Me I&#x27;m Sick&quot;, which includes lyrics with &quot;deranged imagery&quot; which depict a &quot;broken world and a fragmented self-image&quot;; the song includes the lines &quot;I feel bad, and I&#x27;ve felt worse&quot; and &quot;I won&#x27;t live long and I&#x27;m full of rot&quot;. Nirvana&#x27;s song &quot;Lithium&quot;, from their 1991 album &quot;Nevermind&quot;, is about a &quot;man who finds faith after his girlfriend&#x27;s suicide&quot;; it depicts &quot;irony and ugliness&quot; as a way of dealing with these &quot;dark issues&quot;.

== Recording production ==
Like punk, grunge&#x27;s sound came from a lo fi (low fidelity) recording and production approach. Before the arrival of major labels, early grunge albums were recorded using low-budget analogue studios: &quot;Nirvana&#x27;s first album &quot;Bleach&quot;, was recorded for $606.17 in 1989.&quot; Sub Pop recorded most of their music at a &quot;low-rent studio named Reciprocal&quot;, where producer Jack Endino created the grunge genre&#x27;s aesthetic, a &quot;raw and unpolished sound with distortion, but usually without any added studio effects&quot;. Endino is known for his stripped-down recording practices and his dislike of &#x27;over-producing&#x27; music with effects and remastering. His work on Soundgarden&#x27;s &quot;Screaming Life&quot; and Nirvana&#x27;s &quot;Bleach&quot; as well as for the bands Green River, Screaming Trees, L7, the Gits, Hole, 7 Year Bitch, and TAD helped to define the grunge sound. An example of the lower cost production approach is Mudhoney; even after the band signed to Warner Music, &quot;[t]rue to [the band&#x27;s] indie roots ... [they are] ... probably one of the few bands that would have to fight [their label] to record for a lower budget rather than a higher one.&quot;

Steve Albini was another important influence on the grunge sound. Albini preferred to be called a &quot;recording engineer&quot;, because he believed that putting record producers in charge of recording sessions often destroys the band&#x27;s real sound, while the role of the recording engineer is to capture the actual sound of the musicians, not to threaten the artists&#x27; control over their creative product. Albini&#x27;s recordings have been analyzed by writers such as Michael Azerrad, who stated that Albini&#x27;s &quot;recordings were both very basic and very exacting: like Endino, Albini used few special effects; got an aggressive, often violent guitar sound; and made sure the rhythm section slammed as one.&quot;

Nirvana&#x27;s &quot;In Utero&quot; is a typical example of Albini&#x27;s recording approach. He preferred to have the entire band play live in the studio, rather than use mainstream rock&#x27;s approach of recording each instrument on a separate track at different times, and then mixing them using multi-track recording. While multitracking results in a more polished product, it does not capture the &quot;live&quot; sound of the band playing together. Albini used a range of different microphones for the vocals and instruments. Like most metal and punk recording engineers, he mics the guitar amp speakers and bass amp speakers to capture each performer&#x27;s unique tone.

== Concerts ==

Grunge concerts were known for being straightforward, high-energy performances. Grunge shows were &quot;celebrations, parties [and] carnivals&quot;, where the audience expressed its spirit by stagediving, moshing and thrashing. Simon Reynolds states that in &quot;... some of the most masculine forms of rock—thrash metal, grunge, moshing becomes a form of surrogate combat&quot; in which &quot;male bodies&quot; can contact in the &quot;sweat-and-bloodbath&quot; of the moshpit. As with punk shows, grunge &quot;performances were about frontmen who screamed and jumped around on stage and musicians who thrashed wildly on their instruments.&quot; While grunge lyrical themes focused on &quot;angst and rage&quot;, the audience at shows were positive and created a &quot;life-affirming&quot; attitude. Grunge bands rejected the complex and high budget presentations of many mainstream musical genres, including the use of complex digitally controlled light arrays, pyrotechnics, and other visual effects then popular in &quot;hair metal&quot; shows. Grunge performers viewed these elements unrelated to playing the music. Stage acting and &quot;onstage theatrics&quot; were generally avoided.

Instead the bands presented themselves as no different from minor local bands. Jack Endino said in &quot;Hype!&quot; that Seattle bands were inconsistent live performers, since their primary objective was not to be entertainers, but simply to &quot;rock out&quot;. Grunge bands gave enthusiastic performances; they would thrash their long hair during shows as &quot;a symbolic weapon&quot; for releasing &quot;pent-up aggression&quot; (Dave Grohl was particularly noted for his &quot;head flips&quot;). Dave Rimmer writes that with the revival of punk ideals of stripped-down music in the early 1990s, &quot;for Cobain, and lots of kids like him, rock &amp; roll ... threw down a dare: Can you be pure enough, day after day, year after year, to prove your authenticity, to live up to the music ... And if you can&#x27;t, can you live with being a poseur, a phony, a sellout?&quot;

== Clothing and fashion ==
=== 1980s–1990s ===
 commonly worn by grunge musicians in Washington were a &quot;mundane everyday style&quot;, in which they would wear the same clothes on stage that they wore at home. This Pacific Northwest &quot;slacker style&quot; or &quot;slouch look&quot; contrasted sharply with the &quot;wild&quot; mohawks, leather jackets and chains worn by punks. This everyday clothing approach was used by grunge musicians because authenticity was a key principle in the Seattle scene. The grunge look typically consisted of second-hand clothes or thrift store items and the typical outdoor clothing (most notably flannel shirts) of the region, as well as a generally unkempt appearance and long hair. For grunge singers, long hair was used &quot;as a mask to conceal the face&quot; so they can &quot;expres[s their] innermost thoughts&quot;; Cobain is a notable example. Male grunge musicians were &quot;... unkempt ... [and] ... unshaven [,] with ... tousled hair&quot; that was often unwashed, greasy and &quot;... matted [into a] sheep-dog mop&quot;.

The lumberjack attire was a common sight in the thrift stores near Seattle for the low prices that musicians could afford. Grunge style consisted of ripped jeans, thermal underwear, Doc Martens boots or combat boots (often unlaced), band T-shirts, oversized knit sweaters, long and droopy skirts, ripped tights, Birkenstocks, hiking boots, and eco-friendly clothing made from recycled textiles or fair trade organic cotton. As well, since women in the grunge scene wore the &quot;... same plaid [shirt]s, boots, and short cropped heads as their male counterparts&quot;, women showed &quot;... that they are not defined by their sex appeal.&quot;

&quot;Grunge ... became an anti-consumerist movement where the less you spent on clothes, the more &#x27;coolness&#x27; you had.&quot; The style did not evolve out of a conscious attempt to create an appealing fashion; music journalist Charles R. Cross said, &quot;[Nirvana frontman] Kurt Cobain was just too lazy to shampoo&quot;, and Sub Pop&#x27;s Jonathan Poneman said, &quot;This [clothing] is cheap, it&#x27;s durable, and it&#x27;s kind of timeless. It also runs against the grain of the whole flashy aesthetic that existed in the 80s.&quot; The flannel and &quot;... cracked leatherette coats&quot; in the grunge scene were part of the Pacific Northwest&#x27;s thrift-shop aesthetic. Grunge fashion was very much an anti-fashion response and a non-conformist move against the &quot;manufactured image&quot;, often pushing musicians to dress in authentic ways and to not glamorize themselves. At the same time, Sub-Pop utilized the &#x27;grunge look&#x27; in their marketing of their bands. In an interview with VH1, photographer Charles Peterson commented that members from grunge band Tad &quot;were given blue collar identities that weren&#x27;t entirely earned. Bruce (Pavitt) really got him to dress up in flannel and a real chain saw and really play up this image of a mountain man and it worked.&quot;

&quot;Dazed&quot; magazine called Courtney Love one of &quot;ten women who defined the 1990s&quot; from a style perspective: the &quot;... image of Courtney Love&#x27;s too-short baby doll dress, tattered fur coat and shock of platinum hair&quot;, a look dubbed &quot;kinderwhore&quot;, &quot;... topped with a tiara, of course – is seared on the memory of anyone who lived through the decade.&quot; The kinderwhore look consisted of torn, ripped tight or low-cut babydoll and Peter-Pan-collared dresses, slips, heavy makeup with dark eyeliner, barrettes, and leather boots or Mary–Jane shoes. Kat Bjelland of Babes in Toyland was the first to define it, while Courtney Love of Hole was the first to popularize it. Love has claimed that she took the style from Divinyls frontwoman Chrissy Amphlett. The look became very popular in 1994.

&quot;Vogue&quot; stated in 2014 that &quot;Cobain pulled liberally from both ends of a woman&#x27;s and a man&#x27;s wardrobe, and his Seattle thrift-store look ran the gamut of masculine lumberjack workwear and 40s-by-way-of-70s feminine dresses. It was completely counter to the shellacked, flashy aesthetic of the 1980s in every way. In disheveled jeans and floral frocks, he softened the tough exterior of the archetypal rebel from the inside out, and set the ball in motion for a radical, millennial idea of androgyny.&quot; Cobain&#x27;s way of dressing &quot;was the antithesis of the macho American man&quot;, because he &quot;... made it cooler to look slouchy and loose, no matter if you were a boy or a girl.&quot; Music and culture writer Julianne Escobedo Shepherd wrote that with Cobain&#x27;s style of dress &quot;Not only did he make it okay to be a freak, he made it desirable.&quot;

====Adoption by mainstream====
Grunge music hit the mainstream in the early 1990s with bands such as Soundgarden, Alice in Chains, Pearl Jam, and Nirvana being signed to major record labels. Grunge fashion began to break into mainstream fashion in mid-1992 for both sexes and peaked in late 1993 and early 1994. As it picked up momentum, the grunge tag was being used by shops selling expensive flannelette shirts to cash in on the trend. Ironically, the non-conformist look suddenly became a mainstream trend. In the fashion world, Marc Jacobs presented a show for Perry Ellis in 1992 (the Spring 1993 Collection,) featuring grunge-inspired clothing mixed with high-end fabrics. Jacobs found inspiration in the &quot;realism&quot; of grunge streetwear; he mixed it with the luxury of fashion by sending models down the catwalk in beanies, floral dresses and silk flannel shirts. This did, however, not sit well with the brand owners and Jacobs was dismissed. Other designers like Anna Sui, also drew inspiration from grunge during the spring/summer 1993 season.

In the same year, &quot;Vogue&quot; did a spread called &quot;Grunge &amp; Glory&quot; with fashion photographer Steven Meisel who shot supermodels Kristen McMenamy, Naomi Campbell, and Nadja Auermann in a savanna landscape wearing grunge-styled clothing. This shoot made McMenamy the face for grunge, as she had her eyebrows shaved and her hair cropped short. Designers like Christian Lacroix, Donna Karen and Karl Lagerfeld incorporated the grunge influence into their looks. In 1993, James Truman, editor of &quot;Details&quot;, said: &quot;to me the thing about grunge is it&#x27;s not anti-fashion, it&#x27;s unfashion. Punk was anti-fashion. It made a statement. Grunge is about not making a statement, which is why it&#x27;s crazy for it to become a fashion statement.&quot; The unkempt fashion sense defined the look of the &quot;slacker generation&quot;, who &quot;skipped school, smoked pot ... [and] cigarettes and listened to music&quot; hoping to become a rock star one day.

=== 2000s–2010s ===
Even though grunge fashion had declined in popularity by the late 1990s, designers have continued to occasionally draw inspiration from the movement. Grunge appeared as a trend again in 2008, and for Fall/Winter 2013, Hedi Slimane at Yves Saint Laurent brought back grunge to the runway. With Courtney Love as his muse for the collection, she reportedly loved the collection. &quot;No offense to MJ [Marc Jacobs] but he never got it right,&quot; Courtney said. &quot;This is what it really was. Hedi knows his shit. He got it accurate, and MJ and Anna [Sui] did not.&quot; Both Cobain and Love apparently burnt the Perry Ellis collection they received from Marc Jacobs back in 1993. In 2016, grunge inspired an upscale &quot;reinvention&quot; of the style by A$AP Rocky, Rihanna and Kanye West. However, &quot;dressing grunge is no longer a badge of authenticity, though: the signifiers of rebellion (Dr Martens boots, tartan shirts) are omnipotent on the high street&quot;, says Lynette Nylander, deputy editor of &quot;i-D magazine&quot;.

==Alcohol and drugs==

Many music subcultures are associated with particular drugs, such as the hippie counterculture and reggae, both of which are associated with marijuana and psychedelics. In the 1990s, the media focused on the use of heroin by musicians in the Seattle grunge scene, with a 1992 &quot;New York Times&quot; article listing the city&#x27;s &quot;three principal drugs&quot; as &quot;espresso, beer and heroin&quot; and a 1996 article calling Seattle&#x27;s grunge scene the &quot;... subculture that has most strongly embraced heroin&quot;. Tim Jonze from &quot;The Guardian&quot; states that &quot;... heroin had blighted the [grunge] scene ever since its inception in the mid-80s&quot; and he argues that the &quot;... involvement of heroin mirrors the self-hating, nihilistic aspect to the music&quot;; in addition to the heroin deaths, Jonze points out that Stone Temple Pilots&#x27; Scott Weiland, as well as Courtney Love, Mark Lanegan, Jimmy Chamberlin and Evan Dando &quot;... all had their run-ins with the drug, but lived to tell the tale.&quot; A 2014 book stated that whereas in the 1980s, people used the &quot;stimulant&quot; cocaine to socialize and &quot;... celebrate good times&quot;, in the 1990s grunge scene, the &quot;depressant&quot; heroin was used to &quot;retreat&quot; into a &quot;cocoon&quot; and be &quot;... sheltered from a harsh and unforgiving world which offered ... few prospects for ... change or hope.&quot; Justin Henderson states that all of the &quot;downer&quot; opiates, including &quot;heroin, morphine, etorphine, codeine, opium, [and] hydrocodone ... seemed to be the habit of choice for many a grunger&quot;.

The title of Nirvana&#x27;s debut album &quot;Bleach&quot; was inspired by a harm reduction poster aimed at heroin injection users, which stated &quot;Bleach your works [e.g., syringe and needle] before you get stoned&quot;. The poster was released by the U.S. State Health Department which was trying to reduce AIDS transmission caused through sharing used needles. Alice in Chains&#x27; song &quot;God Smack&quot; includes the line &quot;stick your arm for some real fun&quot;, a reference to injecting heroin. Seattle musicians known to use heroin included Cobain, who was using &quot;heroin when he shot himself in the head&quot;; &quot;Andrew Wood of Mother Love Bone [who] overdosed on heroin in 1990&quot;; &quot;Stefanie Sargent of 7 Year Bitch [who] died of an overdose of the same opiate in 1992 ... [and] Layne Staley of Alice in Chains [who] publicly detailed his battles with heroin ...&quot;. Mike Starr of Alice in Chains and Jonathan Melvoin from the Smashing Pumpkins also died from heroin. After Cobain&#x27;s death, his &quot;... widow, singer Courtney Love, characterized Seattle as a drug mecca, where heroin is easier to get than in San Francisco or Los Angeles.&quot;

However, Daniel House, who owned C/Z Records, disputed these perceptions in 1994. House stated that there was &quot;... no more (heroin) here [in Seattle] than anyplace else&quot;; he stated that the &quot;heroin is not a big part of the [Seattle music] culture&quot;, and that &quot;marijuana and alcohol ... are far more prevalent&quot;. Jeff Gilbert, one of the editors of &quot;Guitar World&quot; magazine, stated in 1994 that the media association of the Seattle grunge scene with heroin was &quot;really overblown&quot;; instead, he says that Seattle musicians were &quot;... all a bunch of potheads.&quot; Gil Troy&#x27;s history of America in the 1990s states that in the Seattle grunge scene, the &quot;... drug of choice switched from upscale cocaine [of the 1980s] to blue-collar marijuana.&quot; &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine reported that members of Seattle&#x27;s grunge scene were &quot;coffee-crazed&quot; by day on espresso and &quot;... by night, they quaff[ed] oceans of beer – jolted by Java and looped with liquor, no wonder the [grunge] music sounds like it does.&quot; &quot;Some [Seattle] scene veterans maintain that MDA&quot;, a drug related to Ecstasy, &quot;was a vital contributor to grunge&quot;, because it gave users a &quot;body high&quot; (in contrast to marijuana&#x27;s &quot;head high&quot;) that made them appreciate &quot;bass-heavy grooves&quot;. Pat Long&#x27;s &quot; History of the NME&quot; states that scene members involved with the Sub Pop label would have multi-day MDMA parties in the woods, which shows that what Long calls Ecstasy&#x27;s &quot;warm glow&quot; had an impact even in the wet, grey and isolated Pacific Northwest region.

==Graphic design==
Regarding graphic design and images, a common feature of grunge bands was the use of &quot;lo-fi&quot; (low fidelity) and deliberately unconventional album covers, for example presenting intentionally murky or miscolored photography, collage or distressed lettering. Early grunge &quot;[a]lbum covers and concert flyers appeared Xeroxed not in allegiance to some DIY aesthetic&quot; but because of &quot;economic necessity&quot;, as &quot;bands had so little money&quot;. This was already a common feature of punk rock design, but could be extended in the grunge period due to the increasing use of Macintosh computers for desktop publishing and digital image processing. The style was sometimes called &#x27;grunge typography&#x27; when used outside music. A famous example of &#x27;grunge&#x27;-style experimental design was &quot;Ray Gun&quot; magazine, art directed by David Carson.

Carson developed a technique of &quot;ripping, shredding and remaking letters&quot; and using &quot;overprinted, disharmonious letters&quot; and experimental design approaches, including &quot;deliberate &#x27;mistakes&#x27; in alignment&quot;. Carson&#x27;s art used &quot;messy and chaotic design&quot; and he did not &quot;respect any rule of composition&quot;, using an &quot;experimental, personal and intuitive&quot; approach. Another &quot;grunge graphic designer&quot; was Elliott Earls, who used &quot;distorted ... older typefaces&quot; and &quot;aggressively illegible&quot; type which adopted the &quot;unkempt expressiveness&quot; of the &quot;grunge [music] aesthetic&quot;; this radical, anti-establishment approach in graphic design was influenced by the 1910s-era avant-garde Dada movement. Hat Nguyen&#x27;s Droplet, Harriet Goren&#x27;s Morire and Eric Lin&#x27;s Tema Canante were all &quot;signature grunge fonts.&quot; Sven Lennartz states that grunge design images have a &quot;realistic, genuine look&quot; which is created by adding simulated torn paper, dog-eared corners, creases, yellowed scotch tape, coffee cup stains, hand-drawn images and handwritten words, typically over a &quot;dirty&quot; background texture which is done with dull, subdued colors.

A key figure in creating the &quot;look&quot; of the grunge scene for outsiders was music photographer Charles Peterson. Peterson&#x27;s black and white, uncropped, and sometimes blurry shots of the underground Pacific Northwest music scene&#x27;s members playing and jamming, wearing their characteristic everyday clothes, were used by Sub Pop to promote its Seattle bands.

== Literature ==
=== Zines ===
Following the tradition in the 1980s US punk subculture of amateur, fan-produced zines, members of the grunge scene also produced DIY publications which were &quot;distributed at gigs or by mail order&quot;. The zines were typically photocopied and contained handwritten, &quot;hand-colored pages&quot;, &quot;typing errors and grammatical mistakes, misspellings and jumbled pagination&quot;, all proof of their amateur nature. &quot;Backlash&quot; was a zine that was published from 1987 to 1991 by Dawn Anderson, covering the &quot;dirtier, heavier, more underground and rock side of Seattle&#x27;s music scene&quot;, including &quot;punk, metal, underground rock, grunge before it was called grunge and even some local hip-hop.&quot; &quot;Grunge Gerl #1&quot; was one early 1990s grunge zine; the publication was written by and for riot grrrls in the Los Angeles area. It stated that &quot;we&#x27;re girls, we&#x27;re angry, we&#x27;re powerful.&quot;

=== Local newspapers ===
In 1992, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; music critic Michael Azerrad called &quot;The Rocket&quot; the Seattle music &quot;scene&#x27;s [most] respected commentator&quot;. &quot;The Rocket&quot; was a free newspaper about the Pacific Northwest music scene which was launched in 1979. Edited by Charles R. Cross, the paper covered &quot;fairly obscure alternative bands&quot; in the local area, such as the Fartz and others. In the mid-1980s, the paper had stories on Slayer, Wild Dogs, Queensrÿche, and Metal Church. By 1988, the metal scene had faded, and &quot;The Rocket&quot; focus shifted to covering the pre-grunge local alternative rock bands. Dawn Anderson states that in 1988, long before any other publication took notice of them, Soundgarden and Nirvana were &quot;Rocket&quot; cover stars. In 1991, &quot;The Rocket&quot; expanded to include a Portland, Oregon edition.

=== Fiction ===

Grunge lit is an Australian literary genre of fictional or semi-autobiographical writing in the early 1990s about young adults living in an &quot;inner cit[y]&quot; &quot;... world of disintegrating futures where the only relief from ... boredom was through a nihilistic pursuit of sex, violence, drugs and alcohol&quot;. Often the central characters are disfranchised, alienated, and lacking drive and determination beyond the desire to satisfy their basic needs. It was typically written by &quot;new, young authors&quot; who examined &quot;gritty, dirty, real existences&quot; of everyday characters. It has been described as both a sub-set of dirty realism and an offshoot of Generation X literature. Stuart Glover states that the term &quot;grunge lit&quot; takes the term &quot;grunge&quot; from the &quot;late &#x27;80s and early &#x27;90s— ... Seattle [grunge] bands&quot;. Glover states that the term &quot;grunge lit&quot; was mainly a marketing term used by publishing companies; he states that most of the authors who have been categorized as &quot;grunge lit&quot; writers reject the label. The Australian fiction authors McGahan, McGregor and Tsiolkas criticized the &quot;homogenizing effect&quot; of conflating such a different group of writers. Tsiolkas called the &quot;grunge lit&quot; term a &quot;media creation&quot;.

==Role of women==
Many all-female or woman-led bands are associated with grunge including L7, Lunachicks, Dickless, 7 Year Bitch, the Gits, Courtney Love&#x27;s band Hole, and Babes in Toyland. VH1 writer Dan Tucker described L7 as an &quot;all-female grunge band [that] emanated from the fertile L.A. underground scene and [which] had strong ties with ... Black Flag and could match any male band in attitude and volume.&quot; Grunge was also closely linked with Riot Grrrl, an underground feminist punk movement. 
Riot Grrrl pioneer and Bikini Kill frontwoman Kathleen Hanna was the source for the name of Nirvana&#x27;s 1991 breakthrough single, &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot;, a reference to a deodorant marketed specifically to young women. Notable women instrumentalists include the bassists D&#x27;arcy Wretzky and Melissa Auf der Maur from the Smashing Pumpkins, and drummers Patty Schemel of Hole and Lori Barbero of Babes in Toyland. The inclusion of women instrumentalists in grunge is notable, because professional women instrumentalists are uncommon in most rock genres.

Bam Bam, formed in Seattle in 1983, was fronted by an African American woman named Tina Bell, breaking the norm of what was predominantly a White dominated scene. Bam Bam also included future Soundgarden and Pearl Jam drummer Matt Cameron. Kurt Cobain was a roadie for Bam Bam before he was famous; he was also a fan of the band. Bell died in 2012. Observers have speculated that the lack of recognition in her lifetime as one of the progenitors of grunge music was due to sexism and racism.

Women also played active non-musician roles in the underground grunge scene, such as riot grrrls who produced zines about grunge bands and indie record labels (e.g., &quot;Grunge Gerl #1&quot;) and writer Dawn Anderson of the Seattle fanzine &quot;Backlash&quot; which supported many local bands before they achieved greater fame. Tina Casale was the co-founder of C/Z Records in the 1980s (along with Chris Hanzsek), a Seattle indie label that released the seminal grunge compilation &quot;Deep Six&quot; in 1986.

Susan Silver was the first female manager of the Seattle music scene. She started her career in 1983 and managed several bands such as the U-Men, Soundgarden, Alice in Chains and Screaming Trees. In 1991, &quot;The Seattle Times&quot; called Silver &quot;the most powerful figure in local rock management&quot;. Silver was also an advisor for Nirvana. Kurt Cobain and bassist Krist Novoselic consulted Silver for advice when they were not satisfied with Sub Pop&#x27;s lack of promotion for their debut album, &quot;Bleach&quot;. Silver looked at their contract with the label and told them they needed a lawyer. Silver then introduced them to agent Don Muller and music business attorney Alan Mintz, who started sending out Nirvana&#x27;s demo tape to major labels looking for deals. The band ended up choosing DGC and the label released their breakthrough album &quot;Nevermind&quot; in 1991. When Nirvana was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2014, Novoselic thanked Silver during his speech for &quot;introducing them to the music industry properly&quot;.

==History==
=== 1965–1985: Roots, predecessors, and influences ===

The term proto-grunge has been used to describe artists as having elements of grunge well before the genre appeared in the mid- to late-1980s. Perhaps the earliest proto-grunge album is &quot;Here Are the Sonics&quot;, released in 1965 by the Sonics. Neil Young&#x27;s albums &quot;Rust Never Sleeps&quot; (1979) and &quot;Ragged Glory&quot; (1990) have been proclaimed examples of proto-grunge and grunge music. Additionally, he has been cited as an influence by Pearl Jam, which led to them backing Young for the &quot;Mirror Ball&quot; album, released in 1995. Other acts described as proto-grunge include Wipers and their album &quot;Youth of America&quot; (1981), Elvis Costello and his &quot;Blood &amp; Chocolate&quot; album which Will Birch hailed as &quot;6 or 8 years ahead of its time&quot; (1986), and the Stooges and their album &quot;Fun House&quot; (1970).

Grunge&#x27;s sound partly resulted from Seattle&#x27;s isolation from other music scenes. As Sub Pop&#x27;s Jonathan Poneman noted, &quot;Seattle was a perfect example of a secondary city with an active music scene that was completely ignored by an American media fixated on Los Angeles and New York [City].&quot; Mark Arm claimed that the isolation meant, &quot;this one corner of the map was being really inbred and ripping off each other&#x27;s ideas&quot;. Seattle &quot;was a remote and provincial city&quot; in the 1980s; Bruce Pavitt states that the city was &quot;very working class&quot;, a place of deprivation, and so the scene&#x27;s &quot;whole aesthetic – work clothes, thriftstore truckers&#x27; hats, pawnshop guitars&quot; was not just a style, it was done because Seattle &quot;was very poor.&quot; Indeed, when &quot;&quot;Nevermind&quot; reached number one in the U.S. charts, Cobain was living in a car.&quot;

Bands began to mix metal and punk in the Seattle music scene around 1984, with much of the credit for this fusion going to the U-Men. However, some critics have noted that in spite of the U-Men&#x27;s canonical place as original grunge progenitors, that their sound was less indebted to heavy metal and much more akin to However the idiosyncrasy of the band may have been the bigger inspiration, more than the aesthetics themselves. Soon Seattle had a growing and &quot;varied music scene&quot; and &quot;diverse urban personality&quot; expressed by local &quot;post-punk garage bands&quot;. Grunge evolved from the local punk rock scene, and was inspired by bands such as the Fartz, the U-Men, 10 Minute Warning, the Accüsed, and the Fastbacks. Additionally, the slow, heavy, and sludgy style of the Melvins was a significant influence on the grunge sound. Roy Shuker states that grunge&#x27;s success built on the &quot;foundations ... laid throughout the 1980s by earlier alternative music scenes.&quot; Shuker states that music critics &quot;... emphasized the perceived purity and authenticity of the Seattle scene. 

Outside the Pacific Northwest, a number of artists and music scenes influenced grunge. Alternative rock bands from the Northeastern United States, including Sonic Youth, Pixies, and Dinosaur Jr., are important influences on the genre. Through their patronage of Seattle bands, Sonic Youth &quot;inadvertently nurtured&quot; the grunge scene, and reinforced the fiercely independent attitudes of its musicians. Nirvana introduced into the Seattle scene the noise-inflected influences of Scratch Acid and the Butthole Surfers.

Several Australian bands, including the Scientists, Cosmic Psychos and Feedtime, are cited as precursors to grunge, their music influencing the Seattle scene through the college radio broadcasts of Sub Pop founder Jonathan Poneman and members of Mudhoney on KCMU. The influence of Pixies on Nirvana was noted by Kurt Cobain, who commented in a &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; interview, &quot;I connected with that band so heavily that I should have been in that band—or at least a Pixies cover band. We used their sense of dynamics, being soft and quiet and then loud and hard.&quot; In August 1997, in an interview with &quot;Guitar World&quot;, Dave Grohl said: &quot;From Kurt, Krist [Novoselic] and I liking the Knack, Bay City Rollers, Beatles and Abba just as much as we liked Flipper and Black Flag ... You listen to any Pixies record and it&#x27;s all over there. Or even Black Sabbath&#x27;s &quot;War Pigs&quot;—it&#x27;s there: the power of the dynamic. We just sort of abused it with pop songs and got sick with it.&quot;

Aside from the genre&#x27;s punk and alternative rock roots, many grunge bands were equally influenced by heavy metal of the early 1970s. Clinton Heylin, author of &quot;Babylon&#x27;s Burning: From Punk to Grunge&quot;, cited Black Sabbath as &quot;perhaps the most ubiquitous pre-punk influence on the northwest scene&quot;. Black Sabbath played a role in shaping the grunge sound, through their own records and the records they inspired. Musicologist Bob Gulla asserted that Black Sabbath&#x27;s sound &quot;shows up in virtually all of grunge&#x27;s most popular bands, including Nirvana, Soundgarden, and Alice in Chains&quot;. Black Sabbath&#x27;s 1971 album &quot;Master of Reality&quot; in particular has been noted as a key influence on grunge, largely in part due to the sound, as a result of guitarist Tony Iommi down-tuning his guitar a step and a half. The influence of Led Zeppelin is also evident, particularly in the work of Soundgarden, whom &quot;Q&quot; magazine noted were &quot;in thrall to &#x27;70s rock, but contemptuous of the genre&#x27;s overt sexism and machismo&quot;. Jon Wiederhorn of &quot;Guitar World&quot; wrote: &quot;So what exactly is grunge? ... Picture a supergroup made up of Creedence Clearwater Revival, Black Sabbath and the Stooges, and you&#x27;re pretty close.&quot; Catherine Strong stated that grunge&#x27;s strongest metal influence was thrash metal, which had a tradition of &quot;equality with the audience&quot;, based on the notion that &quot;anyone could start a band&quot; (a way of thinking also shared by US hardcore punk, which Strong also cites as an influence on grunge) which was also taken up by grunge bands. Strong stated that grunge musicians were opposed to the then-popular &quot;hair metal&quot; bands.

Strong stated that &quot;sections of what was [US] hardcore became known as grunge.&quot; Seattle songwriter Jeff Stetson states that &quot;[t]here is no real difference ... between Punk and Grunge.&quot; Like punk bands, grunge groups were &quot;embraced as back-to-basics rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll bands which reminded the public that the music was supposed to be raw and raunchy&quot;. One example of the influence of US hardcore on grunge is the impact that the Los Angeles hardcore punk band Black Flag had on grunge. Black Flag&#x27;s 1984 record &quot;My War&quot;, on which the band combined heavy metal with their traditional sound, made a strong impact in Seattle. Mudhoney&#x27;s Steve Turner commented, &quot;A lot of other people around the country hated the fact that Black Flag slowed down ... but up here it was really great ... we were like &#x27;Yay!&#x27; They were weird and fucked-up sounding.&quot; Turner explained grunge&#x27;s integration of metal influences, noting, &quot;Hard rock and metal was never that much of an enemy of punk like it was for other scenes. Here, it was like, &#x27;There&#x27;s only twenty people here, you can&#x27;t really find a group to hate.&#x27;&quot; Charles R. Cross stated that grunge was the &quot;culmination of twenty years of punk rock&quot; development. Cross states that the bands most representing the grunge genre were Seattle bands Blood Circus, Tad, and Mudhoney and Sub Pop&#x27;s Denver band the Fluid; he states that Nirvana, with its pop influences and blend of Sonic Youth and Cheap Trick, was lighter-sounding than bands like Blood Circus.

Neil Young played a few concerts with Pearl Jam and recorded the album &quot;Mirror Ball&quot;. This was grounded not only in his work with his band Crazy Horse and his regular use of distorted guitar—most notably on the album &quot;Rust Never Sleeps&quot;—but also his dress and persona. A similarly influential yet often overlooked album is &quot;Neurotica&quot; by Redd Kross, about which Jonathan Poneman said, &quot;&quot;Neurotica&quot; was a life changer for me and for a lot of people in the Seattle music community.&quot;

The context for the development of the Seattle grunge scene was a &quot;golden age of failure, a time when a swath of American youth embraced the ... vices of indolence and lack of motivation&quot;. The &quot;idlers of Generation X [were] trying to forestall the dread day of corporate enrollment&quot; and embrace the &quot;cult of the loser&quot;; indeed Nirvana&#x27;s 1991 song &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; &quot;opens with Cobain intoning &#x27;It&#x27;s fun to lose.&#x27;&quot;

===1985–1991: Early development and rise in popularity===

In 1985, the band Green River released their debut EP &quot;Come on Down&quot;, which is cited by many as being the first grunge record. Another seminal release in the development of grunge was the &quot;Deep Six&quot; compilation, released by C/Z Records in 1986. The record featured multiple tracks by six bands: Green River, Soundgarden, Melvins, Malfunkshun, Skin Yard, and the U-Men. For many of them it was their first appearance on record. The artists had &quot;a mostly heavy, aggressive sound that melded the slower tempos of heavy metal with the intensity of hardcore&quot;. The recording process was low-budget; each band was given four hours of studio time. As Jack Endino recalled, &quot;People just said, &#x27;Well, what kind of music is this? This isn&#x27;t metal, it&#x27;s not punk, What is it?&#x27; ... People went &#x27;Eureka! These bands all have something in common.&#x27;&quot; Later that year Bruce Pavitt released the &quot;Sub Pop 100&quot; compilation and Green River&#x27;s &quot;Dry As a Bone&quot; EP as part of his new label, Sub Pop. An early Sub Pop catalog described the Green River EP as &quot;ultra-loose GRUNGE that destroyed the morals of a generation&quot;. Sub Pop&#x27;s Bruce Pavitt and Jonathan Poneman, inspired by other regional music scenes in music history, worked to ensure that their label projected a &quot;Seattle sound&quot;, reinforced by a similar style of production and album packaging. While music writer Michael Azerrad acknowledged that early grunge bands like Mudhoney, Soundgarden, and Tad had disparate sounds, he noted &quot;to the objective observer, there were some distinct similarities.&quot;

Early grunge concerts were sparsely attended (many by fewer than a dozen people) but Sub Pop photographer Charles Peterson&#x27;s pictures helped create the impression that such concerts were major events. Mudhoney, which was formed by former members of Green River, served as the flagship band of Sub Pop during their entire time with the label and spearheaded the Seattle grunge movement. Other record labels in the Pacific Northwest that helped promote grunge included C/Z Records, Estrus Records, EMpTy Records and PopLlama Records.

Grunge attracted media attention in the United Kingdom after Pavitt and Poneman asked journalist Everett True from the British magazine &quot;Melody Maker&quot; to write an article on the local music scene. This exposure helped to make grunge known outside of the local area during the late 1980s and drew more people to local shows. The appeal of grunge to the music press was that it &quot;promised the return to a notion of a regional, authorial vision for American rock&quot;. Grunge&#x27;s popularity in the underground music scene was such that bands began to move to Seattle and approximate the look and sound of the original grunge bands. Mudhoney&#x27;s Steve Turner said, &quot;It was really bad. Pretend bands were popping up here, things weren&#x27;t coming from where we were coming from.&quot; As a reaction, many grunge bands diversified their sound, with Nirvana and Tad in particular creating more melodic songs. Dawn Anderson of the Seattle fanzine &quot;Backlash&quot; recalled that by 1990 many locals had tired of the hype surrounding the Seattle scene and hoped that media exposure had dissipated.

Chris Dubrow from &quot;The Guardian&quot; states that in the late 1980s, Australia&#x27;s &quot;sticky-floored ... alternative pub scene&quot; in seedy inner-city areas produced grunge bands with &quot;raw and awkward energy&quot; such as the Scientists, X, Beasts of Bourbon, feedtime, Cosmic Psychos and Lubricated Goat. Dubrow said &quot;Cobain ... admitted the Australian wave was a big influence&quot; on his music. Everett True states that &quot;[t]here&#x27;s more of an argument to be had for grunge beginning in Australia with the Scientists and their scrawny punk ilk.&quot;

Grunge bands had made inroads to the musical mainstream in the late 1980s. Soundgarden was the first grunge band to sign to a major label when they joined the roster of A&amp;M Records in 1989. Soundgarden, along with other major label signings Alice in Chains and Mother Love Bone, performed &quot;okay&quot; with their initial major label releases, according to Jack Endino. Nirvana, originally from Aberdeen, Washington, was also courted by major labels, while releasing its first album &quot;Bleach&quot; in 1989. Nirvana got signed by Geffen Records in 1990.

Alice in Chains signed with Columbia Records in 1989, and their debut album, &quot;Facelift&quot;, was released on August 21, 1990. The album&#x27;s second single, &quot;Man in the Box&quot;, was released in January 1991, spent 20 weeks on the Top 20 of Billboard&#x27;s Mainstream Rock chart and its music video received heavy rotation on MTV. &quot;Facelift&quot; became the first album from the grunge movement to be certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) on September 11, 1991, for selling over 500,000 copies.

===1991–1997: Mainstream success===
====Peak of influence====
In September 1991, Nirvana released its major label debut, &quot;Nevermind&quot;. The album was at best hoped to be a minor success on par with Sonic Youth&#x27;s &quot;Goo&quot;, which Geffen had released a year earlier. It was the release of the album&#x27;s first single &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; that &quot;marked the instigation of the grunge music phenomenon&quot;. Due to the constant airplay of the song&#x27;s music video on MTV, &quot;Nevermind&quot; was selling 400,000 copies a week by Christmas 1991, and was certified gold on November 27, 1991. In January 1992, &quot;Nevermind&quot; replaced pop superstar Michael Jackson&#x27;s &quot;Dangerous&quot; at number one on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. &quot;Nevermind&quot; was certified diamond by the RIAA in 1999.

The success of &quot;Nevermind&quot; surprised the music industry. &quot;Nevermind&quot; not only popularized grunge, but also established &quot;the cultural and commercial viability of alternative rock in general.&quot; Michael Azerrad asserted that &quot;Nevermind&quot; symbolized &quot;a sea-change in rock music&quot; in which the glam metal that had dominated rock music at that time fell out of favor in the face of music that was perceived as authentic and culturally relevant. Grunge made it possible for genres thought to be of a niche audience, no matter how radical, to prove their marketability and be co-opted by the mainstream, cementing the formation of an individualist, fragmented culture. Other grunge bands subsequently replicated Nirvana&#x27;s success. Pearl Jam, which featured former Mother Love Bone members Jeff Ament and Stone Gossard, had released its debut album &quot;Ten&quot; in August 1991, a month before &quot;Nevermind&quot;, but album sales only picked up the following year. By the second half of 1992 &quot;Ten&quot; had become a breakthrough success, being certified gold and reaching number two on the &quot;Billboard&quot; charts. &quot;Ten&quot; by Pearl Jam was certified 13× platinum by the RIAA.

The band Soundgarden&#x27;s album &quot;Badmotorfinger&quot; and the band Alice in Chains&#x27; album &quot;Dirt&quot;, along with the band Temple of the Dog&#x27;s self-titled album, a collaboration featuring members of Pearl Jam and Soundgarden, were also among the 100 top selling albums of 1992. The popular breakthrough of these grunge bands prompted &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; to nickname Seattle &quot;the new Liverpool&quot;. Major record labels signed most of the prominent grunge bands in Seattle, while a second influx of bands moved to the city in hopes of success. The grunge scene was the backdrop in the 1992 Cameron Crowe film &quot;Singles&quot;. There were several small roles, performances, and cameos in the film by popular Seattle grunge bands including Pearl Jam, Soundgarden, and Alice in Chains. Filmed in and around Seattle in 1991, the film was not released until 1992 during the height of grunge popularity.

The popularity of grunge resulted in a large interest in the Seattle music scene&#x27;s perceived cultural traits. While the Seattle music scene in the late 1980s and early 1990s in actuality consisted of various styles and genres of music, its representation in the media &quot;served to depict Seattle as a music &#x27;community&#x27; in which the focus was upon the ongoing exploration of one musical idiom, namely grunge&quot;. The fashion industry marketed &quot;grunge fashion&quot; to consumers, charging premium prices for items such as knit ski hats and tartan shirts. Critics asserted that advertising was co-opting elements of grunge and turning it into a fad. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; commented in a 1993 article, &quot;There hasn&#x27;t been this kind of exploitation of a subculture since the media discovered hippies in the &#x27;60s&quot;. Marketers used the &quot;grunge&quot; concept to sell grunge air freshener, grunge hair gel and even CDs of &quot;easy-listening music&quot; called &quot;grunge light&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot; compared the &quot;grunging of America&quot; to the mass-marketing of punk rock, disco, and hip hop in previous years. Ironically, the &quot;New York Times&quot; was tricked into printing a fake list of slang terms that were supposedly used in the grunge scene; often referred to as the grunge speak hoax. This media hype surrounding grunge was documented in the 1996 documentary &quot;Hype!&quot;. As mass media began to use the term &quot;grunge&quot; in any news story about the key bands, Seattle scene members began to refer to the term as &quot;the G-word&quot;.
A backlash against grunge began to develop in Seattle; in late 1992, Jonathan Poneman said that in the city, &quot;All things grunge are treated with the utmost cynicism and amusement [. . .] Because the whole thing is a fabricated movement and always has been.&quot; Grunge and grunge bands received criticism from musicians such as Blur&#x27;s Damon Albarn, who was quoted saying &quot;fuck grunge&quot; and &quot;The Smashing Pumpkins can kiss my fucking ass&quot; while performing onstage. Many grunge artists were uncomfortable with their success and the resulting attention it brought. Nirvana&#x27;s Kurt Cobain told Michael Azerrad, &quot;Famous is the last thing I wanted to be.&quot; Pearl Jam also felt the burden of success, with much of the attention falling on frontman Eddie Vedder.

Nirvana&#x27;s follow-up album &quot;In Utero&quot; (1993) featured an intentionally abrasive album that Nirvana bassist Krist Novoselic described as a &quot;wild aggressive sound, a true alternative record&quot;. Nevertheless, upon its release in September 1993, &quot;In Utero&quot; topped the &quot;Billboard&quot; charts. In 1996, &quot;In Utero&quot; was certified 5× platinum by the RIAA. Pearl Jam also continued to perform well commercially with its second album, &quot;Vs.&quot; (1993). The album sold a record 950,378 copies in its first week of release, topped the &quot;Billboard&quot; charts, and outperformed all other entries in the top ten that week combined. In 1993, the grunge band Candlebox released their self-titled album, which was certified by the RIAA. In February 1994, Alice in Chains&#x27; EP, &quot;Jar of Flies&quot; peaked at number 1 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 album chart. Soundgarden&#x27;s album &quot;Superunknown&quot;, which was also released in 1994, peaked at number 1 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 chart, and was certified 5× platinum by the RIAA. In 1995, Alice in Chains&#x27; self-titled album became their second number 1 album on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, and was certified 2× platinum.

At the height of grunge&#x27;s commercial success in the early 1990s, the commercial success of grunge put record labels on a nationwide search for undiscovered talent to promote. This included San Diego, California–based Stone Temple Pilots, Texas-based Tripping Daisy and Toadies, Paw, Chicago-based Veruca Salt, and Australian band Silverchair, bands whose early work continues to be identified broadly (if not in Seattle itself) as &quot;grunge&quot;. In 2014, &quot;Paste&quot; ranked Veruca Salt&#x27;s &quot;All Hail Me&quot; #39 and Silverchair&#x27;s &quot;Tomorrow&quot; #45 on their list of the 50 best grunge songs of all time. &quot;Loudwire&quot; named Stone Temple Pilots one of the ten best grunge bands of all time. Grunge bands outside of the United States emerged in several countries. In Canada, Eric&#x27;s Trip, the first Canadian band signed by the Sub Pop label, has been classified as grunge and Nickelback&#x27;s debut album was considered to be grunge. Silverchair achieved mainstream success in the 1990s; the band&#x27;s song &quot;Tomorrow&quot; went to number 22 on the Radio Songs chart in September 1995 and the band&#x27;s debut album &quot;Frogstomp&quot;, released in June 1995, was certified 2× platinum by the RIAA in February 1996.

During this period, grunge bands that were not from Seattle were often panned by critics, who accused them of being bandwagon-jumpers; Stone Temple Pilots and Bush in particular fell victim to this. In a January 1994 &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; poll, Stone Temple Pilots was simultaneously voted &quot;Best New Band&quot; by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; readers and &quot;Worst New Band&quot; by the magazine&#x27;s music critics, highlighting the disparity between critics and fans. Stone Temple Pilots became very popular; their album &quot;Core&quot; was certified 8× platinum by RIAA and their album &quot;Purple&quot; was certified 6× platinum by the RIAA. The British post-grunge band Bush released their debut album &quot;Sixteen Stone&quot; in 1994. In a review of their second album &quot;Razorblade Suitcase&quot;, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; criticized the album and called Bush &quot;the most successful and shameless mimics of Nirvana&#x27;s music&quot;. In the book &quot;Fargo Rock City: A Heavy Metal Odyssey in Rural North Dakota&quot;, Chuck Klosterman wrote, &quot;Bush was a good band who just happened to signal the beginning of the end; ultimately, they would become the grunge Warrant&quot;.

====Decline in popularity and end of subculture====
A number of factors contributed to grunge&#x27;s decline in prominence. Critics and historians do not agree on the exact point that grunge ended. Catherine Strong wrote that &quot;at the end of 1993 ... grunge had become unstable, and was entering the first stages of being killed off&quot;; she pointed out that the &quot;scene had become so successful&quot; and widely known that &quot;imitators had begun to enter the field&quot;. &quot;Paste&quot; magazine states by 1994, grunge &quot;was fading fast&quot;, with &quot;Pearl Jam retreating from the spotlight as fast as they could; Alice in Chains, Stone Temple Pilots and hordes of others were battling horrid drug addictions and struggling for survival.&quot; In &quot;Grunge: Seattle&quot;, Justin Henderson stated that the &quot;downward spiral&quot; began in mid-1994, as the influx of major label money into the scene changed the culture and it had &quot;nowhere to go but down&quot;; he states the death of Hole bassist Kristen Pfaff on June 16, 1994, from a heroin overdose, was &quot;another nail in grunge&#x27;s coffin.&quot;

In Jason Heller&#x27;s 2013 article &quot;Did grunge really matter?&quot;, in &quot;The A.V. Club&quot;, he stated that Nirvana&#x27;s &quot;In Utero&quot; (September 1993) was &quot;grunge&#x27;s death knell. As soon as Cobain grumbled, &#x27;Teenage angst has paid off well / Now I&#x27;m bored and old,&#x27; it was all over.&quot; Heller states that after Cobain&#x27;s death in 1994, the &quot;hypocrisy&quot; in the grunge of the time &quot;became ... glaring&quot; and &quot;idealism became embarrassing&quot;, with the result being that &quot;grunge became the new [mainstream] Aerosmith&quot;. Heller states that &quot;grunge became an evolutionary dead end&quot;, because &quot;it stood for nothing and was built on nothing, and that ethos of negation was all it was about.&quot;

During the mid-1990s, many grunge bands broke up or became less visible. On April 8, 1994, Kurt Cobain was found dead in his Seattle home from an apparently self-inflicted gunshot wound; Nirvana summarily disbanded. After Cobain&#x27;s death, Bruce Hardy wrote in &quot;Time&quot; magazine that he was &quot;the John Lennon of the swinging Northwest&quot;, that he had struggled with a heroin addiction, and claimed that during the last weeks of his life there had been rumors in the music industry that Cobain had suffered a drug overdose and that Nirvana was breaking up. Cobain&#x27;s suicide &quot;served as a catalyst for grunge&#x27;s ... demise&quot;, because it &quot;deflated the energy from grunge and provided the opening for saccharine and corporate-formulated music to regain&quot; its lost footing.&quot;

That same year Pearl Jam canceled its summer tour in protest of ticket vendor Ticketmaster&#x27;s unfair business practices. Pearl Jam then began a boycott of the company; however, Pearl Jam&#x27;s initiative to play only at non-Ticketmaster venues effectively, with a few exceptions, prevented the band from playing shows in the United States for the next three years. In 1996, Alice in Chains gave their final performances with their ailing and estranged lead singer, Layne Staley, who subsequently died from an overdose of cocaine and heroin in 2002. In 1996, Soundgarden and Screaming Trees released their final studio albums of the 1990s, &quot;Down on the Upside&quot; and &quot;Dust&quot;, respectively. Strong states that Roy Shuker and Stout have written that the &quot;end of grunge&quot; can be seen as being &quot;as late as the breakup of Soundgarden in 1997&quot;.

====Emergence of post-grunge====
During the latter half of the 1990s, grunge was supplanted by post-grunge, which remained commercially viable into the start of the 21st century. Post-grunge &quot;... transformed the thick guitar sounds and candid lyrical themes of the Seattle bands into an accessible, often uplifting mainstream aesthetic&quot;. These artists were seen as lacking the underground roots of grunge and were largely influenced by what grunge had become, namely &quot;a wildly popular form of inward-looking, serious-minded hard rock&quot;. was a more commercially viable genre that tempered the distorted guitars of grunge with polished, radio-ready production. When grunge became a mainstream genre, major labels started signing bands that sounded similar to these bands&#x27; sonic identities. Bands labeled as that emerged when grunge was mainstream such as Bush, Candlebox and Collective Soul all are noted for emulating the sound of the bands that launched grunge into the mainstream.

In 1995, &quot;SPIN&quot; writer Charles Aaron stated that with grunge &quot;spent&quot;, pop punk in a slump, Britpop a &quot;giddy memory&quot; and album-oriented rock over, the music industry turned to &quot;Corporate[-produced] Alternative&quot;, which he calls &quot;soundalike fake grunge&quot; or &quot;scrunge&quot;. Bands Aaron lists as &quot;scrunge&quot; groups include: Better Than Ezra; Bush; Collective Soul; Garbage; Hootie &amp; the Blowfish; Hum; Silverchair; Sponge; Tripping Daisy; Jennifer Trynin and Weezer; Aaron includes the Foo Fighters in his list, but states that Dave Grohl avoided becoming a &quot;scrunge fall gu[y]&quot; by combining 1980s hardcore punk with 1970s arena trash music in his post-Nirvana group. Bands described as grunge like Bush and Candlebox also have been largely categorized as These two bands became popular after 1992. Other bands categorized as post-grunge that emerged when Bush and Candlebox became popular include Collective Soul and Live.

====Reaction by Britpop====
Conversely, another rock genre, Britpop, emerged in part as a reaction against the dominance of grunge in the United Kingdom. In contrast to the dourness of grunge, Britpop was defined by &quot;youthful exuberance and desire for recognition&quot;. The leading Britpop bands, &quot;Blur and Oasis existed as reactionary forces to [grunge&#x27;s] eternal downcast glare.&quot; Britpop artists&#x27; new approach was inspired by Blur&#x27;s tour of the United States in the spring of 1992. Justine Frischmann, formerly of Suede and leader of Elastica (and at the time in a relationship with Damon Albarn) explained, &quot;Damon and I felt like we were in the thick of it at that point ... it occurred to us that Nirvana were out there, and people were very interested in American music, and there should be some sort of manifesto for the return of Britishness.&quot;

Britpop artists were vocal about their disdain for grunge. In a 1993 &quot;NME&quot; interview, Damon Albarn of Britpop band Blur agreed with interviewer John Harris&#x27; assertion that Blur was an &quot;anti-grunge band&quot;, and said, &quot;Well, that&#x27;s good. If punk was about getting rid of hippies, then I&#x27;m getting rid of grunge&quot; (ironically Kurt Cobain once cited Blur as his favorite band). Noel Gallagher of Oasis, while a fan of Nirvana, wrote music that refuted the pessimistic nature of grunge. Gallagher noted in 2006 that the 1994 Oasis single &quot;Live Forever&quot; &quot;was written in the middle of grunge and all that, and I remember Nirvana had a tune called &#x27;I Hate Myself and I Want to Die,&#x27; and I was like ... &#x27;Well, I&#x27;m not fucking having that.&#x27; As much as I fucking like him [Cobain] and all that shit, I&#x27;m not having that. I can&#x27;t have people like that coming over here, on smack [heroin], fucking saying that they hate themselves and they wanna die. That&#x27;s fucking rubbish.&quot; In an interview during Pinkpop Festival 2000, Oasis&#x27; Liam Gallagher attacked Pearl Jam, who were also performing, criticizing their depressing lyrical content and writing them off as &quot;rubbish&quot;.

===Since 1997: Successors and revivals===
====Second-wave post-grunge====
Following the end of the original grunge movement, post-grunge increased in popularity in the late 1990s and early 2000s with newer bands such as Creed, Nickelback, 3 Doors Down and Puddle of Mudd. Other bands include Foo Fighters, Staind and Matchbox Twenty. These post-grunge artists were criticized for their commercialized sound as well as their &quot;worldview built around the comforts of community and romantic relationships&quot;, as opposed to grunge&#x27;s lyrical exploration of &quot;troubling issues such as suicide, societal hypocrisy and drug addiction.&quot; Adam Steininger criticized post-grunge bands&#x27; &quot;diluted ditties filled with watered-down lyrics, all seemingly revolving around suffering through romance.&quot; Criticizing many bands that have been described as post-grunge, Steininger criticized Candlebox for their &quot;pop-filled&quot; sound, focus on &quot;love lyrics, and writing songs without &quot;versatility and creativity; Three Days Grace for their &quot;diluted&quot; and &quot;radio-friendly music&quot;; 3 Doors Down for focusing on &quot;snagging hit singles instead of creating quality albums&quot;; Finger Eleven for going in a &quot;pop rock&quot; direction; Bush&#x27;s &quot;random phrasings of nonsense&quot;; Live&#x27;s &quot;pseudo pop poetry&quot; that &quot;strangled the essence of grunge&quot;, Puddle of Mudd&#x27;s &quot;watered down post-grunge sound&quot;; Lifehouse, for tearing down &quot;grunge&#x27;s sound and groundbreaking structure to appeal more to the masses&quot;; and Nickelback, which he calls the &quot;featherweight ... punching bags of post-grunge&quot; whose music is &quot;dull as dishwater&quot;.

====Grunge revivals====
Many major grunge bands continued recording and touring with success in the 2000s and 2010s. Perhaps the most notable grunge act of the 21st century has been Pearl Jam. In 2006, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; writer Brian Hiatt described Pearl Jam as having &quot;spent much of the past decade deliberately tearing apart their own fame&quot;, but noted the band had nevertheless developed a loyal concert following akin to that of the Grateful Dead. They saw a return to wide commercial success with 2006&#x27;s &quot;Pearl Jam&quot;, 2009&#x27;s &quot;Backspacer&quot; and 2013&#x27;s &quot;Lightning Bolt&quot;. Alice In Chains reformed for a handful of reunion dates in 2005 with several different vocalists replacing Layne Staley. Eventually settling on William DuVall as Staley&#x27;s replacement, in 2009 they released &quot;Black Gives Way to Blue,&quot; their first record in 14 years. The band&#x27;s 2013 release, &quot;The Devil Put Dinosaurs Here&quot;, reached number 2 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. Soundgarden reformed in 2010 and released their album &quot;King Animal&quot; two years later which reached the top five of the national albums charts in Denmark, New Zealand, and the United States. Matt Cameron and Ben Shepherd joined Alain Johannes (Queens of the Stone Age, Eleven), Mark Lanegan (Screaming Trees, Queens of the Stone Age) and Dimitri Coats (Off!) to form side project Ten Commandos in 2016.

Despite Kurt Cobain&#x27;s death, the remaining members of Nirvana have continued to be successful posthumously. Due to the high sales for Kurt Cobain&#x27;s &quot;Journals&quot; and the band&#x27;s best-of compilation &quot;Nirvana&quot; upon their releases in 2002, &quot;The New York Times&quot; argued Nirvana &quot;are having more success now than at any point since Mr. Cobain&#x27;s suicide in 1994.&quot; This trend has continued through the century&#x27;s second decade, with the reissuing of the band&#x27;s discography and release of the authorized documentary &quot;Kurt Cobain: Montage of Heck&quot;. In 2012, the surviving members of Nirvana re-united, with Paul McCartney in place of Cobain, to record a track for the soundtrack Dave Grohl&#x27;s documentary &quot;Sound City&quot; titled &quot;Cut Me Some Slack&quot;.

One of the most successful rock groups of the 21st century, Queens of the Stone Age, has featured major contributions from various grunge musicians. Josh Homme had briefly played in Screaming Trees with off-and-on QOTSA member Mark Lanegan, before forming the group. Nirvana&#x27;s Dave Grohl and Eleven&#x27;s Alain Johannes have also provided notable contributions. Homme and Grohl joined with Led Zeppelin&#x27;s John Paul Jones to form the supergroup Them Crooked Vultures in 2009. Johannes also performed with the group as a touring member.
In the early 2000s, grunge would make multiple regionally based resurgences, albeit minor ones. In 2005, &quot;The Seattle Times&quot; made note of groups returning in the Seattle scene. Similarly, &quot;The Guardian&quot; reported of grunge-influenced groups from Yorkshire, including Dinosaur Pile-Up, Pulled Apart by Horses, and Wonderswan. Also, in 2003, the &quot;New York Times&quot; noted a resurgence in grunge fashion.

The 2010s have birthed a number of bands influenced by grunge. Unlike their forebears, some of these acts ascribe the label to themselves willingly. Many acts have been noted for affiliating and/or collaborating with prominent figures from the original alternative rock era. Steve Albini has produced for or worked with members of bands such as Bully, Vomitface, and Shannon Wright, while Emma Ruth Rundle of Marriages has toured with Buzz Osborne of the Melvins. Other notable acts that have been labelled as grunge or as heavily influenced by the grunge era, include Courtney Barnett, Wolf Alice, Yuck, Speedy Ortiz, the Kut, Mitski, 2:54, False Advertising, Slothrust, Baby in Vain, Big Thief, Torres, Lullwater, and Red Sun Rising.

Media outlets also began referring to a revival of the grunge sound around the mid-2010s, with the label being given to bands such as Title Fight, InCrest, Fangclub, Code Orange, My Ticket Home, Citizen, Milk Teeth and Muskets, some of which have been described as merging the genre with emo.

==Legacy==

In 2011, music critic Dave Whitaker wrote, &quot;every generation since the beginning of recorded music has introduced a game-changing genre&quot;, from swing music in the 1930s, rock and roll in the 1950s, punk rock in the 1970s, and then grunge in the 1990s. However, he states &quot;grunge was the last American musical revolution&quot;, as no post-grunge generation has introduced a new genre which radically changed the music scene. He states that the &quot;digital revolution&quot; (online music, file sharing, etc.) has meant that there has not been a &quot;generation-defining genre since grunge&quot;, because, for &quot;one genre to so completely saturate the market requires ... a music industry with immense control over the market&quot;. In 2016, Rob Zombie stated that grunge caused the death of the &quot;rock star&quot;; he states that unlike previous stars like &quot;Alice Cooper and Gene Simmons and Elton John&quot;, who &quot;might as well have been from another fuckin&#x27; planet&quot;, with grunge the attitude was &quot;[we] need all our rock stars to look just like us.&quot;

Bob Batchelor states that the indie record mindset and values in Seattle which provided guidance for the development and emergence of Nirvana and Pearl Jam &quot;conflicted with the major recording label desire to sell millions of CDs.&quot; Batchelor also states that despite grunge musicians&#x27; discomfort with the major labels&#x27; commercial goals, and the resistance by some key bands to do the promotional activities required by the labels, including music videos, MTV&#x27;s video programs &quot;played an instrumental role in making [grunge]&quot; become &quot;mainstream, since many music fans received their first exposure&quot; on MTV, rather than on local or &quot;niche radio.&quot; Gil Troy states that the &quot;grunge rebellion, like most others&quot; in America&#x27;s &quot;consumerist&quot; culture, ended up being &quot;commodified, mass-produced, ritualized, and thus sanitized&quot; by major corporations.

In 2011, John Calvert stated that &quot;timing&quot; is the reason why a grunge revival did not happen; he says that the cultural mood of the late 1980s and early 1990s, which inspired the movement, were no longer present. Seattle songwriter Jeff Stetson states that people from the 2010s who are listening to grunge should learn about the &quot;context and history of how it all came to be&quot; and &quot;respect for what a truly amazing thing it was that happened here [in Seattle,] because you probably won&#x27;t see anything like it again.&quot; &quot;Paste&quot; magazine&#x27;s Michael Danaher states that the grunge &quot;movement changed the course of rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll, bringing ... tales of abuse and depression&quot; and socially conscious issues&quot; into pop culture.

Calvert stated that Nirvana&#x27;s &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; has an &quot;iconic place in history&quot; as it had &quot;generation-defining resonance&quot; for young people from its era&quot;; he states that &quot;no other band ... made the urge to self-destruct ... as listenable&quot;, with &quot;authentic&quot; pain and &quot;disaffection&quot;. Calvert also calls the record &quot;chart history&#x27;s most ferocious, dark and intense&quot; music since early punk rock, and he says it was &quot;heavy when heavy was needed&quot; by young people of that era, &quot;jarr[ing] young America awake&quot; and giving them something to &quot;cling to&quot; in difficult times. A 2017 book stated that grunge &quot;forever changed the identity of rock music in a way analogous to punk&quot;; moreover, grunge added &quot;introspective&quot; lyrics about &quot;existential authenticity&quot; and &quot;what it means to be true to oneself&quot;. Grunge&#x27;s Kurt Cobain has been called the &quot;voice of Generation X&quot;, playing the same role for this demographic as Bob Dylan played for 1960s youth and that John Lennon played for the 1970s generation. Bob Batchelor stated that Nirvana was &quot;as important as Elvis or the Beatles.&quot;

In 2008, Darragh McManus of &quot;The Guardian&quot; states that grunge was not simply a young person&#x27;s trend or a musical fad; she states that grunge synthesized the key philosophies of the modern era, from &quot;Feminism, liberalism, irony, apathy, cynicism/idealism ... anti-authoritarianism, [to] wry post-modernism&quot;. McManus states that grunge dealt with serious, &quot;weighty&quot; topics, which does not occur often in popular music. McManus stated that for Generation X, grunge was not just music, it was a key cultural influence. Marlen Komar stated that Nirvana&#x27;s success popularized &quot;non-heterosexist&quot;, non-binary ways of thinking about &quot;gender and sexuality&quot;, emphasized how men and women were alike and promoted progressive political thinking.

When asked about the &#x27;90s grunge movement in 2021, Mark Lanegan commented, &quot;It&#x27;s not something that was contrived or cooked up around the campfire somewhere. It just happened organically. It&#x27;s hard for me to comment, because there&#x27;s always great new music and there probably always will be – as long as the sun keeps shining.&quot;

==See also==

* List of grunge bands
* List of grunge albums
* Riot grrrl

==References==
== Bibliography ==
*
*Humphrey, Clark (1999). &quot;Loser: The Real Seattle Music Story&quot;. Harry N. Abrams. .
*Masco, Maire (2015). &quot;Desperate Times: The Summer of 1981&quot;. Fluke Press. .
*Pavitt, Bruce (2014). &quot;SUB POP U.S.A.: The Subterraneanan Pop Music Anthology, 1980–1988&quot; Bazillion Points. .
*Pavitt, Bruce (2013). &quot;Experiencing Nirvana: Grunge in Europe, 1989&quot;. Bazillion Points. .
*Peterson, Charles (1995). &quot;Screaming Life: A Chronicle of the Seattle Music Scene&quot;. HarperCollins. .
*Prato, Greg (2010). &quot;Grunge Is Dead: The Oral History of Seattle Rock Music&quot;. ECW Press. .
*Prato, Greg (2023). &quot;I Love Grunge: &#x27;Grunge Is Dead&#x27; Outtakes&quot;. Independently published. .
*Tow, Stephen (2011). &quot;The Strangest Tribe: How a Group of Seattle Rock Bands Invented Grunge&quot;. Sasquatch Books. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="0" end="6" title="Grunge" label="Grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="37" end="50" title="Grunge" label="Seattle sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="58" end="74" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q188451" start="75" end="80" title="Music genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q264965" start="85" end="95" title="subculture" label="subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="142" end="152" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="170" end="177" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="221" end="230" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="235" end="246" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q899871" start="271" end="280" title="Distortion (music)" label="distorted"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="281" end="296" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="435" end="450" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="452" end="463" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11404" start="465" end="470" title="drums" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="524" end="534" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="549" end="560" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q545825" start="647" end="664" title="social alienation" label="social alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34302" start="666" end="676" title="doubt" label="self-doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q600571" start="678" end="683" title="abuse" label="abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931511" start="685" end="692" title="neglect" label="neglect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166722" start="694" end="702" title="betrayal" label="betrayal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778765" start="704" end="710" title="social isolation" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155534" start="715" end="734" title="emotional isolation" label="emotional isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029" start="736" end="745" title="addiction" label="addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q654426" start="747" end="767" title="psychological trauma" label="psychological trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="785" end="792" title="Liberty" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q778673" start="877" end="884" title="Sub Pop" label="Sub Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373485" start="907" end="924" title="underground music" label="underground music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127431" start="957" end="968" title="Green River (band)" label="Green River"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="974" end="981" title="Melvins" label="Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q898820" start="986" end="994" title="Mudhoney" label="Mudhoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q153946" start="1200" end="1204" title="punk (subculture)" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="1209" end="1214" title="metal (music)" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="1518" end="1525" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="1539" end="1548" title="Nevermind" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="1556" end="1565" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q383227" start="1579" end="1582" title="Ten (Pearl Jam album)" label="Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="1590" end="1601" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q507515" start="1615" end="1629" title="Badmotorfinger" label="Badmotorfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="1637" end="1652" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q835555" start="1665" end="1669" title="Dirt (Alice in Chains album)" label="Dirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q329270" start="1681" end="1700" title="Stone Temple Pilots" label="Stone Temple Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289015" start="1713" end="1717" title="Core (Stone Temple Pilots album)" label="Core"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="1836" end="1846" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="1996" end="2007" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="2050" end="2061" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616580" start="2140" end="2151" title="Suicide of Kurt Cobain" label="his suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037693" start="2256" end="2267" title="modern rock" label="modern rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="2330" end="2341" title="pop culture" label="pop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360032" start="2405" end="2423" title="Authenticity (philosophy)" label="be true to oneself"/>
<link wikidata="Q379671" start="2478" end="2489" title="post-grunge" label="post-grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q612885" start="2731" end="2743" title="Bruce Pavitt" label="Bruce Pavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127431" start="2754" end="2765" title="Green River (band)" label="Green River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933973" start="2779" end="2792" title="Dry as a Bone" label="Dry as a Bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q778673" start="2807" end="2814" title="Sub Pop" label="Sub Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="3544" end="3561" title="alternative rock" label="alternative music"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="3594" end="3618" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q941731" start="3635" end="3662" title="Evergreen State College" label="the Evergreen State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713719" start="3790" end="3794" title="KAOS (FM)" label="KAOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="4048" end="4059" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q97587350" start="4102" end="4118" title="Jonathan Poneman" label="Jonathan Poneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="4313" end="4320" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="4333" end="4342" title="Nevermind" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139519" start="4562" end="4571" title="Cock rock" label="cock-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="4825" end="4838" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q962323" start="4852" end="4864" title="Ben Shepherd" label="Ben Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908370" start="5751" end="5760" title="Pop metal" label="metal pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126530" start="5937" end="5946" title="Hammerbox" label="Hammerbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q270935" start="6158" end="6171" title="Chris Cornell" label="Chris Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q464476" start="6780" end="6790" title="Black Flag (band)" label="Black Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="6947" end="6958" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="6973" end="6986" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="6988" end="7003" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist Novoselic"/>
<link wikidata="Q584301" start="7015" end="7022" title="bassist" label="bassist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="7028" end="7035" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="7061" end="7068" title="Melvins" label="Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q711367" start="7125" end="7137" title="Buzz Osborne" label="Buzz Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246270" start="7195" end="7200" title="dirge" label="dirge"/>
<link wikidata="Q285341" start="7462" end="7470" title="Mark Arm" label="Mark Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q477080" start="7475" end="7487" title="Steve Turner (guitarist)" label="Steve Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127431" start="7532" end="7543" title="Green River (band)" label="Green River"/>
<link wikidata="Q623939" start="7649" end="7665" title="diminished fifth" label="diminished fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q265910" start="7802" end="7807" title="Hype!" label="Hype!"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="7945" end="7956" title="the Ramones" label="the Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="8450" end="8459" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="8483" end="8496" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="8521" end="8532" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="8703" end="8713" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="8784" end="8795" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507298" start="8863" end="8868" title="Lo-fi music" label="lo fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029382" start="9185" end="9194" title="Consonance and dissonance" label="dissonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572489" start="9231" end="9247" title="Charles R. Cross" label="Charles R. Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q716215" start="9343" end="9367" title="audio feedback" label="electric guitar feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q810540" start="9401" end="9409" title="bassline" label="bassline"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095122" start="9582" end="9597" title="Women in music" label="women musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="9599" end="9602" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096120" start="9753" end="9765" title="classic rock" label="classic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="9822" end="9833" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="9838" end="9853" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q778673" start="10394" end="10401" title="Sub Pop" label="Sub Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q427917" start="10411" end="10422" title="Jack Endino" label="Jack Endino"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="10431" end="10438" title="Melvins" label="Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="10511" end="10515" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="11073" end="11084" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="11551" end="11566" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q899871" start="11649" end="11659" title="Distortion (music)" label="distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="11711" end="11719" title="effects unit" label="stompbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q786212" start="11812" end="11826" title="tube amplifier" label="tube amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q671465" start="11880" end="11888" title="Marshall Amplification" label="Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572433" start="11930" end="11941" title="Mesa-Boogie" label="Mesa-Boogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="12029" end="12041" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130936" start="12369" end="12380" title="power chord" label="power chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443281" start="12731" end="12749" title="Fender Twin Reverb" label="Fender Twin Reverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443232" start="12758" end="12777" title="Fender Champion 100" label="Fender Champion 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="12834" end="12840" title="Effects unit" label="pedals"/>
<link wikidata="Q431000" start="12911" end="12920" title="rackmount" label="rackmount"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="12921" end="12933" title="effects unit" label="effects unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q898820" start="13035" end="13043" title="Mudhoney" label="Mudhoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366979" start="13096" end="13113" title="Univox Super-Fuzz" label="Univox Super-Fuzz"/>
<link wikidata="Q859092" start="13122" end="13130" title="Big Muff" label="Big Muff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040743" start="13169" end="13186" title="Superfuzz Bigmuff" label="Superfuzz Bigmuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q859092" start="13429" end="13437" title="Big Muff" label="Big Muff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205854" start="13439" end="13442" title="DOD Electronics" label="DOD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911536" start="13448" end="13457" title="Boss DS-1" label="Boss DS-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911536" start="13462" end="13471" title="Boss DS-1" label="Boss DS-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q591457" start="13499" end="13510" title="Small Clone" label="Small Clone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076641" start="13511" end="13524" title="chorus effect" label="chorus effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q910487" start="13555" end="13570" title="Come as You Are (Nirvana song)" label="Come As You Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411035" start="13588" end="13603" title="Screaming Trees" label="Screaming Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049076" start="13613" end="13628" title="Nearly Lost You" label="Nearly Lost You"/>
<link wikidata="Q264300" start="14021" end="14034" title="wah-wah pedal" label="wah-wah pedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q464619" start="14053" end="14059" title="Kim Thayil" label="Thayil"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="14064" end="14079" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q313559" start="14086" end="14100" title="Jerry Cantrell" label="Jerry Cantrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q622944" start="14233" end="14244" title="Dinosaur Jr" label="Dinosaur Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="14368" end="14377" title="PA system" label="PA system"/>
<link wikidata="Q758907" start="14378" end="14393" title="power amplifier" label="power amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q716215" start="14396" end="14411" title="Audio feedback" label="Guitar feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="14798" end="14809" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180791" start="14811" end="14824" title="the Dead Boys" label="the Dead Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q324645" start="14826" end="14838" title="Celtic Frost" label="Celtic Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q175514" start="14840" end="14853" title="King&amp;#x27;s X" label="King&amp;#x27;s X"/>
<link wikidata="Q845926" start="14855" end="14861" title="Voivod (band)" label="Voivod"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="14863" end="14873" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q927457" start="14881" end="14898" title="Rust Never Sleeps" label="Rust Never Sleeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066024" start="14917" end="14933" title="The Replacements (band)" label="the Replacements"/>
<link wikidata="Q862223" start="14935" end="14944" title="Hüsker Dü" label="Hüsker Dü"/>
<link wikidata="Q464476" start="14946" end="14956" title="Black Flag (band)" label="Black Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="14962" end="14973" title="Melvins" label="the Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818058" start="14999" end="15008" title="downtuned guitar" label="downtuned"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="15055" end="15066" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q464619" start="15085" end="15095" title="Kim Thayil" label="Kim Thayil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339359" start="15119" end="15135" title="guitar amplifier" label="guitar amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434762" start="15156" end="15170" title="Bass amplifier" label="bass combo amp"/>
<link wikidata="Q646424" start="15350" end="15371" title="shred guitar" label="&amp;quot;shredding&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446979" start="15372" end="15383" title="guitar solo" label="guitar solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="15420" end="15431" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="15467" end="15472" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q313559" start="15545" end="15559" title="Jerry Cantrell" label="Jerry Cantrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="15760" end="15769" title="anti-hero" label="anti-hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="16244" end="16256" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q451084" start="16477" end="16486" title="Butch Vig" label="Butch Vig"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="16559" end="16570" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q464619" start="16581" end="16591" title="Kim Thayil" label="Kim Thayil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="16697" end="16706" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q716215" start="16812" end="16820" title="Audio feedback" label="feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="17068" end="17077" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q647640" start="17118" end="17133" title="Michael Azerrad" label="Michael Azerrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q477080" start="17180" end="17192" title="Steve Turner (guitarist)" label="Steve Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="17216" end="17228" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="17410" end="17419" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q381797" start="17430" end="17443" title="Mike McCready" label="Mike McCready"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="17500" end="17521" title="The Smashing Pumpkins" label="The Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q311382" start="17538" end="17550" title="Billy Corgan" label="Billy Corgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535368" start="17997" end="18006" title="Skin Yard (album)" label="Skin Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q594559" start="18037" end="18058" title="Skin Yard" label="band of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q15211645" start="18068" end="18077" title="fuzz bass" label="fuzz bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q899871" start="18079" end="18089" title="Distortion (music)" label="overdriven"/>
<link wikidata="Q427917" start="18113" end="18124" title="Jack Endino" label="Jack Endino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217530" start="18129" end="18141" title="Daniel House (musician)" label="Daniel House"/>
<link wikidata="Q962323" start="18173" end="18185" title="Ben Shepherd" label="Ben Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130936" start="18195" end="18206" title="power chord" label="power chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434762" start="18333" end="18347" title="bass amplifier" label="bass amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="18374" end="18389" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q528140" start="18398" end="18407" title="Mike Inez" label="Mike Inez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748085" start="18444" end="18453" title="Ampeg SVT" label="Ampeg SVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q770289" start="18523" end="18532" title="subwoofer" label="subwoofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572433" start="18773" end="18784" title="Mesa/Boogie" label="Mesa/Boogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="18901" end="18909" title="drum kit" label="drum kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908370" start="18931" end="18940" title="pop metal" label="pop metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q318587" start="19048" end="19060" title="Matt Cameron" label="Matt Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q190172" start="19186" end="19193" title="cymbals" label="cymbals"/>
<link wikidata="Q849349" start="19229" end="19232" title="Tom-tom drum" label="tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305735" start="19265" end="19274" title="floor tom" label="floor tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q211028" start="19309" end="19318" title="bass drum" label="bass drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q208421" start="19331" end="19341" title="snare drum" label="snare drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q190172" start="19351" end="19358" title="cymbals" label="cymbals"/>
<link wikidata="Q202988" start="19360" end="19368" title="Zildjian" label="Zildjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q963334" start="19423" end="19427" title="Hi-hat" label="hats"/>
<link wikidata="Q93985" start="19451" end="19456" title="Crash cymbal" label="crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q93992" start="19571" end="19575" title="Ride cymbal" label="ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="19629" end="19639" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536520" start="19697" end="19701" title="Tama Drums" label="Tama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122899" start="20365" end="20374" title="Vox (musical equipment)" label="Vox organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="20400" end="20409" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q281627" start="20435" end="20466" title="Boom Gaspar" label="Kenneth &amp;quot;Boom&amp;quot; Gaspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="20479" end="20484" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="20486" end="20499" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q221535" start="20945" end="20957" title="Eddie Vedder" label="Eddie Vedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q377435" start="21006" end="21013" title="vibrato" label="vibrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q309838" start="21065" end="21077" title="Layne Staley" label="Layne Staley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064632" start="21125" end="21132" title="tremolo" label="tremolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="21766" end="21771" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="21953" end="21963" title="nihilism" label="nihilistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522565" start="21975" end="21980" title="angst" label="angst"/>
<link wikidata="Q545825" start="22035" end="22052" title="social alienation" label="social alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34302" start="22054" end="22064" title="doubt" label="self-doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q600571" start="22066" end="22071" title="abuse" label="abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931511" start="22082" end="22089" title="neglect" label="neglect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166722" start="22091" end="22099" title="betrayal" label="betrayal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778765" start="22101" end="22117" title="social isolation" label="social isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155534" start="22118" end="22137" title="emotional isolation" label="emotional isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q654426" start="22139" end="22159" title="psychological trauma" label="psychological trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="22178" end="22185" title="Liberty" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="22202" end="22205" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="22538" end="22548" title="Major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360032" start="22790" end="22802" title="Authenticity (philosophy)" label="authenticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323340" start="22913" end="22923" title="Rich Lowry" label="Rich Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="23283" end="23299" title="social prejudice" label="social prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q202676" start="23884" end="23898" title="Simon Reynolds" label="Simon Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q327988" start="23941" end="23948" title="Occupational burnout" label="burnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="24045" end="24057" title="homelessness" label="homelessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="24059" end="24066" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="24068" end="24072" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="24159" end="24169" title="glam metal" label="glam metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q550602" start="24191" end="24197" title="Poison (American band)" label="Poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q379689" start="24316" end="24328" title="Generation X" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276212" start="24556" end="24561" title="Black (Pearl Jam song)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="24587" end="24602" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681258" start="24685" end="24697" title="Hate to Feel" label="Hate to Feel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="24723" end="24729" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q898820" start="24938" end="24946" title="Mudhoney" label="Mudhoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536343" start="24965" end="24987" title="Touch Me I&amp;#x27;m Sick" label="Touch Me I&amp;#x27;m Sick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130059" start="25288" end="25295" title="Lithium (Nirvana song)" label="Lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="25331" end="25340" title="Nevermind" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507298" start="25597" end="25602" title="Lo-fi music" label="lo fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="25797" end="25803" title="Bleach (Nirvana album)" label="Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q778673" start="25851" end="25858" title="Sub Pop" label="Sub Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505000" start="25921" end="25931" title="Reciprocal Recording" label="Reciprocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q427917" start="25954" end="25965" title="Jack Endino" label="Jack Endino"/>
<link wikidata="Q899871" start="26047" end="26057" title="distortion (music)" label="distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="26089" end="26103" title="effects unit" label="studio effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="26226" end="26233" title="effects units" label="effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="26238" end="26249" title="audio mastering" label="remastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756285" start="26288" end="26302" title="Screaming Life" label="Screaming Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127431" start="26372" end="26383" title="Green River (band)" label="Green River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411035" start="26385" end="26400" title="Screaming Trees" label="Screaming Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138185" start="26402" end="26404" title="L7 (band)" label="L7"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334480" start="26406" end="26414" title="the Gits" label="the Gits"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="26416" end="26420" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q270055" start="26422" end="26434" title="7 Year Bitch" label="7 Year Bitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q912127" start="26440" end="26443" title="Tad (band)" label="TAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q21077" start="26571" end="26583" title="Warner Music" label="Warner Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="26781" end="26793" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="26944" end="26959" title="record producer" label="record producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q647640" start="27260" end="27275" title="Michael Azerrad" label="Michael Azerrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="27393" end="27408" title="Effects unit" label="special effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="27443" end="27449" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456785" start="27475" end="27489" title="rhythm section" label="rhythm section"/>
<link wikidata="Q222001" start="27534" end="27542" title="In Utero (album)" label="In Utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="27813" end="27834" title="multi-track recording" label="multi-track recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463560" start="28414" end="28421" title="moshing" label="moshing"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="28518" end="28530" title="thrash metal" label="thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="29235" end="29245" title="hair metal" label="hair metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="29839" end="29849" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q862715" start="29887" end="29897" title="Headbanging" label="head flips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690958" start="30250" end="30256" title="poseur" label="poseur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309433" start="30269" end="30276" title="sellout" label="sellout"/>
<link wikidata="Q250209" start="30620" end="30627" title="mohawk (hairstyle)" label="mohawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360032" start="30740" end="30752" title="authenticity (philosophy)" label="authenticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068804" start="30834" end="30853" title="second-hand clothes" label="second-hand clothes"/>
<link wikidata="Q153551" start="30857" end="30869" title="Charity shop" label="thrift store"/>
<link wikidata="Q58162" start="30923" end="30930" title="flannel" label="flannel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472769" start="31528" end="31545" title="thermal underwear" label="thermal underwear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126126" start="31547" end="31558" title="Doc Martens" label="Doc Martens"/>
<link wikidata="Q131151" start="31603" end="31610" title="T-shirt" label="T-shirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q232191" start="31628" end="31635" title="sweater" label="sweater"/>
<link wikidata="Q648458" start="31677" end="31689" title="Birkenstocks" label="Birkenstocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q622934" start="31741" end="31758" title="Textile recycling" label="recycled textiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q188485" start="31762" end="31772" title="fair trade" label="fair trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q89640" start="32039" end="32055" title="Consumerism" label="anti-consumerist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572489" start="32248" end="32264" title="Charles R. Cross" label="Charles R. Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="32296" end="32307" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q153551" start="32681" end="32692" title="Thrift store" label="thrift-shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="33363" end="33376" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146870" start="33597" end="33608" title="kinderwhore" label="kinderwhore"/>
<link wikidata="Q797901" start="33793" end="33801" title="babydoll" label="babydoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q997545" start="33806" end="33824" title="Peter Pan collar" label="Peter-Pan-collared"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884783" start="33906" end="33915" title="Mary Jane (shoe)" label="Mary–Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638175" start="33923" end="33935" title="Kat Bjelland" label="Kat Bjelland"/>
<link wikidata="Q797648" start="33939" end="33955" title="Babes in Toyland (band)" label="Babes in Toyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="34007" end="34011" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663405" start="34090" end="34098" title="Divinyls" label="Divinyls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659332" start="34110" end="34126" title="Chrissy Amphlett" label="Chrissy Amphlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="34173" end="34178" title="Vogue (magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q313108" start="35603" end="35614" title="Marc Jacobs" label="Marc Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="35788" end="35795" title="realism (arts)" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q262789" start="36051" end="36059" title="Anna Sui" label="Anna Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374796" start="36247" end="36260" title="Steven Meisel" label="Steven Meisel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751689" start="36282" end="36298" title="Kristen McMenamy" label="Kristen McMenamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q199369" start="36300" end="36314" title="Naomi Campbell" label="Naomi Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q76665" start="36320" end="36334" title="Nadja Auermann" label="Nadja Auermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q350844" start="36510" end="36527" title="Christian Lacroix" label="Christian Lacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q464497" start="36529" end="36540" title="Donna Karen" label="Donna Karen"/>
<link wikidata="Q76716" start="36545" end="36559" title="Karl Lagerfeld" label="Karl Lagerfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626407" start="36651" end="36658" title="Details (magazine)" label="Details"/>
<link wikidata="Q211236" start="37103" end="37112" title="Celebrity" label="rock star"/>
<link wikidata="Q558" start="37361" end="37373" title="Hedi Slimane" label="Hedi Slimane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282172" start="37377" end="37395" title="Yves Saint Laurent (brand)" label="Yves Saint Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153401" start="37423" end="37429" title="Runway (fashion)" label="runway"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="37436" end="37449" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q129910" start="37902" end="37912" title="A$AP Rocky" label="A$AP Rocky"/>
<link wikidata="Q36844" start="37914" end="37921" title="Rihanna" label="Rihanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="37926" end="37936" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="Q216797" start="38062" end="38068" title="tartan" label="tartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q286430" start="38164" end="38176" title="i-D magazine" label="i-D magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="38281" end="38287" title="hippie" label="hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q188976" start="38288" end="38302" title="counterculture" label="counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="38307" end="38313" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="38349" end="38358" title="marijuana" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q180289" start="38586" end="38594" title="espresso" label="espresso"/>
<link wikidata="Q16221216" start="38744" end="38753" title="Tim Jonze" label="Tim Jonze"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="38971" end="38981" title="Nihilism" label="nihilistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q329270" start="39065" end="39084" title="Stone Temple Pilots" label="Stone Temple Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q363236" start="39091" end="39104" title="Scott Weiland" label="Scott Weiland"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="39117" end="39130" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q319277" start="39132" end="39144" title="Mark Lanegan" label="Mark Lanegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q373733" start="39146" end="39162" title="Jimmy Chamberlin" label="Jimmy Chamberlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704219" start="39167" end="39177" title="Evan Dando" label="Evan Dando"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="39343" end="39350" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="39741" end="39749" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q110771397" start="39751" end="39760" title="etorphine" label="etorphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174723" start="39762" end="39769" title="codeine" label="codeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="39771" end="39776" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q411441" start="39784" end="39795" title="hydrocodone" label="hydrocodone"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="39906" end="39912" title="Bleach (Nirvana album)" label="Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458711" start="39937" end="39951" title="harm reduction" label="harm reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q273318" start="40036" end="40043" title="syringe" label="syringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165892" start="40048" end="40054" title="Hypodermic needle" label="needle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="40172" end="40176" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q381777" start="40501" end="40512" title="Andrew Wood (singer)" label="Andrew Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053623" start="40516" end="40532" title="Mother Love Bone" label="Mother Love Bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012872" start="40580" end="40596" title="Stefanie Sargent" label="Stefanie Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q270055" start="40600" end="40612" title="7 Year Bitch" label="7 Year Bitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q309838" start="40676" end="40688" title="Layne Staley" label="Layne Staley"/>
<link wikidata="Q539432" start="40767" end="40777" title="Mike Starr (musician)" label="Mike Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703258" start="40801" end="40817" title="Jonathan Melvoin" label="Jonathan Melvoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="40823" end="40844" title="the Smashing Pumpkins" label="the Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217530" start="41061" end="41073" title="Daniel House (musician)" label="Daniel House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930498" start="41085" end="41096" title="C/Z Records" label="C/Z Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q223020" start="42199" end="42202" title="3,4-Methylenedioxyamphetamine" label="MDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q69488" start="42228" end="42235" title="MDMA" label="Ecstasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501482" start="42429" end="42436" title="Groove (music)" label="grooves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283100" start="43008" end="43018" title="Distressing" label="distressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q26384" start="43126" end="43129" title="DIY" label="DIY"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="43362" end="43380" title="Macintosh computer" label="Macintosh computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297558" start="43596" end="43603" title="Ray Gun (magazine)" label="Ray Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q562699" start="43636" end="43648" title="David Carson (graphic designer)" label="David Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q28370096" start="44132" end="44145" title="Elliott Earls" label="Elliott Earls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="44444" end="44448" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065761" start="45040" end="45056" title="Charles Peterson (photographer)" label="Charles Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q549638" start="45425" end="45429" title="zine" label="zine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26384" start="45474" end="45477" title="DIY" label="DIY"/>
<link wikidata="Q677542" start="46180" end="46190" title="riot grrrl" label="riot grrrl"/>
<link wikidata="Q647640" start="46375" end="46390" title="Michael Azerrad" label="Michael Azerrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761281" start="46404" end="46414" title="The Rocket (music magazine)" label="The Rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572489" start="46616" end="46632" title="Charles R. Cross" label="Charles R. Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733478" start="46724" end="46733" title="the Fartz" label="the Fartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="46789" end="46795" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000615" start="46797" end="46806" title="Wild Dogs" label="Wild Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q462380" start="46808" end="46819" title="Queensrÿche" label="Queensrÿche"/>
<link wikidata="Q212448" start="46825" end="46837" title="Metal Church" label="Metal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="46949" end="46965" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="47063" end="47074" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="47079" end="47086" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q223393" start="47250" end="47264" title="literary genre" label="literary genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253" start="47268" end="47275" title="fiction" label="fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056541" start="47281" end="47302" title="Autobiographical novel" label="semi-autobiographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q34255" start="47460" end="47467" title="boredom" label="boredom"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="47482" end="47492" title="nihilism" label="nihilistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568215" start="47869" end="47882" title="dirty realism" label="dirty realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623897" start="48586" end="48596" title="All-female band" label="all-female"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138185" start="48653" end="48655" title="L7 (band)" label="L7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877355" start="48657" end="48667" title="Lunachicks" label="Lunachicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15046311" start="48669" end="48677" title="Dickless" label="Dickless"/>
<link wikidata="Q270055" start="48679" end="48691" title="7 Year Bitch" label="7 Year Bitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334480" start="48693" end="48701" title="the Gits" label="the Gits"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="48703" end="48716" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="48729" end="48733" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q797648" start="48739" end="48755" title="Babes in Toyland (band)" label="Babes in Toyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q464476" start="48920" end="48930" title="Black Flag (band)" label="Black Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q677542" start="49027" end="49037" title="Riot Grrrl" label="Riot Grrrl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="49054" end="49062" title="feminist" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="49063" end="49067" title="punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q860153" start="49102" end="49113" title="Bikini Kill" label="Bikini Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q242608" start="49125" end="49139" title="Kathleen Hanna" label="Kathleen Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q485907" start="49218" end="49241" title="Smells Like Teen Spirit" label="Smells Like Teen Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694320" start="49266" end="49275" title="Teen Spirit (deodorant)" label="deodorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q237008" start="49366" end="49385" title="D&amp;#x27;arcy Wretzky" label="D&amp;#x27;arcy Wretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q254510" start="49390" end="49410" title="Melissa Auf der Maur" label="Melissa Auf der Maur"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="49416" end="49437" title="the Smashing Pumpkins" label="the Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331185" start="49452" end="49465" title="Patty Schemel" label="Patty Schemel"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="49469" end="49473" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681044" start="49478" end="49490" title="Lori Barbero" label="Lori Barbero"/>
<link wikidata="Q797648" start="49494" end="49510" title="Babes in Toyland (band)" label="Babes in Toyland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49595" end="49617" title="Women in music#Popular music" label="women instrumentalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q105107027" start="49653" end="49660" title="Bam Bam (Seattle band)" label="Bam Bam"/>
<link wikidata="Q105107027" start="49736" end="49745" title="Tina Bell" label="Tina Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="49845" end="49856" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="49861" end="49870" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q318587" start="49879" end="49891" title="Matt Cameron" label="Matt Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="49893" end="49904" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q549638" start="50256" end="50261" title="zines" label="zines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930498" start="50511" end="50522" title="C/Z Records" label="C/Z Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182409" start="50637" end="50645" title="Deep Six (album)" label="Deep Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978629" start="50662" end="50674" title="Susan Silver" label="Susan Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q668870" start="50797" end="50806" title="the U-Men" label="the U-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="50808" end="50819" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="50821" end="50836" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411035" start="50841" end="50856" title="Screaming Trees" label="Screaming Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q221718" start="50873" end="50890" title="The Seattle Times" label="The Seattle Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="51005" end="51012" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="51014" end="51025" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="51038" end="51053" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist Novoselic"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="51178" end="51184" title="Bleach (Nirvana album)" label="Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311775" start="51474" end="51477" title="DGC Records" label="DGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="51532" end="51541" title="Nevermind (album)" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="51592" end="51618" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q663778" start="51997" end="52016" title="Here Are the Sonics" label="Here Are the Sonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q904921" start="52044" end="52054" title="the Sonics" label="the Sonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="52056" end="52066" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q927457" start="52087" end="52104" title="Rust Never Sleeps" label="Rust Never Sleeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q515341" start="52128" end="52140" title="Ragged Glory" label="Ragged Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="52269" end="52278" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170703" start="52326" end="52337" title="Mirror Ball (Neil Young album)" label="Mirror Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889932" start="52414" end="52420" title="Wipers (band)" label="Wipers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053487" start="52443" end="52459" title="Youth of America" label="Youth of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q206939" start="52474" end="52488" title="Elvis Costello" label="Elvis Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q756625" start="52503" end="52524" title="Blood &amp;amp; Chocolate" label="Blood &amp;amp; Chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002704" start="52543" end="52553" title="Will Birch" label="Will Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q208767" start="52619" end="52630" title="the Stooges" label="the Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004341" start="52653" end="52662" title="Fun House (The Stooges album)" label="Fun House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942265" start="52719" end="52743" title="Seattle music scene" label="Seattle&amp;#x27;s isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="53521" end="53530" title="Nevermind" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q668870" start="53734" end="53743" title="the U-Men" label="the U-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="54173" end="54182" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q211573" start="54183" end="54194" title="garage band" label="garage band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733478" start="54284" end="54293" title="the Fartz" label="the Fartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546891" start="54306" end="54323" title="10 Minute Warning" label="10 Minute Warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578733" start="54325" end="54336" title="the Accüsed" label="the Accüsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067117" start="54346" end="54355" title="Fastbacks" label="Fastbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="54412" end="54419" title="Melvins" label="Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="54586" end="54603" title="alternative rock" label="alternative music"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="54891" end="54902" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188464" start="54904" end="54910" title="Pixies (band)" label="Pixies"/>
<link wikidata="Q622944" start="54916" end="54928" title="Dinosaur Jr." label="Dinosaur Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q951819" start="55220" end="55232" title="Scratch Acid" label="Scratch Acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018174" start="55241" end="55257" title="Butthole Surfers" label="Butthole Surfers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029733" start="55296" end="55310" title="the Scientists" label="the Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998276" start="55312" end="55326" title="Cosmic Psychos" label="Cosmic Psychos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441252" start="55331" end="55339" title="Feedtime" label="Feedtime"/>
<link wikidata="" start="55518" end="55522" title="KEXP-FM#KCMU: The early years" label="KCMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="55572" end="55583" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q930471" start="55882" end="55894" title="Guitar World" label="Guitar World"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="55902" end="55912" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="55936" end="55941" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427240" start="55967" end="55976" title="the Knack" label="the Knack"/>
<link wikidata="Q812073" start="55978" end="55994" title="Bay City Rollers" label="Bay City Rollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="55996" end="56003" title="The Beatles" label="Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="56008" end="56012" title="ABBA" label="Abba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428959" start="56038" end="56045" title="Flipper (band)" label="Flipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q464476" start="56050" end="56060" title="Black Flag (band)" label="Black Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="56135" end="56148" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q926002" start="56162" end="56170" title="War Pigs" label="War Pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q484641" start="56251" end="56260" title="pop rock" label="pop songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134135" start="56428" end="56442" title="Clinton Heylin" label="Clinton Heylin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932634" start="56744" end="56753" title="Bob Gulla" label="Bob Gulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="56874" end="56881" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="56883" end="56894" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="56900" end="56915" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q658926" start="56961" end="56978" title="Master of Reality" label="Master of Reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q202733" start="57103" end="57113" title="Tony Iommi" label="Tony Iommi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="57173" end="57185" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192463" start="57507" end="57535" title="Creedence Clearwater Revival" label="Creedence Clearwater Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q208767" start="57555" end="57566" title="the Stooges" label="the Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="57677" end="57689" title="thrash metal" label="thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="57856" end="57869" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="58038" end="58048" title="hair metal" label="hair metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="58114" end="58122" title="Hardcore punk" label="hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q464476" start="58558" end="58568" title="Black Flag (band)" label="Black Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q757209" start="58620" end="58626" title="My War" label="My War"/>
<link wikidata="Q477080" start="58752" end="58764" title="Steve Turner (guitarist)" label="Steve Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="59350" end="59359" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927576" start="59461" end="59473" title="Blood Circus (band)" label="Blood Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734548" start="59524" end="59533" title="the Fluid" label="the Fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068713" start="59612" end="59623" title="Cheap Trick" label="Cheap Trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="59677" end="59687" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170703" start="59754" end="59765" title="Mirror Ball (Neil Young album)" label="Mirror Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q951532" start="59826" end="59837" title="Crazy Horse (band)" label="Crazy Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q927457" start="59910" end="59927" title="Rust Never Sleeps" label="Rust Never Sleeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002738" start="60026" end="60035" title="Neurotica (album)" label="Neurotica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305591" start="60045" end="60055" title="Redd Kross" label="Redd Kross"/>
<link wikidata="Q485907" start="60597" end="60620" title="Smells Like Teen Spirit" label="Smells Like Teen Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127431" start="60779" end="60790" title="Green River (band)" label="Green River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756308" start="60821" end="60833" title="Come on Down (EP)" label="Come on Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182409" start="60965" end="60973" title="Deep Six (album)" label="Deep Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930498" start="61005" end="61016" title="C/Z Records" label="C/Z Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="61089" end="61100" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="61102" end="61109" title="Melvins" label="Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q656561" start="61111" end="61122" title="Malfunkshun" label="Malfunkshun"/>
<link wikidata="Q594559" start="61124" end="61133" title="Skin Yard" label="Skin Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q612885" start="61681" end="61693" title="Bruce Pavitt" label="Bruce Pavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403000" start="61713" end="61724" title="Sub Pop 100" label="Sub Pop 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933973" start="61772" end="61785" title="Dry As a Bone" label="Dry As a Bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q647640" start="62226" end="62241" title="Michael Azerrad" label="Michael Azerrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065761" start="62531" end="62547" title="Charles Peterson (photographer)" label="Charles Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401868" start="62910" end="62924" title="Estrus Records" label="Estrus Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228960" start="62944" end="62960" title="PopLlama Records" label="PopLlama Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417079" start="63060" end="63072" title="Everett True" label="Everett True"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="63105" end="63117" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437802" start="63423" end="63436" title="American rock" label="American rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373485" start="63476" end="63493" title="underground music" label="underground music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="64108" end="64120" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029733" start="64324" end="64338" title="the Scientists" label="the Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635783" start="64340" end="64341" title="X (Australian band)" label="X"/>
<link wikidata="Q744376" start="64343" end="64360" title="Beasts of Bourbon" label="Beasts of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441252" start="64362" end="64370" title="feedtime" label="feedtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998276" start="64372" end="64386" title="Cosmic Psychos" label="Cosmic Psychos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331016" start="64391" end="64406" title="Lubricated Goat" label="Lubricated Goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q277626" start="64840" end="64855" title="A&amp;amp;M Records" label="A&amp;amp;M Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="64916" end="64931" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053623" start="64936" end="64952" title="Mother Love Bone" label="Mother Love Bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="65048" end="65055" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q233808" start="65073" end="65093" title="Aberdeen, Washington" label="Aberdeen, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="65167" end="65173" title="Bleach (Nirvana album)" label="Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q212699" start="65211" end="65225" title="Geffen Records" label="Geffen Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="65264" end="65280" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130127" start="65319" end="65327" title="Facelift (album)" label="Facelift"/>
<link wikidata="Q943205" start="65406" end="65420" title="Man in the Box" label="Man in the Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="65490" end="65499" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q868813" start="65507" end="65522" title="Mainstream Rock (chart)" label="Mainstream Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="65678" end="65719" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="65911" end="65920" title="Nevermind" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011916" start="66015" end="66018" title="Goo (album)" label="Goo"/>
<link wikidata="Q485907" start="66126" end="66149" title="Smells Like Teen Spirit" label="Smells Like Teen Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="66290" end="66293" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="66463" end="66466" title="pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="66477" end="66492" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44104" start="66506" end="66515" title="Dangerous (Michael Jackson album)" label="Dangerous"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="66543" end="66568" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="66972" end="66982" title="glam metal" label="glam metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360032" start="67087" end="67096" title="authenticity (philosophy)" label="authentic"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="67411" end="67420" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053623" start="67444" end="67460" title="Mother Love Bone" label="Mother Love Bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q366775" start="67469" end="67479" title="Jeff Ament" label="Jeff Ament"/>
<link wikidata="Q366777" start="67484" end="67497" title="Stone Gossard" label="Stone Gossard"/>
<link wikidata="Q383227" start="67534" end="67537" title="Ten (Pearl Jam album)" label="Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q507515" start="67919" end="67933" title="Badmotorfinger" label="Badmotorfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q835555" start="67987" end="67991" title="Dirt (Alice in Chains album)" label="Dirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q845759" start="68019" end="68036" title="Temple of the Dog" label="Temple of the Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756342" start="68044" end="68061" title="Temple of the Dog (album)" label="self-titled album"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="68295" end="68304" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q318287" start="68502" end="68515" title="Cameron Crowe" label="Cameron Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q282041" start="68527" end="68534" title="Singles (1992 film)" label="Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="69492" end="69512" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="69858" end="69876" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="69953" end="69962" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="69964" end="69969" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="69975" end="69982" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612122" start="70170" end="70182" title="grunge speak" label="grunge speak"/>
<link wikidata="Q265910" start="70269" end="70274" title="Hype!" label="Hype!"/>
<link wikidata="Q485820" start="70786" end="70790" title="Blur (band)" label="Blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q272069" start="70798" end="70810" title="Damon Albarn" label="Damon Albarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="70868" end="70889" title="The Smashing Pumpkins" label="The Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q221535" start="71236" end="71248" title="Eddie Vedder" label="Eddie Vedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q222001" start="71288" end="71296" title="In Utero (album)" label="In Utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="71372" end="71387" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist Novoselic"/>
<link wikidata="Q174218" start="71729" end="71732" title="Vs. (Pearl Jam album)" label="Vs."/>
<link wikidata="Q1033047" start="71952" end="71961" title="Candlebox" label="Candlebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031961" start="71977" end="71994" title="Candlebox (album)" label="self-titled album"/>
<link wikidata="Q912288" start="72079" end="72091" title="Jar of Flies" label="Jar of Flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q739924" start="72194" end="72206" title="Superunknown" label="Superunknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q600212" start="72380" end="72397" title="Alice in Chains (album)" label="self-titled album"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="72693" end="72702" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="72704" end="72714" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q329270" start="72721" end="72740" title="Stone Temple Pilots" label="Stone Temple Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q548450" start="72754" end="72768" title="Tripping Daisy" label="Tripping Daisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811375" start="72773" end="72780" title="Toadies" label="Toadies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373180" start="72782" end="72785" title="Paw (band)" label="Paw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300681" start="72801" end="72812" title="Veruca Salt" label="Veruca Salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q157327" start="72834" end="72845" title="Silverchair" label="Silverchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686082" start="73145" end="73153" title="Loudwire" label="Loudwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385952" start="73315" end="73331" title="Eric&amp;#x27;s Trip" label="Eric&amp;#x27;s Trip"/>
<link wikidata="Q483802" start="73420" end="73430" title="Nickelback" label="Nickelback"/>
<link wikidata="Q116535" start="73560" end="73568" title="Tomorrow (Silverchair song)" label="Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356902" start="73600" end="73611" title="Radio Songs (chart)" label="Radio Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q45652" start="73674" end="73683" title="Frogstomp" label="Frogstomp"/>
<link wikidata="Q329270" start="73906" end="73925" title="Stone Temple Pilots" label="Stone Temple Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q247949" start="73930" end="73934" title="Bush (British band)" label="Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="73994" end="74007" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q329270" start="74020" end="74039" title="Stone Temple Pilots" label="Stone Temple Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289015" start="74309" end="74313" title="Core (Stone Temple Pilots album)" label="Core"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310898" start="74376" end="74382" title="Purple (Stone Temple Pilots album)" label="Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q247949" start="74457" end="74461" title="Bush (British band)" label="Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q641451" start="74564" end="74583" title="Razorblade Suitcase" label="Razorblade Suitcase"/>
<link wikidata="Q367336" start="74818" end="74834" title="Chuck Klosterman" label="Chuck Klosterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631685" start="74964" end="74971" title="Warrant (American band)" label="Warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="75556" end="75565" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="75619" end="75634" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q329270" start="75636" end="75655" title="Stone Temple Pilots" label="Stone Temple Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="76001" end="76005" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q240554" start="76014" end="76027" title="Kristen Pfaff" label="Kristen Pfaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233970" start="76209" end="76222" title="The A.V. Club" label="The A.V. Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q222001" start="76266" end="76274" title="In Utero (album)" label="In Utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="76711" end="76720" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="77228" end="77239" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609162" start="77814" end="77826" title="Ticketmaster" label="Ticketmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q309838" start="78206" end="78218" title="Layne Staley" label="Layne Staley"/>
<link wikidata="Q425625" start="78386" end="78404" title="Down on the Upside" label="Down on the Upside"/>
<link wikidata="Q129129" start="78421" end="78425" title="Dust (Screaming Trees album)" label="Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q379671" start="78711" end="78722" title="post-grunge" label="post-grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q247949" start="79493" end="79497" title="Bush (British band)" label="Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033047" start="79499" end="79508" title="Candlebox" label="Candlebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q593366" start="79513" end="79528" title="Collective Soul" label="Collective Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q487914" start="79713" end="79721" title="pop punk" label="pop punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q189045" start="79734" end="79741" title="Britpop" label="Britpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q832446" start="80005" end="80021" title="Better Than Ezra" label="Better Than Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q593366" start="80029" end="80044" title="Collective Soul" label="Collective Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q485673" start="80046" end="80053" title="Garbage (band)" label="Garbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476499" start="80055" end="80080" title="Hootie &amp;amp; the Blowfish" label="Hootie &amp;amp; the Blowfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839847" start="80082" end="80085" title="Hum (band)" label="Hum"/>
<link wikidata="Q157327" start="80087" end="80098" title="Silverchair" label="Silverchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493751" start="80100" end="80106" title="Sponge (band)" label="Sponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q548450" start="80108" end="80122" title="Tripping Daisy" label="Tripping Daisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177337" start="80124" end="80139" title="Jennifer Trynin" label="Jennifer Trynin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209956" start="80144" end="80150" title="Weezer" label="Weezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="80171" end="80183" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="80213" end="80223" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="80293" end="80306" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q593366" start="80593" end="80608" title="Collective Soul" label="Collective Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q165714" start="80613" end="80617" title="Live (band)" label="Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="80668" end="80672" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q189045" start="80680" end="80687" title="Britpop" label="Britpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q485820" start="80929" end="80933" title="Blur (band)" label="Blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="80938" end="80943" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531577" start="81135" end="81153" title="Justine Frischmann" label="Justine Frischmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q826255" start="81167" end="81172" title="Suede (band)" label="Suede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060797" start="81187" end="81195" title="Elastica" label="Elastica"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="81588" end="81591" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q272069" start="81609" end="81621" title="Damon Albarn" label="Damon Albarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q485820" start="81638" end="81642" title="Blur (band)" label="Blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809316" start="81667" end="81678" title="John Harris (critic)" label="John Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q193459" start="81929" end="81943" title="Noel Gallagher" label="Noel Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="81947" end="81952" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q769355" start="82094" end="82106" title="Live Forever (Oasis song)" label="Live Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="82466" end="82471" title="heroin" label="smack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151125" start="82601" end="82622" title="Pinkpop Festival" label="Pinkpop Festival 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q216708" start="82636" end="82650" title="Liam Gallagher" label="Liam Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="82660" end="82669" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q308816" start="83008" end="83013" title="Creed (band)" label="Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q483802" start="83015" end="83025" title="Nickelback" label="Nickelback"/>
<link wikidata="Q175097" start="83027" end="83039" title="3 Doors Down" label="3 Doors Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q907540" start="83044" end="83058" title="Puddle of Mudd" label="Puddle of Mudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="83080" end="83092" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q266496" start="83094" end="83100" title="Staind" label="Staind"/>
<link wikidata="Q482444" start="83105" end="83120" title="Matchbox Twenty" label="Matchbox Twenty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033047" start="83693" end="83702" title="Candlebox" label="Candlebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q486825" start="83831" end="83847" title="Three Days Grace" label="Three Days Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071154" start="84014" end="84027" title="Finger Eleven" label="Finger Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q165714" start="84129" end="84133" title="Live (band)" label="Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q907540" start="84221" end="84235" title="Puddle of Mudd" label="Puddle of Mudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q845790" start="84287" end="84296" title="Lifehouse (band)" label="Lifehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q483802" start="84410" end="84420" title="Nickelback" label="Nickelback"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="84729" end="84738" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="85001" end="85014" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q931609" start="85078" end="85099" title="Pearl Jam (album)" label="&amp;quot;Pearl Jam&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q798509" start="85119" end="85129" title="Backspacer" label="Backspacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13780884" start="85158" end="85172" title="Lightning Bolt (Pearl Jam album)" label="Lightning Bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q442237" start="85324" end="85338" title="William DuVall" label="William DuVall"/>
<link wikidata="Q880282" start="85397" end="85420" title="Black Gives Way to Blue" label="Black Gives Way to Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042736" start="85496" end="85524" title="The Devil Put Dinosaurs Here" label="The Devil Put Dinosaurs Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q29750" start="85643" end="85654" title="King Animal" label="King Animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q984115" start="85819" end="85833" title="Alain Johannes" label="Alain Johannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277480" start="85929" end="85942" title="Dimitri Coats" label="Dimitri Coats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706795" start="86159" end="86167" title="Journals (Cobain)" label="Journals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128931" start="86220" end="86227" title="Nirvana (Nirvana album)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="" start="86573" end="86601" title="Kurt Cobain: Montage of Heck" label="Kurt Cobain: Montage of Heck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="86667" end="86681" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855067" start="86775" end="86785" title="Sound City (film)" label="Sound City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243718" start="86891" end="86914" title="Queens of the Stone Age" label="Queens of the Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708504" start="86980" end="86990" title="Josh Homme" label="Josh Homme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411035" start="87013" end="87028" title="Screaming Trees" label="Screaming Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q319277" start="87058" end="87070" title="Mark Lanegan" label="Mark Lanegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="87113" end="87123" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267966" start="87128" end="87141" title="Eleven (band)" label="Eleven&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="87227" end="87239" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190243" start="87247" end="87262" title="John Paul Jones (musician)" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q544121" start="87286" end="87307" title="Them Crooked Vultures" label="Them Crooked Vultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q221718" start="87488" end="87505" title="The Seattle Times" label="The Seattle Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="87581" end="87593" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q48063" start="87642" end="87651" title="Yorkshire and the Humber" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278645" start="87663" end="87679" title="Dinosaur Pile-Up" label="Dinosaur Pile-Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675588" start="87681" end="87703" title="Pulled Apart by Horses" label="Pulled Apart by Horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031931" start="87709" end="87719" title="Wonderswan (band)" label="Wonderswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="88081" end="88093" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q20630351" start="88151" end="88156" title="Bully (band)" label="Bully"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058867" start="88173" end="88187" title="Shannon Wright" label="Shannon Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q17411149" start="88195" end="88211" title="Emma Ruth Rundle" label="Emma Ruth Rundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155070" start="88215" end="88224" title="Marriages (band)" label="Marriages"/>
<link wikidata="Q711367" start="88241" end="88253" title="Buzz Osborne" label="Buzz Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="88261" end="88268" title="Melvins" label="Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16390683" start="88375" end="88391" title="Courtney Barnett" label="Courtney Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029799" start="88393" end="88403" title="Wolf Alice" label="Wolf Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683245" start="88405" end="88409" title="Yuck (band)" label="Yuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091953" start="88411" end="88423" title="Speedy Ortiz" label="Speedy Ortiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744999" start="88425" end="88432" title="the Kut" label="the Kut"/>
<link wikidata="Q23761694" start="88434" end="88440" title="Mitski" label="Mitski"/>
<link wikidata="" start="88442" end="88446" title="2:54" label="2:54"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352181" start="88448" end="88465" title="False Advertising (band)" label="False Advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060726" start="88467" end="88476" title="Slothrust" label="Slothrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q16145929" start="88478" end="88490" title="Baby in Vain" label="Baby in Vain"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228836" start="88492" end="88501" title="Big Thief" label="Big Thief"/>
<link wikidata="Q16234254" start="88503" end="88509" title="Torres (musician)" label="Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q24911573" start="88526" end="88540" title="Red Sun Rising" label="Red Sun Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664881" start="88677" end="88688" title="Title Fight" label="Title Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q20033291" start="88690" end="88697" title="InCrest" label="InCrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058348" start="88699" end="88707" title="Fangclub" label="Fangclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140037" start="88709" end="88720" title="Code Orange (band)" label="Code Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q14639103" start="88722" end="88736" title="My Ticket Home" label="My Ticket Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q17748058" start="88738" end="88745" title="Citizen (band)" label="Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q24232025" start="88747" end="88757" title="Milk Teeth" label="Milk Teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q48700549" start="88762" end="88769" title="Muskets (band)" label="Muskets"/>
<link wikidata="Q10926" start="88831" end="88834" title="emo" label="emo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203775" start="89002" end="89013" title="swing music" label="swing music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="89028" end="89041" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="89056" end="89065" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="89541" end="89555" title="music industry" label="music industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q298255" start="89609" end="89619" title="Rob Zombie" label="Rob Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q332032" start="89734" end="89746" title="Alice Cooper" label="Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q207197" start="89751" end="89763" title="Gene Simmons" label="Gene Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="89768" end="89778" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="90428" end="90431" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="91663" end="91674" title="pop culture" label="pop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q485907" start="91718" end="91741" title="Smells Like Teen Spirit" label="Smells Like Teen Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q379689" start="91847" end="91872" title="Generation X" label="young people from its era"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="92431" end="92441" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="92544" end="92555" title="Existentialism" label="existential"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360032" start="92605" end="92620" title="Authenticity (philosophy)" label="true to oneself"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="92755" end="92764" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="92797" end="92808" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="92902" end="92907" title="Elvis" label="Elvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="92915" end="92922" title="Beatles" label="Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="93150" end="93158" title="Feminism" label="Feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="93160" end="93170" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030234" start="93209" end="93230" title="anti-authoritarianism" label="anti-authoritarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="93241" end="93255" title="post-modernism" label="post-modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q319277" start="93781" end="93793" title="Mark Lanegan" label="Mark Lanegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518013" start="94099" end="94119" title="List of grunge bands" label="List of grunge bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621936" start="94122" end="94143" title="List of grunge albums" label="List of grunge albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q677542" start="94146" end="94156" title="Riot grrrl" label="Riot grrrl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669411" start="94268" end="94283" title="Harry N. Abrams" label="Harry N. Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q612885" start="94374" end="94387" title="Bruce Pavitt" label="Pavitt, Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875196" start="94474" end="94490" title="Bazillion Points" label="Bazillion Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="94690" end="94703" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322780" start="94796" end="94805" title="ECW Press" label="ECW Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425732" start="95027" end="95042" title="Sasquatch Books" label="Sasquatch Books"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51581" wikidata="Q368718" url="?curid=51581" title="Iridology">
<text>Iridology (also known as iridodiagnosis or iridiagnosis) is an alternative medicine technique whose proponents claim that patterns, colors, and other characteristics of the iris can be examined to determine information about a patient&#x27;s systemic health. Practitioners match their observations to &quot;iris charts,&quot; which divide the iris into zones that correspond to specific parts of the human body. Iridologists see the eyes as &quot;windows&quot; into the body&#x27;s state of health.

Iridologists claim they can use the charts to distinguish between healthy systems and organs in the body and those that are overactive, inflamed, or distressed. Iridologists claim this information demonstrates a patient&#x27;s susceptibility towards certain illnesses, reflects past medical problems, or predicts later health problems.

As opposed to evidence-based medicine, iridology is not supported by quality research studies and is considered pseudoscience. The features of the iris are one of the most stable features on the human body throughout life. The stability of iris structures is the foundation of the biometric technology which uses iris recognition for identification purposes.

==Methods==
Iridologists generally use equipment such as a flashlight and magnifying glass, cameras or slit-lamp microscopes to examine a patient&#x27;s irises for tissue changes, as well as features such as specific pigment patterns and irregular stromal architecture. The markings and patterns are compared to an &quot;iris chart&quot; that correlates zones of the iris with parts of the body. Typical charts divide the iris into approximately 80–90 zones. For example, the zone corresponding to the kidney is in the lower part of the iris, just before 6 o&#x27;clock. There are minor variations between charts&#x27; associations between body parts and areas of the iris.

According to iridologists, details in the iris reflect changes in the tissues of the corresponding body organs. One prominent practitioner, Bernard Jensen, described it thus: &quot;Nerve fibers in the iris respond to changes in body tissues by manifesting a reflex physiology that corresponds to specific tissue changes and locations.&quot; This would mean that a bodily condition translates to a noticeable change in the appearance of the iris, but this has been disproven through many studies. (See section on Scientific research.) For example, &quot;acute inflammatory&quot;, &quot;chronic inflammatory&quot; and &quot;catarrhal&quot; signs may indicate involvement, maintenance, or healing of corresponding distant tissues, respectively. Other features that iridologists look for are &quot;contraction rings&quot; and &quot;Klumpenzellen&quot;, which may indicate various other health conditions, as interpreted in context.

==History==
Medical practitioners have been searching the eyes for signs of illness since at least 3,000 BCE.

The first &quot;explicit&quot; description of iridological principles such as homolaterality (without using the word &quot;iridology&quot;) are found in &quot;Chiromatica Medica&quot;, a famous work published in 1665 and reprinted in 1670 and 1691 by Philippus Meyeus (Philip Meyen von Coburg).

The first use of the word &quot;Augendiagnostik&quot; (&quot;eye diagnosis&quot;, loosely translated as &quot;iridology&quot;) began with Ignaz von Peczely, a 19th-century Hungarian physician who is recognised as its founding father. The most common story is that he got the idea for this diagnostic tool after seeing similar streaks in the eyes of a man he was treating for a broken leg and the eyes of an owl whose leg von Peczely had broken many years before. At the First International Iridological Congress, Ignaz von Peczely&#x27;s nephew, August von Peczely, dismissed this myth as apocryphal, and maintained that such claims were irreproducible.

The second &#x27;father&#x27; to iridology is thought to be Nils Liljequist from Sweden, who greatly suffered from the outgrowth of his lymph nodes. After a round of medication made from iodine and quinine, he observed many differences in the colour of his iris. This observation inspired him to create and publish an atlas in 1893, which contained 258 black and white illustrations and 12 colour illustrations of the iris, known as the Diagnosis of the Eye.

The German contribution in the field of natural healing is due to a minister Pastor Emanuel Felke, who developed a form of homeopathy for treating specific illnesses and described new &quot;iris signs&quot; in the early 1900s. However, Felke was subject to long and bitter litigation. The Felke Institute in Gerlingen, Germany, was established as a leading center of iridological research and training.

Iridology became better known in the United States in the 1950s, when Bernard Jensen, an American chiropractor, began giving classes in his own method. This is in direct relationship with P. Johannes Thiel, Eduard Lahn (who became an American under the name of Edward Lane) and J Haskell Kritzer. Jensen emphasized the importance of the body&#x27;s exposure to toxins, and the use of natural foods as detoxifiers. In 1979, in collaboration with two other iridologists, Jensen failed to establish the basis of their practice when they examined photographs of the eyes of 143 patients in an attempt to determine which ones had kidney impairments. Of the patients, 48 had been diagnosed with kidney disease, and the rest had normal kidney function. Based on their analysis of the patients&#x27; irises, the three iridologists could not detect which patients had kidney disease and which did not.

==Criticism==
Scientists dismiss iridology given that published studies have indicated a lack of success for its claims. To date, clinical data does not support correlation between illness in the body and coinciding observable changes in the iris. In controlled experiments, practitioners of iridology have performed statistically no better than chance in determining the presence of a disease or condition solely through observation of the iris. James Randi notes that iridology is unfalsifiable because iridologists do not provide a distinction between current physical defects and &quot;future&quot; defects; thus, the iridologist cannot be proven wrong.

Iridology is based on a premise that is at odds with the fact that the iris does not undergo substantial changes in an individual&#x27;s life. Iris texture is a phenotypical feature that develops during gestation and remains unchanged after infancy. There is no evidence for changes in the iris pattern other than variations in pigmentation in the first years of life and variations caused by glaucoma treatment. The stability of iris structures is the foundation of the biometric technology which uses iris recognition for identification purposes.

==Scientific research into iridology==
Well-controlled scientific evaluation of iridology has shown entirely negative results, with all rigorous double blind tests failing to find any statistical significance to its claims.

In 2015 the Australian Government&#x27;s Department of Health published the results of a review of alternative therapies that sought to determine if any were suitable for being covered by health insurance. Iridology was one of 17 therapies evaluated for which no clear evidence of effectiveness was found.

A German study from 1957 which took more than 4,000 iris photographs of more than 1,000 people concluded that iridology was not useful as a diagnostic tool.

In 1979, Bernard Jensen, a leading American iridologist, and two other iridology proponents failed to establish the basis of their practice when they examined photographs of the eyes of 143 patients in an attempt to determine which ones had kidney impairments. Of the patients, 48 had been diagnosed with kidney disease, and the rest had normal kidney function. Based on their analysis of the patients&#x27; irises, the three iridologists could not detect which patients had kidney disease and which did not. One iridologist, for example, decided that 88% of the normal patients had kidney disease, while another judged through his iris analysis that 74% of patients who needed artificial kidney treatment were normal.

Another study was published in the &quot;British Medical Journal&quot; which selected 39 patients who were due to have their gall bladder removed the following day, because of suspected gallstones. The study also selected a group of people who did not have diseased gall bladders to act as a control. A group of five iridologists examined a series of slides of both groups&#x27; irises. The iridologists could not correctly identify which patients had gall bladder problems and which had healthy gall bladders. For example, one of the iridologists diagnosed 49% of the patients with gall stones as having them and 51% as not having them. The author concluded: &quot;this study showed that iridology is not a useful diagnostic aid.&quot;

Edzard Ernst raised the question in 2000:Does iridology work? ... This search strategy resulted in 77 publications on the subject of iridology. ... All of the uncontrolled studies and several of the unmasked experiments suggested that iridology was a valid diagnostic tool. The discussion that follows refers to the 4 controlled, masked evaluations of the diagnostic validity of iridology. ... In conclusion, few controlled studies with masked evaluation of diagnostic validity have been published. None have found any benefit from iridology.A 2005 study tested the usefulness of iridology in diagnosing common forms of cancer. An experienced iridology practitioner examined the eyes of 110 total subjects, of which 68 people had proven cancers of the breast, ovary, uterus, prostate, or colorectum, and 42 for whom there was no medical evidence of cancer. The practitioner, who was unaware of their gender or medical details, was asked to suggest a diagnosis for each person and his results were then compared with each subject&#x27;s known medical diagnosis. The study conclusion was that &quot;Iridology was of no value in diagnosing the cancers investigated in this study.&quot;

==Regulation, licensure, and certification==
In Canada and the United States, iridology is not regulated or licensed by any governmental agency. Numerous organizations offer certification courses.

==Possible harms==
Medical errors—treatment for conditions diagnosed via this method which do not actually exist (false positive result) or a false sense of security when a serious condition is not diagnosed by this method (false negative result)—could lead to improper or delayed treatment and even loss of life.

==See also==
*Moleosophy
*Phrenology

==References==
==External links==
*The Skeptics Dictionary
*Quackwatch
*Your-Doctor.com
*James Randi Educational Foundation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q368718" start="0" end="9" title="Iridology" label="Iridology"/>
<link wikidata="Q368718" start="25" end="39" title="Iridology" label="iridodiagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q368718" start="43" end="55" title="Iridology" label="iridiagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="63" end="83" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178748" start="173" end="177" title="Iris (anatomy)" label="iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414805" start="242" end="250" title="systemic disease" label="systemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q691640" start="851" end="874" title="evidence-based medicine" label="evidence-based medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="949" end="962" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q177765" start="1118" end="1127" title="biometric" label="biometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672722" start="1150" end="1166" title="iris recognition" label="iris recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q965041" start="1300" end="1320" title="slit-lamp microscope" label="slit-lamp microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="1361" end="1367" title="Biological tissue" label="tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624331" start="1445" end="1451" title="stroma of iris" label="stroma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2012" end="2026" title="Bernard Jensen" label="Bernard Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3071" end="3089" title="Chiromatica Medica" label="Chiromatica Medica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3163" end="3179" title="Philippus Meyeus" label="Philippus Meyeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242888" start="3346" end="3363" title="Ignaz von Peczely" label="Ignaz von Peczely"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3754" end="3772" title="August von Peczely" label="August von Peczely"/>
<link wikidata="Q5951879" start="3923" end="3938" title="Nils Liljequist" label="Nils Liljequist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="3944" end="3950" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644043" start="4300" end="4309" title="Diagnosis" label="Diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q95326" start="4407" end="4420" title="Emanuel Felke" label="Emanuel Felke"/>
<link wikidata="Q81058" start="4446" end="4456" title="homeopathy" label="homeopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4797" end="4811" title="Bernard Jensen" label="Bernard Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="5751" end="5764" title="scientific method" label="clinical data"/>
<link wikidata="Q294918" start="6068" end="6079" title="James Randi" label="James Randi"/>
<link wikidata="Q220888" start="6104" end="6117" title="Falsifiability" label="unfalsifiable"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="6441" end="6453" title="phenotypical" label="phenotypical"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="6483" end="6492" title="gestation" label="gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q159701" start="6673" end="6681" title="glaucoma" label="glaucoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q177765" start="6751" end="6760" title="biometric" label="biometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672722" start="6783" end="6799" title="iris recognition" label="iris recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q608510" start="6975" end="6987" title="double blind" label="double blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q113588161" start="7067" end="7116" title="Department of Health (Australia)" label="Australian Government&amp;#x27;s Department of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="7243" end="7259" title="health insurance" label="health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q546003" start="8281" end="8304" title="British Medical Journal" label="British Medical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q70166" start="8978" end="8990" title="Edzard Ernst" label="Edzard Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207010" start="10474" end="10488" title="false positive" label="false positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896086" start="10689" end="10699" title="Moleosophy" label="Moleosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188584" start="10701" end="10711" title="Phrenology" label="Phrenology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51582" wikidata="Q43109" url="?curid=51582" title="Referendum">
<text>A referendum, plebiscite, or ballot measure is a direct vote by the electorate (rather than their representatives) on a proposal, law, or political issue. A referendum may be either binding (resulting in the adoption of a new policy) or advisory (functioning like a large-scale opinion poll).

==Etymology==

&#x27;Referendum&#x27; is the gerundive form of the Latin verb , literally &quot;to carry back&quot; (from the verb , &quot;to bear, bring, carry&quot; plus the inseparable prefix , here meaning &quot;back&quot;). As a gerundive is an adjective, not a noun, it cannot be used alone in Latin, and must be contained within a context attached to a noun such as , &quot;A proposal which must be carried back to the people&quot;. The addition of the verb (3rd person singular, ) to a gerundive, denotes the idea of necessity or compulsion, that which &quot;must&quot; be done, rather than that which is &quot;fit for&quot; doing. Its use as a noun in English is not considered a strictly grammatical usage of a foreign word but is rather a newly coined English noun, which follows English grammatical usage, not Latin grammatical usage. This determines the form of the plural in English, which according to English grammar should be &quot;referendums&quot;. The use of &quot;referenda&quot; as a plural form in English (treating it as a Latin word and attempting to apply to it the rules of Latin grammar) is unsupportable according to the rules of both Latin and English grammar. The use of &quot;referenda&quot; as a plural form is posited hypothetically as either a gerund or a gerundive by the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot;, which rules out such usage in both cases as follows:

&quot;Referendums&quot; is logically preferable as a plural form meaning &#x27;ballots on one issue&#x27; (as a Latin gerund, referendum has no plural). The Latin plural gerundive &#x27;referenda&#x27;, meaning &#x27;things to be referred&#x27;, necessarily connotes a plurality of issues.

It is closely related to agenda, &quot;those matters which must be driven forward&quot;, from , to impel or drive forwards; and memorandum, &quot;that matter which must be remembered&quot;, from , to call to mind, corrigenda, from , to rule, make straight, those things which must be made straight (corrected), etc.

The term &#x27;plebiscite&#x27; has a generally similar meaning in modern usage and comes from the Latin &quot;plebiscita&quot;, which originally meant a decree of the &quot;Concilium Plebis&quot; (Plebeian Council), the popular assembly of the Roman Republic. Today, a referendum can also often be referred to as a plebiscite, but in some countries the two terms are used differently to refer to votes with differing types of legal consequences.

In Australia, a &#x27;referendum&#x27; is often said to be a vote to change the federal constitution and &#x27;plebiscite&#x27; a vote which does not affect the federal constitution. However, this is erroneous as not all federal referendums have been on constitutional matters (such as the 1916 Australian conscription referendum), and state votes that likewise do not affect either the federal or state constitution are frequently said to be referendums (such as the 2009 Western Australian daylight saving referendum). Historically, they are used by Australians interchangeably and a plebiscite was considered another name for a referendum.

In Ireland, &#x27;plebiscite&#x27; referred to the vote to adopt its constitution, but a subsequent vote to amend the constitution is called a &#x27;referendum&#x27;, as is a poll of the electorate on a non-constitutional bill.

== History ==
The name and use of the &#x27;referendum&#x27; is thought to have originated in the Swiss canton of Graubünden as early as the 16th century.

After a reduction in the number of referendums in the Mid-twentieth century, the referendum as a political tool has been increasing in popularity since the 1970s. This increase has been attributed to dealignment of the public with political parties, as specific policy issues became more important to the public than party identifiers.

==Types==

=== Classification ===
The term &quot;referendum&quot; covers a variety of different meanings, and the terminology is different depending on the use. A referendum can be binding or advisory. In some countries, different names are used for these two types of referendum. Referendums can be further classified by who initiates them.

David Altman proposes four dimensions that referendums can be classified by:

* Mandatory (legally required) vs Optional (ad hoc)
* Binding vs consultative
* Citizen initiated (bottom-up) vs Authorities initiated (top-down)
* Proactive (proposing a change) vs reactive (preventing a change)

=== Mandatory referendums ===

A mandatory referendum is a class of referendum required to be voted on if certain conditions are met or for certain government actions to be taken. They do not require any signatures from the public. In areas that use referendums a mandatory referendum is commonly used as a legally required step for ratification for constitutional changes, ratifying international treaties and joining international organizations, and certain types of public spending.

Typical types of mandatory referendums include:

* Constitutional changes: Some countries or local governments choose to enact any constitutional amendments with a mandatory referendum. These include Australia, Ireland, Switzerland, Denmark, and 49 of the 50 U.S. states (the only exception is Delaware).
* Financial referendum: Many localities require a referendum in order for the government to issue certain bonds, raise taxes above a specified amount, or take on certain amounts of debt. In California for example, the state government may not borrow more than $300,000 without a public vote in a statewide bond proposition.
* International relations: Switzerland has mandatory referendums on enacting international treaties that have to do with collective security and joining a supranational community. This type of referendum has only occurred once in the country&#x27;s history: a failed attempt in 1986 for Switzerland to join the United Nations.
* War referendum: A hypothetical type of referendum, first proposed by Immanuel Kant, is a referendum to approve a declaration of war in a war referendum. It has never been enacted by any country, but was debated in the United States in the 1930s as the Ludlow Amendment.

=== Optional referendum ===

An optional referendum is a class of referendums that is put to the vote as a result of a demand. This may come from the executive branch, legislative branch, or a request from the people (often after meeting a signature requirement).

Types of optional referendums include:

* Authorities plebiscite: Also known as a legislative referral, are initiated by the legislature or government. These may be advisory questions to gauge public opinion or binding questions of law.
* Popular initiative or Initiative referendum: A citizen-led process to propose and vote on new laws.
* Popular referendum: A citizen-led process to oppose and strike down existing laws.
* Recall referendum: A procedure to remove elected officials before the end of their term of office. Depending on the area and position, a recall may be for a specific individual, such as an individual legislator, or more general such as an entire legislature.

== Rationale ==
From a political-philosophical perspective, referendums are an expression of direct democracy, but today, most referendums need to be understood within the context of representative democracy. They tend to be used quite selectively, covering issues such as changes in voting systems, where currently elected officials may not have the legitimacy or inclination to implement such changes.

==By country==

Since the end of the 18th century, hundreds of national referendums have been organised in the world; almost 600 national votes have been held in Switzerland since its inauguration as a modern state in 1848. Italy ranks second with 78 national referendums: 72 popular referendums (51 of which were proposed by the Radical Party), 4 constitutional referendums, one institutional referendum and one advisory referendum.

==By issue==

===Civil rights referendum===
===Financial referendum===
===Mining referendum===
===Independence referendum===
===Referendums related to the European Union===
== Design and procedure ==

=== Multiple-choice referendums ===

A referendum usually offers the electorate a straight choice between accepting or rejecting a proposal. However some referendums give voters multiple choices, and some use transferable voting. This has also been called a when the choices given allow the voters to weight their support for a policy.

In Switzerland, for example, multiple choice referendums are common. Two multiple choice referendums were held in Sweden, in 1957 and in 1980, in which voters were offered three options. In 1977, a referendum held in Australia to determine a new national anthem was held, in which voters had four choices. In 1992, New Zealand held a five-option referendum on their electoral system. In 1982, Guam had a referendum that used six options, with an additional blank option for those wishing to (campaign and) vote for their own seventh option.

A multiple choice referendum poses the question of how the result is to be determined. They may be set up so that if no single option receives the support of an absolute majority (more than half) of the votes, resort can be made to the two-round system or instant-runoff voting, which is also called IRV and PV.

In 2018 the Irish Citizens&#x27; Assembly considered the conduct of future referendums in Ireland, with 76 of the members in favour of allowing more than two options, and 52% favouring preferential voting in such cases. Other people regard a non-majoritarian methodology like the Modified Borda Count (MBC) as more inclusive and more accurate.

Swiss referendums offer a separate vote on each of the multiple options as well as an additional decision about which of the multiple options should be preferred. In the Swedish case, in both referendums the &#x27;winning&#x27; option was chosen by the Single Member Plurality (&quot;first past the post&quot;) system. In other words, the winning option was deemed to be that supported by a plurality, rather than an absolute majority, of voters. In the 1977 Australian referendum, the winner was chosen by the system of preferential instant-runoff voting (IRV). Polls in Newfoundland (1949) and Guam (1982), for example, were counted under a form of the two-round system, and an unusual form of TRS was used in the 1992 New Zealand poll.

Although California has not held multiple-choice referendums in the Swiss or Swedish sense (in which only one of several counter-propositions can be victorious, and the losing proposals are wholly null and void), it does have so many yes-or-no referendums at each election day that conflicts arise. The State&#x27;s constitution provides a method for resolving conflicts when two or more inconsistent propositions are passed on the same day. This is a de facto form of approval voting—i.e. the proposition with the most &quot;yes&quot; votes prevails over the others to the extent of any conflict.

Other voting systems that could be used in multiple-choice referendum are Condorcet method and quadratic voting (including quadratic funding).

===Electronic referendum===
== Quorum ==
Quorums are typically introduced to prevent referendum results from being skewed by low turnout or decided by a motivated minority of voters.

=== Participation quorum ===
Referendums may require a turnout threshold (also called a participation quorum) in order for the referendum to be considered legally valid. In a participation quorum a majority of those voting must approve of the referendum, and a certain percentage of population must have voted in order for the results to be approved.

The usage of participation quorums in referendums is controversial, as higher requirements have been shown to reduced turnout and voter participation. With high participation quorums, the opposition of a referendum has an interest in abstaining from the vote instead of participating, in order to invalidate the referendum results through low turnout. This is a form of the no-show paradox. All others who are not voting for other reasons, including those with no opinion, are effectively also voting against the referendum.

In the 2005 Italian fertility laws referendum, opposition to the proposed loosening of laws on research on embryos and on allowing in-vitro fertilization, campaigned for people to abstain from voting to drive down turnout. Although a majority of people voted yes for the changes in the law, the results were invalid because participation was low.

== Disputes ==
Important referendums are frequently challenged in courts. In pre-referendum disputes, plaintiffs have often tried to prevent the referendum to take place. In one such challenge, in 2017, the Spanish Constitutional Court suspended the Catalonia&#x27;s independence referendum. In post-referendum disputes, they challenge the result. British courts dismissed post-referendum challenges of the Brexit referendum.

International tribunals have traditionally not interfered with referendum disputes. In 2021, the European Court of Human Rights extended its jurisdiction to referendums in its judgment &quot;Toplak and Mrak v. Slovenia&quot;, initiated by two disabled voters over polling place access.

==Criticisms==

===Criticism of populist aspect===

In Political Governance states that voters in a referendum are more likely to be driven by transient whims than by careful deliberation, or that they are not sufficiently informed to make decisions on complicated or technical issues. Also, voters might be swayed by propaganda, strong personalities, intimidation, and expensive advertising campaigns. James Madison argued that direct democracy is the &quot;tyranny of the majority&quot;.

Some opposition to the referendum has arisen from its use by dictators such as Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini who, it is argued, used the plebiscite to disguise oppressive policies as populism. Dictators may also make use of referendums as well as show elections to further legitimize their authority such as António de Oliveira Salazar in 1933; Benito Mussolini in 1934; Adolf Hitler in 1934, 1936; Francisco Franco in 1947; Park Chung Hee in 1972; and Ferdinand Marcos in 1973. Hitler&#x27;s use of plebiscites is argued as the reason why, since World War II, there has been no provision in Germany for the holding of referendums at the federal level.

In recent years, referendums have been used strategically by several European governments trying to pursue political and electoral goals.

In 1995, John Bruton considered that 

===Closed questions and the separability problem===
Some critics of the referendum attack the use of closed questions. A difficulty called the separability problem can plague a referendum on two or more issues. If one issue is in fact, or in perception, related to another on the ballot, the imposed simultaneous voting of first preference on each issue can result in an outcome which is displeasing to most.

===Undue limitations on regular government power===
Several commentators have noted that the use of citizens&#x27; initiatives to amend constitutions has so tied the government to a jumble of popular demands as to render the government unworkable. A 2009 article in &quot;The Economist&quot; argued that this had restricted the ability of the California state government to tax the people and pass the budget, and called for an entirely new Californian constitution.

A similar problem also arises when elected governments accumulate excessive debts. That can severely reduce the effective margin for later governments.

Both these problems can be moderated by a combination of other measures as 
* strict rules for correct accounting on budget plans and effective public expenditure;
* mandatory assessment by an independent public institution of all budgetary implications of all legislative proposals, before they can be approved;
* mandatory prior assessment of the constitutional coherence of any proposal;
* interdiction of extra-budget expenditure (tax payers anyway have to fund them, sooner or later).

=== Disproportionate disruption ===
Referendums occur occasionally rather than periodically as elections are and they don’t offer the same kind of formal opposition. Because referendums affect for a longer term than legislative deliberation, a turnout and supermajority requirement is necessary to maintain principles of majoritarianism. In republic polities, referendums could be used to bypass legislatures and representatives by the executive body. Zurcher argues that the use of the Nazi referendums was ending turnout requirements to advance intrinsic advantages in an otherwise slower and more demanding manner to constitutional and policy changes.
==Sources==
* The Federal Authorities of the Swiss Confederation, statistics (German). Statistik Schweiz – Stimmbeteiligung

==See also==
* Right to petition
*Deliberative referendum

==External links==
* From 1777 inclusively

==References==
==Further reading==

*Smith, Julie (ed.). 2021. &quot;The Palgrave Handbook of European Referendums&quot;. Palgrave.
*
* Morel, L. (2011). &#x27;Referenda&#x27;. In: B. Badie, D. Berg-Schlosser, &amp; L. Morlino (eds), &quot;International Encyclopedia of Political Science&quot;. Thousand Oaks: Sage: 2226–2230. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="2" end="12" title="Referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="14" end="24" title="Referendum" label="plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="29" end="43" title="Referendum" label="ballot measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="49" end="55" title="Direct democracy" label="direct"/>
<link wikidata="Q189760" start="56" end="60" title="vote" label="vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="68" end="78" title="Constituency" label="electorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="98" end="113" title="Representative democracy" label="representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156854" start="226" end="232" title="policy" label="policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49958" start="278" end="290" title="opinion poll" label="opinion poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q731298" start="339" end="348" title="gerundive" label="gerundive"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="361" end="366" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q134830" start="482" end="488" title="prefix" label="prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="544" end="553" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="561" end="565" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="1608" end="1633" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920329" start="2011" end="2017" title="political agenda" label="agenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q660651" start="2114" end="2124" title="memorandum" label="memorandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348305" start="2200" end="2210" title="corrigenda" label="corrigenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056619" start="2477" end="2493" title="Plebeian Council" label="Concilium Plebis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="2548" end="2562" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454837" start="3041" end="3080" title="1916 Australian conscription referendum" label="1916 Australian conscription referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987552" start="3219" end="3269" title="2009 Western Australian daylight saving referendum" label="2009 Western Australian daylight saving referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="3722" end="3727" title="Switzerland" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925" start="3738" end="3748" title="Graubünden" label="Graubünden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181002" start="3980" end="3991" title="dealignment" label="dealignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279357" start="4540" end="4549" title="Mandatory referendum" label="Mandatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q431226" start="4572" end="4580" title="Optional referendum" label="Optional"/>
<link wikidata="Q660064" start="4618" end="4635" title="Popular initiative" label="Citizen initiated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518443" start="4651" end="4672" title="Authorities referendum" label="Authorities initiated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279357" start="4785" end="4805" title="mandatory referendum" label="mandatory referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307166" start="5439" end="5448" title="Referendums in Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100850" start="5450" end="5457" title="Ordinary referendum" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942192" start="5459" end="5470" title="Voting in Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="5498" end="5508" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="5533" end="5541" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416593" start="5546" end="5566" title="Financial referendum" label="Financial referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="5734" end="5744" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021202" start="5855" end="5866" title="California ballot proposition" label="proposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="5945" end="5967" title="Treaty" label="international treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127126" start="5989" end="6008" title="Military alliance" label="collective security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="6179" end="6193" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968735" start="6197" end="6211" title="War referendum" label="War referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="6266" end="6279" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968735" start="6334" end="6348" title="war referendum" label="war referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698835" start="6449" end="6465" title="Ludlow Amendment" label="Ludlow Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q431226" start="6500" end="6519" title="optional referendum" label="optional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518443" start="6775" end="6797" title="Legislative referral" label="Authorities plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q660064" start="6972" end="6990" title="Popular initiative" label="Popular initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q331513" start="7074" end="7092" title="Popular referendum" label="Popular referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196663" start="7159" end="7176" title="Recall election" label="Recall referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q524572" start="7242" end="7256" title="term of office" label="term of office"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="7512" end="7528" title="direct democracy" label="direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="7602" end="7626" title="representative democracy" label="representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942192" start="7986" end="7997" title="Voting in Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889003" start="8026" end="8046" title="Modern history of Switzerland" label="modern state in 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="8048" end="8053" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518511" start="8075" end="8095" title="Referendums in Italy" label="national referendums"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704736" start="8154" end="8167" title="Radical Party (Italy)" label="Radical Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260521" start="8200" end="8228" title="1946 Italian institutional referendum" label="one institutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931593" start="8233" end="8256" title="1989 Italian advisory referendum" label="one advisory referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="8800" end="8811" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="8911" end="8917" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="9014" end="9023" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170601" start="9043" end="9058" title="Advance Australia Fair" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382648" start="9509" end="9517" title="majority" label="majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="9595" end="9616" title="instant-runoff voting" label="instant-runoff voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130439" start="9670" end="9693" title="Citizens&amp;#x27; Assembly (Ireland)" label="Citizens&amp;#x27; Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q765896" start="9727" end="9749" title="referendums in Ireland" label="referendums in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q576578" start="9932" end="9952" title="Modified Borda Count" label="Modified Borda Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="10250" end="10273" title="First Past the Post electoral system" label="Single Member Plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799148" start="10388" end="10397" title="plurality (voting)" label="plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="10531" end="10552" title="instant-runoff voting" label="instant-runoff voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="10652" end="10668" title="two-round system" label="two-round system"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="10746" end="10756" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q526530" start="11206" end="11221" title="approval voting" label="approval voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q868720" start="11410" end="11426" title="Condorcet method" label="Condorcet method"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630909" start="11431" end="11447" title="quadratic voting" label="quadratic voting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11459" end="11476" title="Quadratic voting#Quadratic funding" label="quadratic funding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="11719" end="11736" title="Voter turnout" label="turnout threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q345321" start="12250" end="12260" title="Abstention" label="abstaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140429" start="12390" end="12405" title="Participation criterion" label="no-show paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454876" start="12549" end="12587" title="2005 Italian fertility laws referendum" label="2005 Italian fertility laws referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="12649" end="12655" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="12673" end="12695" title="In vitro fertilisation" label="in-vitro fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566394" start="13097" end="13125" title="Constitutional Court of Spain" label="Spanish Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="13140" end="13149" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27145747" start="13157" end="13180" title="2017 Catalan independence referendum" label="independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="13297" end="13303" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262438" start="13317" end="13340" title="International court" label="International tribunals"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="13414" end="13444" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q109535870" start="13508" end="13535" title="Toplak and Mrak v. Slovenia" label="Toplak and Mrak v. Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="13560" end="13568" title="Disability" label="disabled"/>
<link wikidata="Q335778" start="13581" end="13594" title="polling place" label="polling place"/>
<link wikidata="Q555097" start="13595" end="13601" title="Accessibility" label="access"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="13922" end="13932" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="14007" end="14020" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q922903" start="14063" end="14086" title="tyranny of the majority" label="tyranny of the majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="14174" end="14186" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="14191" end="14207" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="14282" end="14290" title="populism" label="populism"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="14346" end="14360" title="show elections" label="show elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q151394" start="14407" end="14434" title="António de Oliveira Salazar" label="António de Oliveira Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232706" start="14438" end="14442" title="1933 Portuguese constitutional referendum" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722449" start="14464" end="14468" title="1934 Italian general election" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305909" start="14486" end="14490" title="1934 German referendum" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q389024" start="14492" end="14496" title="1936 German election and referendum" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="14498" end="14514" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q28662970" start="14518" end="14522" title="1947 Spanish law of succession referendum" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q14356" start="14524" end="14538" title="Park Chung Hee" label="Park Chung Hee"/>
<link wikidata="Q334793" start="14542" end="14546" title="1972 South Korean constitutional referendum" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463" start="14552" end="14568" title="Ferdinand Marcos" label="Ferdinand Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084854" start="14572" end="14576" title="1973 Philippine constitutional plebiscite" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14646" end="14658" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="14691" end="14698" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q333701" start="14901" end="14912" title="John Bruton" label="John Bruton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451764" start="15074" end="15094" title="separability problem" label="separability problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q660064" start="15441" end="15467" title="Popular initiative" label="citizens&amp;#x27; initiatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="15613" end="15626" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="15684" end="15694" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625153" start="17248" end="17265" title="Right to petition" label="Right to petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806007" start="17267" end="17290" title="Deliberative referendum" label="Deliberative referendum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51584" wikidata="Q40933" url="?curid=51584" title="Eva Perón">
<text>María Eva Duarte de Perón (; ; 7 May 1919 – 26 July 1952), better known as just Eva Perón or by the nickname Evita (), was an Argentine politician, activist, actress, and philanthropist who served as First Lady of Argentina from June 1946 until her death in July 1952, as the wife of Argentine President Juan Perón. She was born in poverty in the rural village of Los Toldos, in the Pampas, as the youngest of five children. In 1934, at the age of 15, she moved to the nation&#x27;s capital of Buenos Aires to pursue a career as a stage, radio, and film actress. She married Perón in 1945, when he was still an army colonel, and was propelled onto the political stage when he became President in 1946. She became a central figure of Peronism and Argentine culture because of the Eva Perón Foundation, a charitable organization perceived by many Argentinians as highly impactful.

She met Colonel Juan Perón on 22 January 1944 during a charity event at the Luna Park Stadium to benefit the victims of an earthquake in San Juan, Argentina. The two were married the following year. Juan Perón was elected President of Argentina in June 1946; during the next six years, Eva Perón became powerful within the pro-Peronist trade unions, primarily for speaking on behalf of labor rights. She also ran the Ministries of Labor and Health, founded and ran the charitable Eva Perón Foundation, championed women&#x27;s suffrage in Argentina, and founded and ran the nation&#x27;s first large-scale female political party, the Female Peronist Party.

In 1951, Eva Perón announced her candidacy for the Peronist nomination for the office of Vice President of Argentina, receiving great support from the Peronist political base, low-income and working-class Argentines who were referred to as &quot;descamisados&quot; or &quot;shirtless ones&quot; (similar to the term “sans-culottes” during the French Revolution). Opposition from the nation&#x27;s military and bourgeoisie, coupled with her declining health, ultimately forced her to withdraw her candidacy. In 1952, shortly before her death from cancer at 33, Eva Perón was given the title of &quot;Spiritual Leader of the Nation of Argentina&quot; by the Argentine Congress. She was given a state funeral upon her death, a prerogative generally reserved for heads of state.

Eva Perón has become a part of international popular culture, most famously as the subject of the musical &quot;Evita&quot; (1976). Cristina Álvarez Rodríguez has said that Evita has never left the collective consciousness of Argentines. Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, the second female president of Argentina (after Juan Perón&#x27;s third wife Isabel Perón), claims that women of her generation owe a debt to Eva for &quot;her example of passion and combativeness&quot;.

==Early life==
===Early childhood===
Eva&#x27;s 1951 biography, &quot;La Razón de mi Vida&quot;, contains no dates or references to childhood occurrences, and does not list the location of her birth or her name at birth. According to Junín&#x27;s civil registry, a birth certificate shows that one &quot;María Eva Duarte&quot; was born on May 7, 1919. Her baptismal certificate lists the date of birth as May 7, 1919 under the name &quot;Eva María Ibarguren&quot;. It is thought that in 1945 the adult Eva Perón created a forgery of her birth certificate for her marriage.

Eva Perón spent her childhood in Junín, Buenos Aires province. Her father, Juan Duarte, was descended from French Basque immigrants. Her mother, Juana Ibarguren, was descended from Spanish Basque immigrants. Juan Duarte, a wealthy rancher from nearby Chivilcoy, already had a wife and family there. At that time in rural Argentina, it was not uncommon for a wealthy man to have several families.

When Eva was a year old, Duarte returned permanently to his legal family, leaving Juana Ibarguren and her children in abject poverty. They were forced to move to the poorest area of Junín. Los Toldos was a village in the dusty region of Las Pampas, with a reputation as a desolate place of poverty. To support herself and her children, Ibarguren sewed clothes for neighbors. The family was stigmatized by the abandonment of the father and by the illegitimate status of the children under Argentine law, and was consequently somewhat isolated. A desire to expunge this part of her life might have been a motivation for Eva to arrange the destruction of her original birth certificate in 1945.

When Duarte suddenly died and his mistress and their children sought to attend his funeral, there was an unpleasant scene at the church gates. Although Juana and the children were permitted to enter and pay their respects, they were promptly directed out of the church. Duarte&#x27;s widow did not want her late husband&#x27;s mistress and children at the funeral; as she was the legitimate wife, her orders were respected.

===Junín===
Before abandoning Juana Ibarguren, Juan Duarte had been her sole means of support. Biographer John Barnes writes that, after this abandonment, all Duarte left to the family was a document declaring that the children were his, thus enabling them to use the Duarte surname. Soon after, Juana moved her children to a one-room apartment in Junín. To pay the rent on their single-roomed home, mother and daughters took up jobs as cooks in the houses of the local estancias.

Eventually, owing to Eva&#x27;s older brother&#x27;s financial help, the family moved into a bigger house, which they later transformed into a boarding house. During this time, young Eva often participated in school plays and concerts. One of her favorite pastimes was the cinema. Though Eva&#x27;s mother wanted to marry her off to one of the local bachelors, Eva dreamed of becoming a famous actress. Eva&#x27;s love for acting was reinforced in October 1933, when she played a small role in a school play called &quot;Arriba Estudiantes&quot; (Students Arise), which Barnes describes as &quot;an emotional, patriotic, flag-waving melodrama&quot;. After the play, Eva was determined to become an actress.

===Move to Buenos Aires===
In her autobiography, Eva explained that all the people from her town who had been to the big cities described them as &quot;marvelous places, where nothing was given but wealth&quot;. In 1934, at 15, Eva escaped her poverty-stricken village when she ran off with a young musician to the nation&#x27;s capital of Buenos Aires. The young couple&#x27;s relationship ended quickly, but Eva remained in Buenos Aires. She began to pursue jobs on the stage and the radio, and she eventually became a film actress. She bleached her naturally black hair blonde, a look she maintained for the rest of her life.

It is often reported that Eva traveled to Buenos Aires by train with tango singer Agustín Magaldi. However, there is no record of the married Magaldi performing in Junín in 1934 (and, even if he had done so, he usually traveled with his wife). Eva&#x27;s sisters maintain that Eva traveled to Buenos Aires with their mother. The sisters also claim that Doña Juana accompanied her daughter to an audition at a radio station and arranged for Eva to live with the Bustamante family, who were friends of the Duarte family. While the method of Eva&#x27;s escape from her bleak provincial surroundings is debated, she did begin a new life in Buenos Aires.


Upon arrival in Buenos Aires, Eva Duarte was faced with the difficulties of surviving without formal education or connections. The city was especially overcrowded during this period because of the migrations caused by the Great Depression. On 28 March 1935, she made her professional debut in the play &quot;Mrs. Perez&quot; (&quot;la Señora de Pérez&quot;), at the Comedias Theater.

In 1936, Eva toured nationally with a theater company, worked as a model, and was cast in a few B-grade movie melodramas. In 1942, she experienced some economic stability when a company called &quot;Candilejas&quot; (sponsored by a soap manufacturer) hired her for a daily role in one of their radio dramas called &quot;Muy Bien&quot;, which aired on &quot;Radio El Mundo&quot; (World Radio), the most important radio station in the country at that time. Later that year, she signed a five-year contract with &quot;Radio Belgrano&quot;, which assured her a role in a popular historical-drama program called &quot;Great Women of History&quot;, in which she played Elizabeth I of England, Sarah Bernhardt, and Alexandra Feodorovna, the last Tsarina of Russia. Eventually, Eva Duarte came to co-own the radio company. By 1943, she was earning five or six thousand pesos a month, making her one of the highest-paid radio actresses in the nation. Pablo Raccioppi, who jointly ran &quot;Radio El Mundo&quot; with Eva Duarte, is said to have not liked her, but to have noted that she was &quot;thoroughly dependable&quot;. Eva also had a short-lived film career during the Golden Age of Argentine cinema, but none of the films in which she appeared were hugely successful. In one of her last films, &quot;La cabalgata del circo&quot; (&quot;The Circus Cavalcade&quot;), Eva played a young country girl who rivaled an older woman, the movie&#x27;s star, Libertad Lamarque.

As a result of her success with radio dramas and the films, Eva achieved some financial stability. In 1942, she was able to move into an apartment in the exclusive neighborhood of Recoleta, on 1557 Calle Posadas (currently the site of the Hotel Melia Recoleta Plaza). The next year, Eva began her career in politics, as one of the founders of the Argentine Radio Syndicate (ARA).

==Early relationship with Juan Perón==

On 15 January 1944, an earthquake occurred in the town of San Juan, Argentina, killing ten thousand people. In response, Juan Perón, who was then the Secretary of Labour, established a fund to raise money to aid the victims. He devised a plan to have an &quot;artistic festival&quot; as a fundraiser, and invited radio and film actors to participate. After a week of fundraising, all participants met at a held at Luna Park Stadium in Buenos Aires to benefit earthquake victims.

It was at this gala, on 22 January 1944, that Eva Duarte first met Colonel Juan Perón. Eva promptly became the colonel&#x27;s girlfriend. She referred to the day she met her future husband as her &quot;marvelous day&quot;. Juan Perón and Eva left the gala together at around two in the morning. (Perón&#x27;s first wife, Aurelia Tizón, had died of uterine cancer in 1938.)

Eva Duarte had no knowledge of or interest in politics prior to meeting Perón; therefore, she never argued with Perón or any of his inner circle, but merely absorbed what she heard. Juan Perón later claimed in his memoir that he purposefully selected Eva as his pupil, and set out to create in her a &quot;second I&quot;. Juan Perón may have allowed Eva Duarte such intimate exposure and knowledge of his inner circle because of his age: he was 48 and she was 24 when they met. He had come to politics late in life, and was therefore free of preconceived ideas of how his political career should be conducted, and he was willing to accept whatever aid she offered him.

In May 1944, it was announced that broadcast performers must organize themselves into a union, and that this union would be the only one permitted to operate in Argentina. Shortly after the formation of the union, Eva Duarte was elected its president. Juan Perón had made the suggestion that performers create a union, and the other performers likely felt it was good politics to elect his mistress. Shortly after her election as president of the union, Eva Duarte began a daily program called &quot;Toward a Better Future&quot;, which dramatized, in soap opera form, the accomplishments of Juan Perón. Often, Perón&#x27;s own speeches were played during the program. When she spoke, Eva Duarte spoke in ordinary language as a regular woman who wanted listeners to believe what she herself believed about Juan Perón.

== Rise to power ==
===Juan Perón&#x27;s arrest===

By the early 1940s, a group of Army officers called the GOU for &quot;Grupo de Oficiales Unidos&quot; (United Officers&#x27; Group), nicknamed &quot;The Colonels&quot;, had gained considerable influence within the Argentine government. President Pedro Pablo Ramírez became wary of Juan Perón&#x27;s growing power within the government and was unable to curb that power. On 24 February 1944, Ramírez signed his own resignation paper, which was drafted by Juan Perón himself; Edelmiro Julián Farrell, a friend of Juan Perón, became president, and Juan Perón returned to his job as Labor Minister, at which point he was the most powerful man in the Argentine government. On 9 October 1945 Juan Perón was arrested by his opponents within the government who feared that, with the strong support of his base, largely unskilled unionized workers that had recently moved from rural areas to industrialized urban centers and several allied trade unions, Perón would attempt a power grab.

Six days later, between 250,000 and 350,000 people gathered in front of the Casa Rosada, Argentina&#x27;s government house, to demand Juan Perón&#x27;s release. At 11 pm, Juan Perón stepped onto the balcony of the Casa Rosada and addressed the crowd. Biographer Robert D. Crassweller claims that this moment was particularly powerful because it dramatically recalled important aspects of Argentine history. Crassweller writes that Juan Perón enacted the role of a &quot;caudillo&quot; addressing his people in the tradition of Argentine leaders Rosas and Yrigoyen. Crassweller also claims that the evening contained &quot;mystic overtones&quot; of a &quot;quasi-religious&quot; nature.

After Perón won the elections of 1946, his administration started circulating a highly fictionalized version of the 17 October demonstration where Eva Perón was portrayed as knocking on every door in Buenos Aires in order to bring out people to the street. This version of events was popularized in the movie version of the Lloyd Webber musical; historians agree that this version of events is false. At the time of Perón&#x27;s imprisonment, Eva was still merely an actress. She had no political influence with any of the various labor unions, and she was not well liked within Perón&#x27;s inner circle, nor was she even particularly popular within the film and radio business at that point. The massive rally that freed Perón from prison was organized by various unions, particularly the CGT, which was Perón&#x27;s main base.

On 18 October 1945, a day after he was released, Perón married Eva discreetly in a civil ceremony in Junín. A church wedding was held on 9 December 1945 in La Plata. To this day, 17 October is celebrated as a holiday for the Justicialist Party (celebrated as &quot;Día de la Lealtad&quot;, or &quot;Loyalty Day&quot;).

===1946 presidential election===
After his release from prison, Juan Perón decided to campaign for the presidency of the nation, which he won with 54%. Eva campaigned heavily for her husband during his 1946 presidential bid. Using her weekly radio show, she delivered speeches with heavy populist rhetoric urging the poor to align themselves with Perón&#x27;s movement.

==European tour==
In 1947, Eva embarked on a much-publicized &quot;Rainbow Tour&quot; of Europe, meeting with numerous dignitaries and heads of state, such as Francisco Franco and Pope Pius XII. The tour had its genesis in an invitation that the Spanish leader had extended to Juan Perón; Eva decided that if Juan Perón would not accept Franco&#x27;s invitation for a state visit to Spain, then she would. Argentina had only recently emerged from its &quot;wartime quarantine&quot;, thus taking its place in the United Nations and improving relations with the United States. Therefore, a visit to Franco, with António Salazar of Portugal, the last remaining Western European authoritarian leaders in power, was diplomatically frowned upon internationally. Advisers then decided that Eva should also visit other European countries in addition to Spain. This would make it seem that Eva&#x27;s sympathies were not specifically with Francoist Spain. The tour was billed not as a political tour but as a non-political &quot;goodwill&quot; tour.

Eva was well received in Spain, where she visited the tombs of Spanish monarchs Ferdinand and Isabella in the Capilla Real de Granada. Francoist Spain had not recovered from the Spanish Civil War (the autarkic economy and the UN embargo meant that the country could not feed its people). During her visit to Spain, Eva handed out 100-peseta notes to many poor children she met on her journey. She also received from Franco the highest award given by the Spanish government, the Order of Isabella the Catholic.
Eva then visited Rome, where the reception was not as warm as it had been in Spain. Though Pope Pius XII did not give her a Papal decoration, she was allowed the time usually allotted to queens and was given a rosary. 

Her next stop was France where she met with Charles de Gaulle. She promised France two shipments of wheat.

While in France, Eva received word that George VI would not receive her when she planned to visit Britain, regardless of what his Foreign Office might advise, and that her visit would not be viewed as a state visit. Eva regarded the royal family&#x27;s refusal to meet her as a snub, and canceled the trip to the UK. Eva gave &quot;exhaustion&quot; as the official reason for not going on to Britain.

Eva also visited Switzerland during her European tour, a visit that has been viewed as the worst part of the trip. According to the book &quot;Evita: A Biography&quot; by John Barnes, while she travelled down a street with many people crowding her car, someone threw two stones and smashed the windshield. She threw her hands up in shock, but was not injured. Later, as she sat with the Foreign Minister, protesters threw tomatoes at her. The tomatoes hit the Foreign Minister and splattered on Eva&#x27;s dress. After these two events, Eva had had enough and, concluding the two-month tour, returned to Argentina.

Members of the Peronist opposition speculated that the true purpose of the European tour was to deposit funds in a Swiss bank account, although the tour was not an unusual practice and &quot;there are many more convenient and less conspicuous ways of depositing money in Swiss accounts than meeting the Swiss Foreign Minister and being shown around a watch factory&quot;. It was unlikely that a Swiss bank account existed.
During her tour to Europe, Eva Perón was featured in a cover story for &quot;Time&quot; magazine. The cover&#x27;s caption – &quot;Eva Perón: Between two worlds, an Argentine rainbow&quot; – was a reference to the name given to Eva&#x27;s European tour, The Rainbow Tour. This was the only time in the periodical&#x27;s history that a South American first lady appeared alone on its cover. (In 1951, Eva appeared again, but with Juan Perón.) The 1947 cover story was also the first publication to mention that Eva had been born out of wedlock. In retaliation, the periodical was banned from Argentina for several months.

After returning to Argentina from Europe, Evita never again appeared in public with the complicated hairdos of her movie-star days. The brilliant gold color became more subdued in tone and even the style changed, her hair being pulled back severely into a heavy braided chignon. Her extravagant clothing became more refined after the tour. No longer did she wear the elaborate hats and form-fitting dresses of Argentine designers. Soon she adopted simpler and more fashionable Paris couture and became particularly attached to the fashions of Christian Dior and the jewels of Cartier. In an attempt to cultivate a more serious political persona, Eva began to appear in public wearing conservative though stylish &quot;tailleurs&quot; (a business-like combination of skirts and jackets), which also were made by Dior and other Paris couture houses.

==Charitable and feminist activities==
===Eva Foundation===
The &quot;Sociedad de Beneficencia de Buenos Aires&quot; (Society of Beneficence), a charitable organization made up of 87 society ladies, was responsible for most works of charity in Buenos Aires prior to the election of Juan Perón. At one point the &quot;Sociedad&quot; had been an enlightened institution, caring for orphans and homeless women, but those days had long since passed by the time of the first term of Juan Perón. In the 1800s, the &quot;Sociedad&quot; had been supported by private contributions, largely those of the husbands of the society ladies, but by the 1940s, the &quot;Sociedad&quot; was supported by the government.

It had been the tradition of the &quot;Sociedad&quot; to elect the First Lady of Argentina as president of the charity. But the ladies of the &quot;Sociedad&quot; did not approve of Eva Perón&#x27;s impoverished background, lack of formal education, and former career as an actress. The ladies of the &quot;Sociedad&quot; were afraid that Evita would set a bad example for the orphans; therefore, the society ladies did not extend to Evita the position of president of their organization. It has often been said that Evita had the government funding for the &quot;Sociedad&quot; cut off in retaliation. This version of events is arguable, but the government funding that had previously supported the &quot;Sociedad&quot; now went to support Evita&#x27;s own foundation. The Eva Perón Foundation began with 10,000 pesos provided by Evita herself.

In &quot;The Woman with the Whip&quot;, the first English-language biography of Eva Perón, author Mary Main writes that no account records were kept for the foundation, because it was merely a means of funneling government money into private Swiss bank accounts controlled by the Peróns. Fraser and Navarro counter these claims, writing that Ramón Cereijo, the Minister of Finance, did keep records, and that the foundation &quot;began as the simplest response to the poverty [Evita] encountered each day in her office&quot; and to &quot;the appalling backwardness of social services—or charity, as it was still called—in Argentina&quot;. Crassweller writes that the foundation was supported by donations of cash and goods from the Peronist unions and private businesses, and that the General Confederation of Labour donated three man-days (later reduced to two) of salary for every worker per year. Tax on lottery and movie tickets also helped to support the foundation, as did a levy on casinos and revenue from horse races. Crassweller also notes that there were some cases of businesses being pressured to donate to the foundation, with negative repercussions resulting if requests for donations were not met.

Within a few years, the foundation had assets in cash and goods in excess of three billion pesos, or over $200 million at the exchange rate of the late 1940s. It employed 14,000 workers, of whom 6,000 were construction workers and 26 were priests. It purchased and distributed annually 400,000 pairs of shoes, 500,000 sewing machines, and 200,000 cooking pots. The foundation also gave scholarships, built homes, hospitals, and other charitable institutions. Every aspect of the foundation was under Evita&#x27;s supervision. The foundation also built entire communities, such as Evita City, which still exists today. Due to the works and health services of the foundation, for the first time in history there was no inequality in Argentine health care.

Toward the end of her life, Evita was working as many as 20 to 22 hours per day in her foundation, often ignoring her husband&#x27;s request that she cut back on her workload and take the weekends off. The more she worked with the poor in her foundation, the more she adopted an outraged attitude toward the existence of poverty, saying, &quot;Sometimes I have wished my insults were slaps or lashes. I&#x27;ve wanted to hit people in the face to make them see, if only for a day, what I see each day I help the people.&quot; Crassweller writes that Evita became fanatical about her work in the foundation and felt as though she were on a crusade against the very concept and existence of poverty and social ills. &quot;It is not surprising&quot;, writes Crassweller, &quot;that as her public crusades and her private adorations took on a narrowing intensity after 1946, they simultaneously veered toward the transcendental.&quot; Crassweller compares Evita to Ignatius Loyola, saying she came to be akin to a one-woman Jesuit Order.

===Female Peronist Party and women&#x27;s suffrage===

Eva Perón has often been credited with gaining the right to vote for Argentine women. While Eva did make radio addresses in support of women&#x27;s suffrage and also published articles in her &quot;Democracia&quot; newspaper asking male Peronists to support women&#x27;s right to vote, ultimately the ability to grant to women the right to vote was beyond Eva&#x27;s powers. Eva&#x27;s actions were limited to supporting a bill introduced by one of her supporters, Eduardo Colom, a bill that was eventually dropped.

A new women&#x27;s suffrage bill was introduced, which the Senate of Argentina sanctioned on 21 August 1946. It was necessary to wait more than a year before the House of Representatives sanctioned it on 9 September 1947. Law 13,010 established the equality of political rights between men and women and universal suffrage in Argentina. Finally, Law 13,010 was approved unanimously. In a public celebration and ceremony, Juan Perón signed the law granting women the right to vote, and then he handed the bill to Eva, symbolically making it hers.

Eva Perón then created the Female Peronist Party, the first large female political party in the nation. By 1951, the party had 500,000 members and 3,600 headquarters across the country. While Eva Perón did not consider herself a feminist, her impact on the political life of women was decisive. Thousands of previously apolitical women entered politics because of Eva Perón. They were the first women active in Argentine politics. The combination of female suffrage and the organization of the Female Peronist Party granted Juan Perón a large majority (63 percent) of the vote in the 1951 presidential elections.

==1952 presidential election==
===Vice-presidential nomination===
In 1951, Duarte was chosen by her husband as a candidate for vice-president. This move was not welcomed by some of Perón&#x27;s more conservative allies to whom the possibility of Eva becoming president in the event of Juan Perón&#x27;s death was not acceptable.

Eva was immensely popular particularly among working-class women. The intensity of the support she drew from the people is said to have surprised even Juan Perón himself. The wide support Evita&#x27;s proposed candidacy generated indicated to him that Eva had become as important a figure of the Peronist party as Juan Perón himself was.
On 22 August 1951, the aligned labour unions held a massive rally that they called the &quot;Cabildo Abierto&quot;, a reference to the first local government of the May Revolution, in 1810. The Peróns addressed the crowd from the balcony of a huge scaffolding set up on the Avenida 9 de Julio, several blocks away from the Casa Rosada, the official government house of Argentina. Overhead were two large portraits of Eva and Juan Perón. It has been claimed that &quot;Cabildo Abierto&quot; was the largest public display of support in history for a female political figure.
She declined the invitation to run for vice-president. She said her only ambition was that in the large chapter of history to be written about her husband, the footnotes would mention a woman who brought the &quot;hopes and dreams of the people to the president&quot;, a woman who eventually turned those hopes and dreams into &quot;glorious reality&quot;. In Peronist rhetoric, this event has come to be referred to as &quot;The Renunciation&quot;, portraying Evita as having been a selfless woman in line with the Hispanic myth of &quot;marianismo&quot;.

===Re-election and Spiritual Leader of the Nation===

On 7 May 1952, Evita&#x27;s 33rd birthday, she was given the title of &quot;Spiritual Leader of the Nation&quot; by her husband.

On 4 June 1952, Evita rode with Juan Perón in a parade through Buenos Aires in celebration of his re-election as President of Argentina. Evita was by this point so ill that she was unable to stand without support. Underneath her oversized fur coat was a frame made of plaster and wire that allowed her to stand. She took a triple dose of pain medication before the parade and took another two doses when she returned home.

==Death and aftermath==

===Declining health===
On 9 January 1950, Evita fainted in public and underwent surgery three days later. Although it was reported that she had undergone an appendectomy, she was actually found to have advanced cervical cancer. Fainting episodes continued through 1951 (including the evening after &quot;Cabildo abierto&quot;), with extreme weakness and severe vaginal bleeding. By 1951, it had become evident that her health was rapidly deteriorating. Although she withheld her diagnosis from Juan, he knew she was not well, and a bid for the vice-presidency was not practical. A few months after &quot;the Renunciation&quot;, Evita secretly underwent a radical hysterectomy, performed by the American surgeon George T. Pack 
at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in an attempt to remove the cervical tumor. In 2011, a Yale neurosurgeon, Daniel E. Nijensohn, studied Evita&#x27;s skull X-rays and photographic evidence and said that Perón may have been given a prefrontal lobotomy in the last months of her life &quot;to relieve the pain, agitation and anxiety she suffered in the final months of her illness&quot;.

Péron&#x27;s cervical cancer had metastasized and returned rapidly despite the hysterectomy. She was the first Argentine to undergo chemotherapya novel treatment at that time. She became emaciated, weighing only by June 1952.

===Death===
Evita died at 8:25 p.m. on Saturday, 26 July 1952 at the Unzue Palace. Radio broadcasts throughout the country were interrupted with the announcement that &quot;the Press Secretary&#x27;s Office of the Presidency of the Nation fulfills its very sad duty to inform the people of the Republic that at 20:25 hours, Mrs. Eva Perón, Spiritual Leader of the Nation, died.&quot;

===Mourning===

Immediately after Evita&#x27;s death, the government suspended all official activities for several days and ordered that all flags be flown at half-mast for 10 days. Business across the country was put to a halt as movies were stopped and patrons were asked to leave restaurants. Popular grief was overwhelming. The crowd outside of the presidential residence, where Evita died, grew dense, congesting the streets for ten blocks in each direction.

The morning after her death, while Evita&#x27;s body was being moved to the Ministry of Labour Building, eight people were crushed to death in the throngs. In the following 24 hours, over 2,000 people were treated in city hospitals for injuries sustained in the rush to be near Evita as her body was being transported, and thousands more were treated on the spot. For the following two weeks, lines stretched for many city blocks with mourners waiting hours to see Evita&#x27;s body lie in state at the Ministry of Labour.

The streets of Buenos Aires overflowed with huge piles of flowers. Within a day of Perón&#x27;s death, all flower shops in Buenos Aires had run out of stock. Flowers were flown in from all over the country, and as far away as Chile. Despite the fact that Eva Perón never held a political office, she was eventually given a state funeral usually reserved for a head of state, along with a full Roman Catholic Requiem Mass. A memorial was held in Helsinki for the Argentine team to attend during the 1952 Summer Olympics due to Eva Perón&#x27;s death during those games.

On Saturday, 9 August, the body was transferred to the Congress Building for an additional day of public viewing, and a memorial service attended by the entire Argentine legislative body. The next day, after a final Mass, the coffin was laid on a gun carriage pulled by CGT officials. It was followed by Perón, his cabinet, Eva&#x27;s family and friends, the delegates and representatives of the Female Peronist Party—then workers, nurses and students of the Eva Peron Foundation. Flowers were thrown from balconies and windows.

There were different interpretations of the popular mourning of Eva Perón&#x27;s death. Some reporters viewed the mourning as authentic; others saw a public succumbing to another of the &quot;passion plays&quot; of the Peronist regime. &quot;Time&quot; reported that the Peronist government enforced the observance of a daily period of five minutes of mourning following a daily radio announcement.

During Perón&#x27;s time, children born to unmarried parents did not have the same legal rights as those born to married parents. Biographer Julie M. Taylor, professor of anthropology at Rice University, has said that Evita was well aware of the pain of being born &quot;illegitimate&quot;. Taylor speculates that Evita&#x27;s awareness of this may have influenced her decision to have the law changed so that &quot;illegitimate&quot; children would henceforth be referred to as &quot;natural&quot; children. Upon her death, the Argentine public was told that Evita was only 30. The discrepancy was meant to dovetail with Evita&#x27;s earlier tampering with her birth certificate. After becoming the first lady in 1946, Evita had her birth records altered to read that she had been born to married parents, and placed her birth date three years later, making herself younger.

===Memorial===

Shortly after Evita&#x27;s death, Pedro Ara, who was well known for his embalming skill, was approached to embalm the body. It is doubtful that Evita ever expressed a wish to be embalmed, which suggests that it was most likely Juan Perón&#x27;s decision. Ara replaced the subject&#x27;s blood with glycerine in order to preserve the organs and lend an appearance of &quot;artistically rendered sleep&quot;.

===Disappearance and return of body===
Shortly after Evita&#x27;s death, plans were made to construct a memorial in her honour. The monument, which was to be a statue of a man representing the &quot;descamisados&quot;, was projected to be larger than the Statue of Liberty. Evita&#x27;s body was to be stored in the base of the monument and, in the tradition of Lenin&#x27;s corpse, to be displayed for the public. While the monument was being constructed, Evita&#x27;s embalmed body was displayed in her former office at the CGT building for almost two years. Before the monument to Evita was completed, Juan Perón was overthrown in a military coup, the Revolución Libertadora, in 1955. Perón hastily fled the country and was unable to make arrangements to secure Evita&#x27;s body.

Following his flight, a military dictatorship took power. The new authorities removed Evita&#x27;s body from display, and its whereabouts were a mystery for 16 years. From 1955 until 1971, the military dictatorship of Argentina maintained a ban on Peronism. In 1971, the military found that Evita&#x27;s body was buried in a crypt in Milan, Italy, under the name &quot;María Maggi&quot;. It appeared that her body had been damaged during its transport and storage, including compressions to her face and disfigurement of one of her feet due to the body having been left in an upright position.

In 1995, Tomás Eloy Martínez published &quot;Santa Evita&quot;, a fictionalised work propounding many new stories about the escapades of the corpse. Allegations that her body was the object of inappropriate attentions are derived from his description of an &#x27;emotional necrophilia&#x27; by embalmers, Colonel Koenig and his assistant Arancibia. Many primary and secondary references to his novel have inaccurately stated that her body had been defiled in some way resulting in the widespread belief in this myth. Also included are allegations that many wax copies had been made, that the corpse had been damaged with a hammer, and that one of the wax copies was the object of an officer&#x27;s sexual attentions.

===Final resting place===

In 1971, Evita&#x27;s body was exhumed and flown to Spain, where Juan Perón maintained the corpse in his home. Juan and his third wife, Isabel, decided to keep the corpse in their dining room on a platform near the table. In 1973, Juan Perón came out of exile and returned to Argentina, where he became president for the third time. Perón died in office in 1974. That year the group Montoneros stole the corpse of Pedro Eugenio Aramburu, whom they had also previously kidnapped and assassinated. Montoneros then used the captive body of Aramburu to press for the repatriation of Eva&#x27;s body. His third wife, Isabel Perón, who had been elected vice-president, succeeded Perón and had Eva Perón&#x27;s body returned to Argentina to be displayed beside her husband&#x27;s corpse. Once Eva&#x27;s body had arrived in Argentina, the group unceremoniously dumped Aramburu&#x27;s corpse on a random street in Buenos Aires. Eva&#x27;s body was later buried in the Duarte family tomb in La Recoleta Cemetery, Buenos Aires.

Later Argentine governments took elaborate measures to make Eva Perón&#x27;s tomb secure. The tomb&#x27;s marble floor has a trap door that leads to a compartment containing two coffins. Under that compartment is a second trap door and a second compartment, where Eva Perón&#x27;s coffin rests.

==Legacy and criticism==
===Argentina and Latin America===

In his essay titled &quot;Latin America&quot; published in &quot;The Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity&quot;, John McManners claims that the appeal and success of Eva Perón are related to Latin American mythology and concepts of divinity. McManners claims that Eva Perón consciously incorporated aspects of the theology of the Virgin and of Mary Magdalene into her public persona. Historian Hubert Herring has described Eva Perón as &quot;perhaps the shrewdest woman yet to appear in public life in Latin America&quot;.

In a 1996 interview, Tomás Eloy Martínez referred to Eva Perón as &quot;the Cinderella of the tango and the Sleeping Beauty of Latin America&quot;. Martínez suggested she has remained an important cultural icon for the same reasons as fellow Argentine Che Guevara: 

Although not a government holiday, the anniversary of Eva Perón&#x27;s death is marked by many Argentines each year. Additionally, Eva Perón has been featured on Argentine coins, and a form of Argentine currency called &quot;Evitas&quot; was named in her honour. Ciudad Evita (Evita City), which was established by the Eva Perón Foundation in 1947, is located just outside Buenos Aires. 

Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, the first elected female president in Argentine history, is a Peronist who has occasionally been referred to as &quot;The New Evita&quot;. Kirchner says she does not want to compare herself to Evita, claiming she was a unique phenomenon in Argentine history. Kirchner also says that women of her generation, who came of age in the 1970s during the military dictatorships in Argentina, owe a debt to Evita for offering an example of passion and combativeness. On 26 July 2002, the 50th anniversary of Eva Perón&#x27;s death, a museum opened in her honour called &quot;Museo Evita&quot;. The museum, created by her great-niece Cristina Alvarez Rodriguez, houses many of Eva Perón&#x27;s clothes, portraits, and artistic renderings of her life, and has become a popular tourist attraction. The museum was opened in a building that was once used by the Eva Perón Foundation.

In the book &quot;Eva Perón: The Myths of a Woman&quot;, cultural anthropologist Julie M. Taylor claims that Evita has remained important in Argentina due to the combination of three unique factors:


Taylor argues that the fourth factor in Evita&#x27;s continued importance in Argentina relates to her status as a dead woman and the power that death holds over the public imagination. Taylor suggests that Evita&#x27;s embalmed corpse is analogous to the incorruptibility of various Catholic saints, such as Bernadette Soubirous, and has powerful symbolism within the largely Catholic cultures of Latin America:

John Balfour was the British ambassador in Argentina during the Perón regime, and describes Evita&#x27;s popularity:

In 2011, two giant murals of Evita were unveiled on the building facades of the current Ministry of Social Development, located on 9 de Julio Avenue. The works were painted by Argentine artist Alejandro Marmo. On 26 July 2012, to commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of Evita&#x27;s death, notes were issued in a value of 100 pesos. The controversial effigy of Julio Argentino Roca was replaced by that of Eva Duarte, making her the first actual woman to be featured on the currency of Argentina. The image in the notes is based on a 1952 design, whose sketch was found in the Mint, made by the engraver Sergio Pilosio with artist Roger Pfund. The printing totals 20 million notes; it is not clear whether the government will replace the notes that feature Roca and the Conquest of the Desert.

===Allegations of fascism and antisemitism===


From the start, Juan Perón&#x27;s opponents accused him of being a fascist. Spruille Braden, a diplomat from the United States who was greatly supported by Juan Perón&#x27;s opponents, campaigned against Juan Perón&#x27;s first candidacy on the platform that Juan Perón was a fascist and a Nazi. The perception that the Peróns were fascists may have been enhanced during Evita&#x27;s 1947 European tour, during which, she was a guest of honor of Francisco Franco. By 1947, Franco had become politically isolated because he was one of the few remaining right-wing authoritarian leaders who was able to retain his power. Franco, therefore, was in desperate need of a political ally. With nearly a third of Argentina&#x27;s population of Spanish descent, it seemed natural for Argentina to have diplomatic relations with Spain. Commenting on the international perception of Evita during her 1947 European tour, Fraser and Navarro write, &quot;It was inevitable that Evita be viewed in a fascist context. Therefore, both Evita and Perón were seen to represent an ideology which had run its course in Europe, only to re-emerge in an exotic, theatrical, even farcical form in a faraway country.&quot;

Laurence Levine, the former president of the U.S.-Argentine Chamber of Commerce, writes that in contrast to Nazi ideology, the Peróns were not anti-Semitic. In the book &quot;Inside Argentina from Perón to Menem: 1950–2000 from an American Point of View&quot;, Levine writes:


Biographer Robert D. Crassweller writes, &quot;Peronism was not fascism&quot;, and &quot;Peronism was not Nazism.&quot; Crassweller also refers to the comments of U.S. Ambassador George S. Messersmith. While visiting Argentina in 1947, Messersmith made the following statement: &quot;There is not as much social discrimination against Jews here as there is right in New York or in most places at home.&quot;

&quot;Time&quot; magazine published an article by Tomás Eloy Martínez—Argentine writer, journalist, and former director of the Latin American program at Rutgers University—titled &quot;The Woman Behind the Fantasy: Prostitute, Fascist, Profligate—Eva Peron Was Much Maligned, Mostly Unfairly&quot;. In this article, Martínez writes that the accusations that Eva Perón was a fascist, a Nazi, and a thief had been made against her for decades. He wrote that the allegations were untrue:

The governments that preceded Juan Perón&#x27;s government were anti-Semitic but his government was not. Juan Perón &quot;eagerly and enthusiastically&quot; attempted to recruit the Jewish community into his government and set up a branch of the Peronist party for Jewish members, known as the Organización Israelita Argentina (OIA). Perón&#x27;s government was the first to court the Argentine Jewish community and the first to appoint Jewish citizens to public office. The Peronist regime has been accused of being fascist, but it has been argued that what passed for fascism under Perón never took hold in Latin America; additionally, because the Peronist regime allowed rival political parties to exist, it cannot be described as totalitarian.

===International popular culture===

By the late 20th century, Eva Perón had become the subject of numerous articles, books, stage plays, and musicals, ranging from the 1952 biography &quot;The Woman with the Whip&quot; to a 1981 TV movie titled &quot;Evita Perón&quot; starring Faye Dunaway in the title role. The most successful rendering of Eva Perón&#x27;s life has been the musical production &quot;Evita&quot;. The musical began as a concept album which was co-produced by Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice in 1976, with Julie Covington in the title role. Elaine Paige was later cast in the title role when the concept album was adapted into a musical stage production in London&#x27;s West End and it won the 1978 Olivier Award for Best Performance in a Musical. In 1980, Patti LuPone won the Tony Award for Best Leading Actress in a Musical for her performance as the title character in the Broadway production. The Broadway production also won the Tony Award for Best Musical. Nicholas Fraser claims that to date, &quot;the musical stage production has been performed on every continent except Antarctica and it has generated over $2 billion in revenue.&quot;

As early as 1978, the musical was considered as the basis for a movie. After a nearly 20-year production delay, Madonna was cast in the title role for the 1996 film version and she won the Golden Globe Award for &quot;Best Actress in a Musical or Comedy&quot;. In response to the American film, and in an alleged attempt to offer a more politically accurate depiction of Evita&#x27;s life, an Argentine film company released &quot;Eva Perón: The True Story&quot;. The Argentine production starred actress Esther Goris in the title role. This movie was the 1996 Argentine submission for the Oscar in the category of &quot;Best Foreign Language Film,&quot; but was not accepted as a nominee.

Nicholas Fraser writes that Evita is the perfect popular culture icon for our times because her career foreshadowed what, by the late 20th century, had become common. During Evita&#x27;s time, it was considered scandalous for a former entertainer to take part in public political life. Her detractors in Argentina had frequently accused Evita of turning public political life into show business. But by the late 20th century, Fraser claims, the public had become engrossed in the cult of celebrity and public political life had become insignificant. In this regard, Evita was perhaps ahead of her time. Fraser also writes that Evita&#x27;s story is appealing to our celebrity-obsessed age because her story confirms one of Hollywood&#x27;s oldest clichés, the rags to riches story. Reflecting on Eva Perón&#x27;s popularity more than half a century after her death, Alma Guillermoprieto writes that, &quot;Evita&#x27;s life has evidently just begun.&quot;

Eva Perón appears on the 100 peso note first issued in 2012 commemorating the anniversary of her death. She is also featured on a new 100 peso note, issued in 2022.

==Honours==
=== National ===
* : Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of the Liberator General San Martín
* : Grand Cross of Honour of the Argentine Red Cross

=== Foreign ===

* : Grand Cross of the Order of the Condor of the Andes 
* : Grand Cross of the Order of the Southern Cross
* : Grand Cross of the Order of Boyaca, Special Class 
* : Dame Grand Cross of the Order of Orange-Nassau 
* : Dame Grand Cross of the Order of Isabella the Catholic
* : Dame Grand Cross of Sovereign Military Order of Malta 
* : Grand Cross of the Order of the Aztec Eagle 
* : Grand Cross of the Order of Omeyades
* : Grand Cross of the Order of Merit and the Ecuadorian Red Cross
* : Grand Cross of the Order of Honour and Merit 
* : Grand Cross of the Order of the Sun of Peru
* : Grand Cross of the Merit of Paraguay

==See also==

*List of suffragists and suffragettes
*Timeline of women&#x27;s suffrage
*Copa Eva Duarte
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* Guy, Donna. &quot;Life and the Commodification of Death in Argentina: Juan and Eva Perón&quot; in &quot;Death, Dismemberment, and Memory: Body Politics in Latin America&quot;, Lyman L. Johnson, ed. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press 2004, pp. 245–272.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
*
* 


==Related articles==
* Evita (musical), the 1978 musical based on her life

==External links==

* Eva Perón Historical Foundation
* casahistoria pages on Perón Les Fearns site, also links to Eva Perón pages
* BBC Radio 4 programme about Perón&#x27;s embalmed body
* The Evita Project – a social media page dedicated to Evita and the preservation of her legacy
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q40933" start="0" end="25" title="Eva Perón" label="María Eva Duarte de Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q40933" start="80" end="89" title="Eva Perón" label="Eva Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q40933" start="109" end="114" title="Eva Perón" label="Evita"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="171" end="185" title="philanthropist" label="philanthropist"/>
<link wikidata="Q24703451" start="200" end="223" title="First Lady of Argentina" label="First Lady of Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969145" start="284" end="303" title="President of Argentina" label="Argentine President"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="304" end="314" title="Juan Perón" label="Juan Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q521056" start="364" end="374" title="Los Toldos" label="Los Toldos"/>
<link wikidata="Q184382" start="379" end="389" title="the Pampas" label="the Pampas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="494" end="506" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q464555" start="733" end="741" title="Peronism" label="Peronism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004004" start="779" end="799" title="Eva Perón Foundation" label="Eva Perón Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="896" end="906" title="Juan Perón" label="Juan Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462481" start="956" end="973" title="Estadio Luna Park" label="Luna Park Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505891" start="1000" end="1036" title="1944 San Juan earthquake" label="an earthquake in San Juan, Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992765" start="1203" end="1228" title="General Confederation of Labour (Argentina)" label="pro-Peronist trade unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915476" start="1266" end="1278" title="labor rights" label="labor rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004004" start="1360" end="1380" title="Eva Perón Foundation" label="Eva Perón Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="1393" end="1414" title="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q833225" start="1513" end="1534" title="Female Peronist Party" label="Female Peronist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914766" start="1626" end="1653" title="Vice President of Argentina" label="Vice President of Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200513" start="1783" end="1795" title="descamisados" label="descamisados"/>
<link wikidata="Q208412" start="1854" end="1867" title="sans-culottes" label="sans-culottes"/>
<link wikidata="Q628021" start="1934" end="1942" title="military of Argentina" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="1947" end="1958" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q646190" start="2193" end="2211" title="Argentine Congress" label="Argentine Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="2229" end="2242" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193293" start="2344" end="2373" title="Cultural depictions of Eva Perón" label="international popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q830549" start="2425" end="2430" title="Evita (musical)" label="Evita"/>
<link wikidata="Q5791547" start="2445" end="2471" title="Cristina Álvarez Rodríguez" label="Cristina Álvarez Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q430880" start="2511" end="2535" title="collective consciousness" label="collective consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q40649" start="2551" end="2581" title="Cristina Fernández de Kirchner" label="Cristina Fernández de Kirchner"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969145" start="2601" end="2623" title="president of Argentina" label="president of Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q191014" start="2660" end="2672" title="Isabel Perón" label="Isabel Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q335046" start="2754" end="2761" title="Passion (emotion)" label="passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6466373" start="2858" end="2877" title="La Razón de mi Vida" label="La Razón de mi Vida"/>
<link wikidata="Q83900" start="3053" end="3070" title="birth certificate" label="birth certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020277" start="3395" end="3400" title="Junín, Buenos Aires" label="Junín"/>
<link wikidata="Q44754" start="3402" end="3423" title="Buenos Aires province" label="Buenos Aires province"/>
<link wikidata="Q98405" start="3469" end="3482" title="French Basque Country" label="French Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="3543" end="3557" title="Basques" label="Spanish Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q686736" start="3613" end="3622" title="Chivilcoy" label="Chivilcoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="4149" end="4160" title="social stigma" label="stigmatized"/>
<link wikidata="Q378505" start="4205" end="4217" title="Legitimacy (family law)" label="illegitimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q613739" start="5347" end="5355" title="estancia" label="estancia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="6407" end="6419" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642467" start="6766" end="6778" title="tango singer" label="tango singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934739" start="6779" end="6794" title="Agustín Magaldi" label="Agustín Magaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="7571" end="7587" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q223770" start="7830" end="7843" title="B-Movie" label="B-grade movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="8397" end="8419" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605" start="8421" end="8436" title="Sarah Bernhardt" label="Sarah Bernhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q152094" start="8442" end="8462" title="Alexandra Feodorovna (Alix of Hesse)" label="Alexandra Feodorovna"/>
<link wikidata="Q244696" start="8595" end="8599" title="peso" label="peso"/>
<link wikidata="Q131673464" start="8900" end="8930" title="Golden Age of Argentine cinema" label="Golden Age of Argentine cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q6461421" start="9032" end="9054" title="La cabalgata del circo" label="La cabalgata del circo"/>
<link wikidata="Q236026" start="9180" end="9197" title="Libertad Lamarque" label="Libertad Lamarque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010253" start="9380" end="9388" title="Recoleta, Buenos Aires" label="Recoleta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505891" start="9644" end="9654" title="1944 San Juan earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q44241" start="9679" end="9698" title="San Juan, Argentina" label="San Juan, Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462481" start="10035" end="10052" title="Estadio Luna Park" label="Luna Park Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="10176" end="10186" title="Juan Perón" label="Juan Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804955" start="10422" end="10435" title="Aurelia Gabriela Tizón de Perón" label="Aurelia Tizón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550917" start="12085" end="12110" title="United Officers&amp;#x27; Group" label="Grupo de Oficiales Unidos"/>
<link wikidata="Q365314" start="12261" end="12280" title="Pedro Pablo Ramírez" label="Pedro Pablo Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q356699" start="12489" end="12512" title="Edelmiro Julián Farrell" label="Edelmiro Julián Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q478926" start="13071" end="13082" title="Casa Rosada" label="Casa Rosada"/>
<link wikidata="Q973658" start="13465" end="13473" title="caudillo" label="caudillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q311436" start="13540" end="13545" title="Juan Manuel de Rosas" label="Rosas"/>
<link wikidata="Q297134" start="13550" end="13558" title="Hipólito Yrigoyen" label="Yrigoyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="13617" end="13623" title="Mysticism" label="mystic"/>
<link wikidata="Q830549" start="14006" end="14026" title="Evita (musical)" label="Lloyd Webber musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="14213" end="14225" title="trade union" label="labor unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992765" start="14473" end="14476" title="General Confederation of Labour (Argentina)" label="CGT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020277" start="14614" end="14619" title="Junín, Buenos Aires" label="Junín"/>
<link wikidata="Q44059" start="14669" end="14677" title="La Plata" label="La Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053668" start="14738" end="14756" title="Justicialist Party" label="Justicialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694482" start="14812" end="14823" title="Loyalty Day (Argentina)" label="Loyalty Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="15121" end="15129" title="populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="15363" end="15379" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="15384" end="15397" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="15801" end="15807" title="Francisco Franco" label="Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q151394" start="15814" end="15841" title="António de Oliveira Salazar" label="António Salazar of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="16134" end="16149" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="16326" end="16335" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="16340" end="16348" title="Isabella I of Castile" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q429192" start="16356" end="16379" title="Capilla Real de Granada" label="Capilla Real de Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="16381" end="16396" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="16424" end="16441" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q309070" start="16447" end="16455" title="autarky" label="autarkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189097" start="16580" end="16586" title="Spanish peseta" label="peseta"/>
<link wikidata="Q931502" start="16724" end="16754" title="Order of Isabella the Catholic" label="Order of Isabella the Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="16847" end="16860" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393480" start="16880" end="16896" title="Papal Orders of Chivalry" label="Papal decoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q132539" start="16966" end="16972" title="rosary" label="rosary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="17020" end="17037" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="17124" end="17133" title="George VI of the United Kingdom" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="17317" end="17329" title="British royal family" label="royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q674304" start="18217" end="18235" title="Swiss bank account" label="Swiss bank account"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="18602" end="18606" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q327496" start="19247" end="19254" title="haircut" label="hairdos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279269" start="19417" end="19424" title="chignon (hairstyle)" label="chignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q216053" start="19630" end="19637" title="Haute couture" label="couture"/>
<link wikidata="Q542767" start="19690" end="19704" title="Christian Dior S.A." label="Christian Dior"/>
<link wikidata="Q538587" start="19723" end="19730" title="Cartier SA" label="Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q24960663" start="20066" end="20106" title="Sociedad de Beneficencia de Buenos Aires" label="Sociedad de Beneficencia de Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q708676" start="20141" end="20164" title="charitable organization" label="charitable organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q193279" start="20376" end="20383" title="orphans" label="orphans"/>
<link wikidata="Q24703451" start="20767" end="20790" title="First Lady of Argentina" label="First Lady of Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004004" start="21474" end="21494" title="Eva Perón Foundation" label="Eva Perón Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775573" start="21556" end="21579" title="The Woman with the Whip" label="The Woman with the Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q674304" start="21789" end="21808" title="Swiss bank accounts" label="Swiss bank accounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992765" start="22332" end="22363" title="General Confederation of Labour (Argentina)" label="General Confederation of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q244696" start="22853" end="22857" title="peso" label="peso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315989" start="23342" end="23352" title="Ciudad Evita" label="Evita City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493282" start="24426" end="24440" title="Transcendence (religion)" label="transcendental"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="24478" end="24493" title="Ignatius Loyola" label="Ignatius Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="24537" end="24549" title="Jesuit Order" label="Jesuit Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="24742" end="24763" title="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118303" start="25183" end="25202" title="Senate of Argentina" label="Senate of Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q833225" start="25698" end="25719" title="Female Peronist Party" label="Female Peronist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q838980" start="27118" end="27132" title="May Revolution" label="May Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q777052" start="27227" end="27245" title="Avenida 9 de Julio" label="Avenida 9 de Julio"/>
<link wikidata="Q478926" start="27276" end="27287" title="Casa Rosada" label="Casa Rosada"/>
<link wikidata="Q590598" start="28066" end="28076" title="marianismo" label="marianismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q620840" start="28875" end="28887" title="appendectomy" label="appendectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q160105" start="28929" end="28944" title="cervical cancer" label="cervical cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q550675" start="29381" end="29393" title="hysterectomy" label="hysterectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665794" start="29429" end="29443" title="George T. Pack" label="George T. Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808012" start="29452" end="29490" title="Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center" label="Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="29546" end="29550" title="Yale University" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q207684" start="29699" end="29707" title="lobotomy" label="lobotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="29976" end="29988" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q568378" start="30031" end="30040" title="Emaciation" label="emaciated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057815" start="30140" end="30152" title="Unzué Palace" label="Unzue Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053885" start="30615" end="30624" title="half-mast" label="half-mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="31768" end="31781" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q51616" start="31853" end="31865" title="Requiem" label="Requiem Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343683" start="31907" end="31916" title="Argentina at the 1952 Summer Olympics" label="Argentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8407" start="31943" end="31963" title="1952 Summer Olympics" label="1952 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q366656" start="32262" end="32274" title="Limbers and caissons" label="gun carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="32319" end="32324" title="Juan Peron" label="Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q833225" start="32411" end="32432" title="Female Peronist Party" label="Female Peronist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004004" start="32474" end="32494" title="Eva Peron Foundation" label="Eva Peron Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="33116" end="33128" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q842909" start="33132" end="33147" title="Rice University" label="Rice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q332997" start="33945" end="33951" title="embalming" label="embalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q132501" start="34136" end="34145" title="Glycerol" label="glycerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200513" start="34445" end="34457" title="descamisados" label="descamisados"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="34501" end="34518" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="34608" end="34613" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="34891" end="34895" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042919" start="34901" end="34923" title="Revolución Libertadora" label="Revolución Libertadora"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="35365" end="35370" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362119" start="35635" end="35654" title="Tomás Eloy Martínez" label="Tomás Eloy Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q16166726" start="35671" end="35682" title="Santa Evita" label="Santa Evita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053419" start="36754" end="36764" title="Montoneros" label="Montoneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q188974" start="36785" end="36807" title="Pedro Eugenio Aramburu" label="Pedro Eugenio Aramburu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36809" end="36865" title="Pedro Eugenio Aramburu#Death" label="whom they had also previously kidnapped and assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q191014" start="36983" end="36995" title="Isabel Perón" label="Isabel Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q831322" start="37353" end="37373" title="La Recoleta Cemetery" label="La Recoleta Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q720196" start="37865" end="37879" title="John McManners" label="John McManners"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="38066" end="38074" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="38082" end="38088" title="Virgin Mary" label="Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="38096" end="38110" title="Mary Magdalene" label="Mary Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362119" start="38297" end="38316" title="Tomás Eloy Martínez" label="Tomás Eloy Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q11841" start="38352" end="38362" title="Cinderella" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q11824" start="38384" end="38399" title="Sleeping Beauty" label="Sleeping Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139104" start="38473" end="38486" title="cultural icon" label="cultural icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="38528" end="38539" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315989" start="38806" end="38818" title="Ciudad Evita" label="Ciudad Evita"/>
<link wikidata="Q40649" start="38932" end="38962" title="Cristina Fernández de Kirchner" label="Cristina Fernández de Kirchner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773904" start="39902" end="39916" title="anthropologist" label="anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q752380" start="40292" end="40308" title="incorruptibility" label="incorruptibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q55398" start="40345" end="40365" title="Bernadette Soubirous" label="Bernadette Soubirous"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="40384" end="40390" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220448" start="40450" end="40462" title="John Balfour (diplomat)" label="John Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q777052" start="40699" end="40716" title="9 de Julio Avenue" label="9 de Julio Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714596" start="40761" end="40776" title="Alejandro Marmo" label="Alejandro Marmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q356659" start="40929" end="40949" title="Julio Argentino Roca" label="Julio Argentino Roca"/>
<link wikidata="Q199578" start="41042" end="41063" title="currency of Argentina" label="currency of Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q513018" start="41199" end="41210" title="Roger Pfund" label="Roger Pfund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348983" start="41338" end="41360" title="Conquest of the Desert" label="Conquest of the Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="41478" end="41485" title="fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q504182" start="41487" end="41502" title="Spruille Braden" label="Spruille Braden"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="41857" end="41873" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="42715" end="42728" title="Nazism" label="Nazi ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="42750" end="42762" title="Antisemitism" label="anti-Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185107" start="42813" end="42818" title="Carlos Menem" label="Menem"/>
<link wikidata="Q505490" start="43064" end="43085" title="George S. Messersmith" label="George S. Messersmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="43300" end="43304" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362119" start="43344" end="43363" title="Tomás Eloy Martínez" label="Tomás Eloy Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="43421" end="43435" title="Latin American" label="Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="43447" end="43465" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="44514" end="44526" title="totalitarian" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775573" start="44719" end="44742" title="The Woman with the Whip" label="The Woman with the Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q168721" start="44808" end="44820" title="Faye Dunaway" label="Faye Dunaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="44908" end="44915" title="Musical theater" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q830549" start="44933" end="44938" title="Evita (musical)" label="Evita"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418505" start="44969" end="44982" title="Evita (album)" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="45008" end="45027" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q298295" start="45032" end="45040" title="Tim Rice" label="Tim Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q443422" start="45055" end="45070" title="Julie Covington" label="Julie Covington"/>
<link wikidata="Q233962" start="45090" end="45102" title="Elaine Paige" label="Elaine Paige"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="45206" end="45228" title="West End theatre" label="London&amp;#x27;s West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q28470" start="45249" end="45262" title="Olivier Award" label="Olivier Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500800" start="45267" end="45296" title="Laurence Olivier Award for Best Performance in a Musical" label="Best Performance in a Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q270324" start="45307" end="45319" title="Patti LuPone" label="Patti LuPone"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="45328" end="45338" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537996" start="45343" end="45376" title="Tony Award for Best Actress in a Musical" label="Best Leading Actress in a Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="45427" end="45435" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="45810" end="45817" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q245271" start="45858" end="45870" title="Evita (1996 film)" label="film version"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="45887" end="45905" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="" start="46129" end="46154" title="Eva Perón: The True Story" label="Eva Perón: The True Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401191" start="46203" end="46215" title="Esther Goris" label="Esther Goris"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="46288" end="46293" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="46438" end="46453" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q587231" start="46869" end="46886" title="cult of celebrity" label="cult of celebrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q156351" start="47136" end="47142" title="cliché" label="cliché"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077298" start="47149" end="47163" title="rags to riches" label="rags to riches"/>
<link wikidata="Q455631" start="47255" end="47275" title="Alma Guillermoprieto" label="Alma Guillermoprieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q199578" start="47375" end="47379" title="Argentine peso" label="peso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783970" start="47576" end="47617" title="Order of the Liberator General San Martín" label="Order of the Liberator General San Martín"/>
<link wikidata="Q94127" start="47712" end="47744" title="Order of the Condor of the Andes" label="Order of the Condor of the Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q93713" start="47769" end="47796" title="Order of the Southern Cross" label="Order of the Southern Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758023" start="47820" end="47850" title="Order of Boyaca" label="Order of Boyaca, Special Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q139425" start="47880" end="47902" title="Order of Orange-Nassau" label="Order of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q931502" start="47932" end="47962" title="Order of Isabella the Catholic" label="Order of Isabella the Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190353" start="47987" end="48020" title="Sovereign Military Order of Malta" label="Sovereign Military Order of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q93956" start="48045" end="48069" title="Order of the Aztec Eagle" label="Order of the Aztec Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q112390" start="48202" end="48227" title="National Order of Honour and Merit" label="Order of Honour and Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415232" start="48252" end="48276" title="Order of the Sun of Peru" label="Order of the Sun of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641747" start="48334" end="48370" title="List of suffragists and suffragettes" label="List of suffragists and suffragettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647212" start="48372" end="48405" title="Timeline of women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="Timeline of women&amp;#x27;s suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130117" start="48407" end="48422" title="Copa Eva Duarte" label="Copa Eva Duarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q830549" start="48794" end="48809" title="Evita (musical)" label="Evita (musical)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51585" wikidata="Q987" url="?curid=51585" title="New Delhi">
<text>New Delhi (; , ISO: &quot;Naī Dillī&quot;) is the capital of India and a part of the National Capital Territory of Delhi (NCT). New Delhi is the seat of all three branches of the Government of India, hosting the Rashtrapati Bhavan, Sansad Bhavan, and the Supreme Court. New Delhi is a municipality within the NCT, administered by the New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC), which covers mostly Lutyens&#x27; Delhi and a few adjacent areas. The municipal area is part of a larger administrative district, the New Delhi district.

Although colloquially &quot;Delhi&quot; and &quot;New Delhi&quot; are used interchangeably to refer to the National Capital Territory of Delhi, both are distinct entities, with the municipality and the New Delhi district forming a relatively small part within the megacity of Delhi. The National Capital Region is an even larger entity, comprising the entire NCT along with adjoining districts in the two neighbouring states forming a continuously built-up area with it, including Ghaziabad, Noida, Greater Noida, Meerut, YEIDA City, Gurgaon, and Faridabad.

The foundation stone of New Delhi, south of central Delhi, was laid by George V during the Delhi Durbar of 1911. It was designed by British architects Edwin Lutyens and Herbert Baker. The new capital was inaugurated on 13 February 1931, by Viceroy and Governor-General Irwin.

== History ==
=== Establishment ===

Until December 1911, Calcutta was the capital of India during the British Rule. However, it had become the centre of the nationalist movements since the late nineteenth century, which led to the Partition of Bengal by Viceroy Curzon. This created massive political and religious upsurge including political assassinations of British officials in Calcutta. The anti-colonial sentiments among the public led to a complete boycott of British goods, which forced the colonial government to reunite Bengal and immediately shift the capital to New Delhi.

Old Delhi had served as the political and financial centre of several empires of medieval India and the Delhi Sultanate, most notably of the Mughal Empire from 1649 to 1857. During the early 1900s, a proposal was made to the British administration to shift the capital of the British Indian Empire, as India was officially named, from Calcutta on the east coast, to Delhi. The Government of British India felt that it would be logistically easier to administer India from Delhi, which is in the centre of northern India. The land for building the new city of Delhi was acquired under the Land Acquisition Act 1894.

During the Delhi Durbar on 12 December 1911, George V while laying the foundation stone for the viceroy&#x27;s residence in the Coronation Park, Kingsway Camp, declared that the capital of the Raj would be shifted from Calcutta to Delhi. Three days later, George V and his consort, Mary, laid the foundation stone of New Delhi at Kingsway Camp. Large parts of New Delhi were planned by Edwin Lutyens, who first visited Delhi in 1912, and Herbert Baker, both leading 20th-century British architects. The contract was given to Sobha Singh. The original plan called for its construction in Tughlaqabad, inside the Tughlaqabad Fort, but this was given up because of the Delhi-Calcutta trunk line that passed through the fort. Construction really began after World War I and was completed by 1931. The gardening and planning of plantations was led by A.E.P. Griessen, and later William Mustoe. The city that was later dubbed &quot;Lutyens&#x27; Delhi&quot; was inaugurated in ceremonies beginning on 10 February 1931 by Viceroy Irwin. Lutyens designed the central administrative area of the city as a testament to Britain&#x27;s imperial aspirations.

Soon Lutyens started considering other places. Indeed, the Delhi Town Planning Committee, set up to plan the new imperial capital, with George Swinton as chairman, and John A. Brodie and Lutyens as members, submitted reports for both north and south sites. However, it was rejected by the Viceroy when the cost of acquiring the necessary properties was found to be too high. The central axis of New Delhi, which today faces east at India Gate, was previously meant to be a north–south axis linking the Viceroy&#x27;s House at one end with Paharganj at the other. Eventually, owing to space constraints and the presence of a large number of heritage sites on the north side, the committee settled on the south site. A site atop the Raisina Hill, formerly Raisina Village, a Meo village, was chosen for the Rashtrapati Bhawan, then known as the Viceroy&#x27;s House. The reason for this choice was that the hill lay directly opposite the Dinapanah citadel, which was also considered the site of Indraprastha, the ancient region of Delhi. Subsequently, the foundation stone was shifted from the site of Delhi Durbar of 1911–1912, where the Coronation Pillar stood, and embedded in the walls of the forecourt of the Secretariat. The Rajpath, also known as King&#x27;s Way, stretched from the India Gate to the Rashtrapati Bhawan. The Secretariat building, the two blocks of which flank the Rashtrapati Bhawan and houses ministries of the government of India, and the Parliament House, both designed by Baker, are located at the Sansad Marg and run parallel to the Rajpath.

In the south, land up to Safdarjung&#x27;s Tomb was acquired to create what is today known as Lutyens&#x27; Bungalow Zone. Before construction could begin on the rocky ridge of Raisina Hill, a circular railway line around the Council House (now Parliament House), called the &quot;Imperial Delhi Railway&quot;, was built to transport construction material and workers for the next twenty years. The last stumbling block was the Agra-Delhi railway line that cut right through the site earmarked for the hexagonal All-India War Memorial (India Gate) and Kingsway (Rajpath), which was a problem because the Old Delhi Railway Station served the entire city at that time. The line was shifted to run along the Yamuna River, and it began operating in 1924. The New Delhi Railway Station opened in 1926, with a single platform at Ajmeri Gate near Paharganj, and was completed in time for the city&#x27;s inauguration in 1931. As construction of the Viceroy&#x27;s House (the present Rashtrapati Bhavan), Central Secretariat, Parliament House, and All-India War Memorial (India Gate) was winding down, the building of a shopping district and a new plaza, Connaught Place, began in 1929, and was completed by 1933. Named after Prince Arthur, 1st Duke of Connaught (1850–1942), it was designed by Robert Tor Russell, chief architect to the Public Works Department (PWD).

After the capital of India moved to Delhi, a temporary secretariat building was constructed in a few months in 1912 in North Delhi. Most of the government offices of the new capital moved here from the &#x27;Old secretariat&#x27; in Old Delhi (the building now houses the Delhi Legislative Assembly), a decade before the new capital was inaugurated in 1931. Many employees were brought into the new capital from distant parts of India, including the Bengal Presidency and Madras Presidency. Subsequently, housing for them has developed around Gole Market area in the 1920s. Built in the 1940s, to house government employees, with bungalows for senior officials in the nearby Lodi Estate area, Lodi Colony near historic Lodi Gardens, was the last residential areas built by the British Raj.

=== Post-independence ===

After India gained independence in 1947, limited autonomy was conferred to New Delhi and was administered by a Chief Commissioner appointed by the Government of India. In 1966, Delhi was converted into a union territory and eventually the Chief Commissioner was replaced by a Lieutenant Governor. The Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991 declared the Union Territory of Delhi to be formally known as the National Capital Territory of Delhi. A system was introduced under which the elected government was given wide powers, excluding law and order which remained with the Central Government. The actual enforcement of the legislation came in 1993.

The first major extension of New Delhi outside of Lutyens&#x27; Delhi came in the 1950s when the Central Public Works Department (CPWD) developed a large area of land southwest of Lutyens&#x27; Delhi to create the diplomatic enclave of Chanakyapuri, where land was allotted for embassies, chanceries, high commissions and residences of ambassadors, around a wide central vista, &quot;Shanti Path&quot;.

== Geography ==

With a total area of , the municipality of New Delhi forms a small part of the Delhi metropolitan area. Since the city is located on the Indo-Gangetic Plain, there is little difference in elevation across the city. New Delhi and surrounding areas were once a part of the Aravali Range; all that is left of those mountains is the Delhi Ridge, which is also called the Lungs of Delhi. While New Delhi lies on the floodplains of the Yamuna River, it is essentially a landlocked city. East of the river is the urban area of Shahdara.

=== Seismology ===
New Delhi falls under the seismic zone-IV, making it vulnerable to earthquakes. It lies on several fault lines and thus experiences frequent earthquakes, most of them of mild intensity. There was a spike in the number of earthquakes between 2011 and 2015, most notable being a 5.4 magnitude earthquake in 2015 with its epicentre in Nepal, a 4.7-magnitude earthquake on 25 November 2007, a 4.2-magnitude earthquake on 7 September 2011, a 5.2-magnitude earthquake on 5 March 2012, and a swarm of twelve earthquakes, including four of magnitudes 2.5, 2.8, 3.1, and 3.3, on 12 November 2013.

=== Climate ===
The climate of New Delhi is a dry-winter humid subtropical climate (Köppen &quot;Cwa&quot;) bordering on a hot semi-arid climate (Köppen &quot;BSh&quot;) with high variation between summer and winter in terms of both temperature and rainfall. The temperature varies from in summers to around in winters. The area&#x27;s version of a humid subtropical climate is noticeably different from many other cities with this climate classification in that it features long and extremely hot summers with dust storms, relatively dry and mild winters with wildfire haze, and a monsoonal period. Summers are long, extending from early April to October, with the monsoon season occurring in the middle of the summer. Winter starts in November and peaks in January. Winters are very mild. The annual mean temperature is around ; monthly daily mean temperatures range from approximately . New Delhi&#x27;s highest temperature ever recorded is on 28 May 2024 at Met Delhi Mungeshpur while the lowest temperature ever recorded is on 11 January 1967 at Indira Gandhi International Airport (formerly known as Palam Airport). The average annual rainfall is and monsoon rainfall from June to September is about , most of which is during the monsoons in July and August.

=== Air quality ===

In Mercer&#x27;s 2015 annual quality-of-living survey, New Delhi ranks at number 154 out of 230 cities due to bad air quality and pollution. The World Health Organization ranked New Delhi as the world&#x27;s worst polluted city in 2014 among about 1,600 cities the organisation tracked around the world. In 2016, United States Environmental Protection Agency listed New Delhi as the most polluted city on Earth and IQAir listed New Delhi as the world&#x27;s most polluted capital city for the second straight year in year 2019.
In an attempt to lessen air pollution in New Delhi, which gets worse during the winter, a temporary alternate-day travel scheme for cars using the odd- and even-numbered licence plates system was announced by Delhi government in December 2015. In addition, trucks were to be allowed to enter India&#x27;s capital only after 11 pm, two hours later than the existing restriction. The driving restriction scheme was planned to be implemented as a trial from 1 January 2016 for an initial period of 15 days. The restriction was in force between 8 am and 8 pm, and traffic was not restricted on Sundays. Public transportation service was increased during the restriction period.

On 16 December 2015, the Supreme Court of India mandated several restrictions on Delhi&#x27;s transportation system to curb pollution. Among the measures, the court ordered to stop registrations of diesel cars and sport utility vehicles with an engine capacity of 2,000 cc and over until 31 March 2016. The court also ordered all taxis in the Delhi region to switch to compressed natural gas by 1 March 2016. Transportation vehicles that are more than 10 years old were banned from entering the capital.

Analysing real-time vehicle speed data from Uber Delhi revealed that during the odd-even program, average speeds went up by a statistically significant 5.4 per cent (2.8 standard deviations from normal). This means vehicles have less idling time in traffic and vehicle engines would run closer to minimum fuel consumption. In bordering areas, PM 2.5 levels were recorded more than 400 (ug/m3) while in inner areas in Delhi, they were recorded between 150 and 210 on an average. However, the sub-city of Dwarka, located in the southwest district, has a substantially low level of air pollution. At the NSIT University campus, located in sector 3 Dwarka, pollution levels were as low as 93 PPM.

On 7 November 2017, the Indian Medical Association declared a public health emergency due to high pollution levels. The highest being in the Punjabi Bagh district with an air quality index of 999 and in the RK Puram district with an index of 852. The lowest index recorded was in the Anand Vihar district with an index of 319. Levels of PM2.5 were recorded at 710 μg/m3, more than 11 times the World Health Organization&#x27;s safe limit.

In a 2018 study, New Delhi was found to be the most polluted capital out of 61 capital cities around the world. In December 2019, IIT Bombay, in partnership with the McKelvey School of Engineering of Washington University in St. Louis, launched the Aerosol and Air Quality Research Facility to study air pollution in New Delhi, among other Indian cities. During the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown in India, the water quality of the Yamuna and Ganges river basins have improved as industries are closed due to the lockdown. The air quality has also significantly improved during the lockdown. On 5 November 2020, New Delhi recorded its most toxic day in a year, as the concentration of poisonous PM2.5 particles was recorded at 14 times the WHO&#x27;s safe limit.


== Demographics ==

As of 2011, the New Delhi Municipal Council area has a population of 249,998. Hindi is the most widely spoken language in New Delhi and the lingua franca of the city. English is primarily used as the formal language by business and government institutes. New Delhi has a literacy rate of 89.38% according to 2011 census, which is the highest in Delhi.

=== Religion ===

According to 2011 census, Hinduism is the religion of 89.8% of New Delhi&#x27;s population. There are also communities of Muslims (4.5%), Christians (2.9%), Sikhs (2.0%), Jains (0.4%). Other religious groups include Parsis, Buddhists, and Jews.

== Government ==

The national capital of India, New Delhi is jointly administered by both the Central Government of India and the local Government of Delhi, it is also the capital of the National Capital Territory (NCT) of Delhi.
New Delhi is administered through a municipal government, known as the New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC). The other urban areas of the metropolis of Delhi are administered by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Delhi Cantonment Board. , the government structure of the New Delhi Municipal Council includes a chairperson, three members of New Delhi&#x27;s Legislative Assembly, two members nominated by the Chief Minister of the NCT of Delhi and five members nominated by the central government.

The districts of the NCT were redrawn in 2012 and include a district called New Delhi, albeit with different borders than the municipality. The New Delhi district includes not only the area of the municipality of the same name but also encompasses the Delhi Cantonment and parts of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi area.

== Economy ==
New Delhi is the largest commercial city in northern India. It has an estimated net State Domestic Product (FY 2010) of in nominal terms and ~ in PPP terms. , the per capita income of Delhi was Rs. 230000, second highest in India after Goa. GSDP in Delhi at the prices for 2012–13 is estimated at Rs 3.88 trillion (short scale) against Rs 3.11 trillion (short scale) in 2011–12.

Connaught Place, one of North India&#x27;s largest commercial and financial centres, is located in the northern part of New Delhi. Adjoining areas such as Barakhamba Road, ITO are also major commercial centres. The government and quasi-government sector was the primary employer in New Delhi. The city&#x27;s service sector has expanded due in part to the large skilled English-speaking workforce that has attracted many multinational companies. Key service industries include information technology, telecommunications, hotels, banking, media, and tourism.
The 2011 World Wealth Report ranks economic activity in New Delhi at 39, but overall the capital is ranked at 37, above cities like Jakarta and Johannesburg. New Delhi, with Beijing, shares the top position as the most targeted emerging markets retail destination among Asia-Pacific markets.

The government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi does not release any economic figures specifically for New Delhi but publishes an official economic report on the whole of Delhi annually. According to the &quot;Economic Survey of Delhi&quot;, the metropolis has a net State Domestic Product (SDP) of Rs. 830.85 billion (for the year 2004–05) and a per capita income of Rs. 53,976 ($1,200). In the year 2008–09 New Delhi had a per capita Income of Rs. ($2,595). It grew by 16.2% to reach Rs. ($3,018) in 2009–10 fiscal. New Delhi&#x27;s per capita GDP (at PPP) was at $6,860 during 2009–10 fiscal, making it one of the richest cities in India. The tertiary sector contributes 78.4% of Delhi&#x27;s gross SDP followed by secondary and primary sectors with 20.2% and 1.4% contribution respectively.

The gross state domestic product (GSDP) of Delhi at prices for the year 2011–12 has been estimated at Rs 3.13 trillion (short scale), which is an increase of 18.7 per cent over the previous fiscal.

== Culture ==

New Delhi is a cosmopolitan city due to the multi-ethnic and multi-cultural presence of the vast Indian bureaucracy and political system. The city&#x27;s capital status has amplified the importance of national events and holidays. National events such as Republic Day, Independence Day and &quot;Gandhi Jayanti&quot; (Gandhi&#x27;s birthday) are celebrated with great enthusiasm in New Delhi and the rest of India. On India&#x27;s Independence Day (15 August), the prime minister of India addresses the nation from the Red Fort. Most celebrate the day by flying kites, which are considered a symbol of freedom. The Republic Day Parade is a large cultural and military parade showcasing India&#x27;s cultural diversity and military might.

Religious festivals include Diwali (the festival of light), Maha Shivaratri, Teej, Durga Puja, Chhath Puja, Mahavir Jayanti, Guru Nanak Jayanti, Holi, Lohri, Eid ul-Fitr, Eid ul-Adha, Easter, Raksha Bandhan, and Christmas. The Qutub Festival is a cultural event during which performances of musicians and dancers from all over India are showcased at night, with the Qutub Minar as the chosen backdrop of the event. Other events such as Kite Flying Festival, International Mango Festival and &quot;Vasant Panchami&quot; (the Spring Festival) are held every year in Delhi.

In 2007, the Japanese Buddhist organisation Nipponzan Myohoji decided to build a Peace Pagoda in the city containing Buddha relics. It was inaugurated by the Dalai Lama.

=== Historic sites, museums and gardens ===
New Delhi is home to several historic sites and museums. The National Museum, which began with an exhibition of Indian art and artefacts at the Royal Academy in London in the winter of 1947–48, was later at the end was shown at the Rashtrapati Bhawan in 1949. Later it was to form a permanent National Museum. On 15 August 1949, the National Museum was formally inaugurated and has 200,000 works of art, both of Indian and foreign origin, covering over 5,000 years.

The India Gate, which was built in 1931, was inspired by the Arc de Triomphe in Paris. It is the national monument of India commemorating the 90,000 soldiers of the Indian Army who died while fighting for the British Raj in World War I and the Third Anglo-Afghan War. The monument is barricaded now with entry to the inside arch restricted.

The Rajpath, which was built similar to the Champs-Élysées in Paris, is the ceremonial boulevard for the Republic of India, located in New Delhi. The annual Republic Day parade takes place here on 26 January. The Beating retreat takes place here two days later.
Gandhi Smriti in New Delhi is the location where Mahatma Gandhi spent the last 144 days of his life and was assassinated on 30 January 1948. Rajghat is the place where Gandhi was cremated on 31 January 1948 after his assassination and his ashes were buried and make it a final resting place beside the sanctity of the Yamuna River. The Raj Ghat in the shape of the large square platform with black marble was designed by architect Vanu Bhuta.

Jantar Mantar located in Connaught Place was built by Maharaja Jai Singh II of Jaipur. It consists of 13 architectural astronomy instruments. The primary purpose of the observatory was to compile astronomical tables, and to predict the times and movements of the sun, moon and planets.

New Delhi is home to Indira Gandhi Memorial Museum, National Gallery of Modern Art, National Museum of Natural History, National Rail Museum, National Handicrafts and Handlooms Museum, National Philatelic Museum, Nehru Planetarium, Shankar&#x27;s International Dolls Museum. and Supreme Court of India Museum,

In the coming years, a new National War Memorial and Museum will be constructed in New Delhi for .

New Delhi is particularly renowned for its beautifully landscaped gardens that can look quite stunning in spring. The largest of these include Buddha Jayanti Park and the historic Lodi Gardens. In addition, there are the gardens in the Presidential Estate, the gardens along the Rajpath and India Gate, the gardens along Shanti Path, the Rose Garden, Nehru Park and the Railway Garden in Chanakya Puri. Also of note is the garden adjacent to the Jangpura Metro Station near the Defence Colony Flyover, as are the roundabout and neighbourhood gardens throughout the city.

The New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) area was declared the cleanest in North India, based on solid waste management, access to sanitation and other parameters of cleanliness, under the zone-wise Swachh Survekshan 2017.

== Cityscape ==
Much of New Delhi, planned by the leading 20th-century British architect Edwin Lutyens, was laid out to be the central administrative area of the city as a testament to Britain&#x27;s imperial ambitions. New Delhi is structured around two central promenades called the Rajpath and the Janpath. The Rajpath, or King&#x27;s Way, stretches from the Rashtrapati Bhavan to the India Gate. The Janpath (), formerly Queen&#x27;s Way, begins at Connaught Circus and cuts the Rajpath at right angles. Nineteen foreign embassies are located on the nearby Shantipath (), making it the largest diplomatic enclave in India.

At the heart of the city is the magnificent Rashtrapati Bhavan (formerly known as Viceroy&#x27;s House) which sits atop Raisina Hill. The Secretariat, which houses ministries of the government of India, flanks out of the Rashtrapati Bhavan. The Parliament House, designed by Herbert Baker, is located at the Sansad Marg, which runs parallel to the Rajpath. Connaught Place is a large, circular commercial area in New Delhi, modelled after the Royal Crescent in England. Twelve separate roads lead out of the outer ring of Connaught Place, one of them being the Janpath.

=== Architecture ===
The New Delhi town plan, like its architecture, was chosen with one single chief consideration: to be a symbol of British power and supremacy. All other decisions were subordinate to this, and it was this framework that dictated the choice and application of symbology and influences from both Hindu and Islamic architecture.

It took about 20 years to build the city from 1911. Many elements of New Delhi architecture borrow from indigenous sources; however, they fit into a British Classical/Palladian tradition. The fact that there were any indigenous features in the design was due to the persistence and urging of both the Viceroy Hardinge and historians like E.B. Havell.

In the year 2019, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and Government of India introduced the Central Vista redevelopment project proposing the redevelopment of over , costing .

== Transport ==

=== Air ===
Indira Gandhi International Airport, situated to the southwest of Delhi, is the main gateway for the city&#x27;s domestic and international civilian air traffic. In 2012–13, the airport was used by more than 35 million passengers, making it one of the busiest airports in South Asia. Terminal 3, which cost to construct between 2007 and 2010, handles an additional 37 million passengers annually.

The Delhi Flying Club, established in 1928 with two de Havilland Moth aircraft named &quot;Delhi&quot; and &quot;Roshanara&quot;, was based at &quot;Safdarjung Airport&quot; which started operations in 1929, when it was the Delhi&#x27;s only airport and the second in India. The airport functioned until 2001; however, in January 2002 the government closed the airport for flying activities because of security concerns following the New York attacks in September 2001. Since then, the club only carries out aircraft maintenance courses, and is used for helicopter rides to Indira Gandhi International Airport for VIP including the president and the prime minister.

In 2010, Indira Gandhi International Airport (IGIA) was conferred the fourth best airport award in the world in the 15–25 million category, and &quot;Best Improved Airport&quot; in the Asia-Pacific Region by Airports Council International. The airport was rated as the &quot;Best airport in the world&quot; in the 25–40 million passengers category in 2015, by Airports Council International. Delhi Airport also bags two awards for &quot;The Best Airport in Central Asia/India&quot; and &quot;Best Airport Staff in Central Asia/India&quot; at the Skytrax World Airport Awards 2015.

A second airport, Noida International Airport, is currently being built in Jewar.

=== Road ===
New Delhi has one of India&#x27;s largest bus transport systems. Buses are operated by the state-owned Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC), which owns the largest fleet of compressed natural gas (CNG)-fueled buses in the world and Delhi Transit. Personal vehicles especially cars also form a major chunk of vehicles plying on New Delhi roads. New Delhi has the highest number of registered cars compared to any other metropolitan city in India. Taxis and Auto Rickshaws also ply on New Delhi roads in large numbers. New Delhi has one of the highest road density in India and average vehicle speed is around in peak hours in the city.

Some roads and expressways serve as important pillars of New Delhi&#x27;s road infrastructure:
* Inner Ring Road is one of the most important &quot;state highways&quot; in New Delhi. It is a long circular road, which connects important areas in New Delhi. Owing to more than 2 dozen grade-separators/flyovers, the road is almost signal-free.
* Outer Ring Road is another major artery in New Delhi that links far-flung areas of Delhi.
* The Delhi Noida Direct Flyway (DND Flyway) is an eight-laned access controlled tolled expressway which connects New Delhi and Delhi to Noida (an important satellite city of Uttar Pradesh). The acronym DND stands for &quot;Delhi-Noida Direct&quot;.
* &#x27;The Delhi Gurgaon Expressway is a expressway connecting New Delhi to Gurgaon, an important satellite city of Haryana.
* The Delhi Faridabad Skyway is controlled tolled expressway which connects New Delhi to Faridabad, an important satellite city of Haryana.

==== National Highways ====
New Delhi is connected by road to the rest of India through National highways:
* National Highway 19 (India) (old number: NH 2), commonly referred to as Delhi-Kolkata Road is a busy Indian National Highway that runs through the states of Delhi, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, and West Bengal.
* National Highway 44 (India) is a National Highway that connects Srinagar with Kanyakumari and passes through Delhi.
* National Highway 48 (India) is a National Highway that connects New Delhi with Chennai.
* National Highway 9 (India) is a National Highway that connects Malout in Punjab to Pithoragarh in Uttarakhand and passes through Delhi.

=== Railway ===

New Delhi is a major junction in the Indian railway network and is the headquarters of the Northern Railway. The five main railway stations are New Delhi railway station, Delhi Junction, Hazrat Nizamuddin railway station, Anand Vihar Terminal and Sarai Rohilla. The Delhi Ring Railway, a circular railway network in Delhi that runs parallel to the Ring Road, is a part of Delhi&#x27;s suburban railway services.

=== Metro ===
The Delhi Metro is a rapid transit system serving Delhi, Faridabad, Ghaziabad, Gurgaon and Noida in the National Capital Region of India. Delhi Metro is the world&#x27;s 12th largest metro system in terms of length. Delhi Metro was India&#x27;s first modern public transportation system, which had revolutionised travel by providing a fast, reliable, safe, and comfortable means of transport. Presently, the network consists of 10 colour-coded lines serving 255 stations with a total length of . The network has now crossed the boundaries of Delhi to reach Ghaziabad and Noida in Uttar Pradesh, and Faridabad and Gurgaon in Haryana. All stations have escalators, elevators, and tactile tiles to guide the visually impaired from station entrances to trains. It has a combination of elevated, at-grade, and underground lines, and uses both broad gauge and standard gauge rolling stock. Four types of rolling stock are used: Mitsubishi-ROTEM Broad gauge, Bombardier MOVIA, Mitsubishi-ROTEM Standard gauge, and CAF Beasain Standard gauge. According to a study, Delhi Metro has helped in removing about 390,000 vehicles from the streets of Delhi.

Delhi Metro is being built and operated by the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited (DMRC), a state-owned company with equal equity participation from the Government of India and the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi. However, the organisation is under administrative control of the Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India. Besides the construction and operation of the Delhi metro, DMRC is also involved in the planning and implementation of metro rail, monorail and high-speed rail projects in India and providing consultancy services to other metro projects in the country as well as abroad. The Delhi Metro project was spearheaded by E. Sreedharan, the managing director of DMRC and popularly known as the &quot;Metro Man&quot; of India. He famously resigned from DMRC, taking moral responsibility for a metro bridge collapse which took five lives. Sreedharan was awarded with the Legion of Honour by the French government for his contribution to Delhi Metro.

== Sports ==
The city hosted the 2010 Commonwealth Games and annually hosts Delhi Half Marathon foot-race. The city has previously hosted the 1951 Asian Games and the 1982 Asian Games. New Delhi was interested in bidding for the 2019 Asian Games but was turned down by the government on 2 August 2010 amid allegations of corruption in 2010 Commonwealth Games. The city also had a bid to host the 1992 Summer Olympics, but withdrew in March 1986, seven months before the host selection.
Major sporting venues in New Delhi include the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, Ambedkar Stadium, Indira Gandhi Indoor Stadium, Arun Jaitley Stadium, R.K. Khanna Tennis Complex, Dhyan Chand National Stadium and Siri Fort Sports Complex. 
== International relations and organisations ==


The city is home to numerous international organisations. The Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology of the UNESCAP servicing the Asia-Pacific region is headquartered in New Delhi. New Delhi is home to most UN regional offices in India namely the UNDP, UNODC, UNESCO, UNICEF, WFP, UNV, UNCTAD, FAO, UNFPA, WHO, World Bank, ILO, IMF, UNIFEM, IFC and UNAIDS. UNHCR Representation in India is also located in the city.

New Delhi hosts 145 foreign embassies and high commissions.

=== Summits, conferences and conventions ===
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development hosted its second meeting conference in the year 1968 at New Delhi.

New Delhi hosted the 7th NAM Summit in 1983, 4th BRICS Summit in 2012, IBSA Summit in 2015, and 5th Global Conference on CyberSpace in 2017. India has also host the G20 summit in 2023 in New Delhi.

=== Sister cities ===

* Moscow, Russia
* Beijing, China (2013)

== See also ==
* Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation
* Urban Health Resource Centre

== References ==
=== Notes ===
===Citations===
== Bibliography ==
* 
* Johnson, David A. &quot;A British Empire for the twentieth century: the inauguration of New Delhi, 1931&quot;, &quot;Urban History&quot;, Dec 2008, Vol. 35 Issue 3, pp. 462–487.
* 
* Ridley, Jane. &quot;Edwin Lutyens, New Delhi, and the Architecture of Imperialism&quot;, &quot;Journal of Imperial &amp; Commonwealth History,&quot; May 1998, Vol. 26 Issue 2, pp. 67–83.
* Sonne, Wolfgang. &quot;Representing the State: Capital City Planning in the Early Twentieth Century&quot; (2003) 367pp; compares New Delhi, Canberra, Washington &amp; Berlin.

== External links ==
* New Delhi Government Portal
* New Delhi Municipal Council
* Official website of Delhi Tourism</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="0" end="9" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q930439" start="15" end="18" title="ISO 15919" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="50" end="57" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="61" end="66" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="85" end="120" title="Delhi" label="National Capital Territory of Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="179" end="198" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q677555" start="212" end="230" title="Rashtrapati Bhavan" label="Rashtrapati Bhavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q106103956" start="232" end="245" title="New Parliament House, New Delhi" label="Sansad Bhavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="255" end="268" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16861604" start="285" end="297" title="Municipal governance in India" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429205" start="334" end="361" title="New Delhi Municipal Council" label="New Delhi Municipal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595640" start="390" end="409" title="Lutyens&amp;#x27; Delhi" label="Lutyens&amp;#x27; Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726398" start="475" end="498" title="List of districts in India" label="administrative district"/>
<link wikidata="Q8560886" start="504" end="522" title="New Delhi district" label="New Delhi district"/>
<link wikidata="Q174844" start="789" end="797" title="megacity" label="megacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249481" start="812" end="835" title="National Capital Region (India)" label="National Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q207098" start="1006" end="1015" title="Ghaziabad" label="Ghaziabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q278204" start="1017" end="1022" title="Noida" label="Noida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711899" start="1024" end="1037" title="Greater Noida" label="Greater Noida"/>
<link wikidata="Q200237" start="1039" end="1045" title="Meerut" label="Meerut"/>
<link wikidata="Q123630871" start="1047" end="1057" title="YEIDA City" label="YEIDA City"/>
<link wikidata="Q238508" start="1059" end="1066" title="Gurgaon" label="Gurgaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q200663" start="1072" end="1081" title="Faridabad" label="Faridabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="1155" end="1163" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q761614" start="1175" end="1195" title="Visit of King George V to India" label="Delhi Durbar of 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1216" end="1223" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q378157" start="1235" end="1248" title="Edwin Lutyens" label="Edwin Lutyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q382771" start="1253" end="1266" title="Herbert Baker" label="Herbert Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="1324" end="1352" title="Viceroy and Governor-General of India" label="Viceroy and Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q333426" start="1353" end="1358" title="Lord Irwin" label="Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="1419" end="1427" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="1464" end="1476" title="British Raj" label="British Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047143" start="1593" end="1612" title="Partition of Bengal (1905)" label="Partition of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q271878" start="1624" end="1630" title="Lord Curzon" label="Curzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242297" start="1948" end="1957" title="Old Delhi" label="Old Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="2029" end="2043" title="History of India" label="medieval India"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="2052" end="2067" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="2089" end="2102" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="2325" end="2352" title="British Raj" label="Government of British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q12412221" start="2536" end="2561" title="Land Acquisition Act 1894" label="Land Acquisition Act 1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q761614" start="2575" end="2587" title="Delhi Durbar" label="Delhi Durbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172223" start="2692" end="2707" title="Coronation Park, Delhi" label="Coronation Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413715" start="2709" end="2722" title="Kingsway Camp" label="Kingsway Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="2753" end="2760" title="the Raj" label="the Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="2783" end="2791" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="2795" end="2800" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q76927" start="2846" end="2850" title="Mary of Teck" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q378157" start="2950" end="2963" title="Edwin Lutyens" label="Edwin Lutyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q382771" start="3002" end="3015" title="Herbert Baker" label="Herbert Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q12458917" start="3089" end="3100" title="Sobha Singh (builder)" label="Sobha Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511605" start="3175" end="3191" title="Tughlaqabad Fort" label="Tughlaqabad Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3318" end="3329" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q98035509" start="3410" end="3425" title="A.E.P. Griessen" label="A.E.P. Griessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595640" start="3490" end="3509" title="Lutyens&amp;#x27; Delhi" label="Lutyens&amp;#x27; Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="3688" end="3708" title="imperialism" label="imperial aspirations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544993" start="3847" end="3861" title="George Swinton" label="George Swinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q378157" start="3898" end="3905" title="Lutyens" label="Lutyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q245347" start="4143" end="4153" title="India Gate" label="India Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q677555" start="4213" end="4233" title="Viceroy&amp;#x27;s House" label="Viceroy&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270707" start="4250" end="4259" title="Paharganj" label="Paharganj"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630462" start="4442" end="4454" title="Raisina Hill" label="Raisina Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428765" start="4484" end="4487" title="Meo (ethnic group)" label="Meo"/>
<link wikidata="Q677555" start="4516" end="4534" title="Rashtrapati Bhawan" label="Rashtrapati Bhawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151529" start="4647" end="4656" title="Purana Qila" label="Dinapanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975540" start="4704" end="4716" title="Indraprastha" label="Indraprastha"/>
<link wikidata="Q761614" start="4811" end="4823" title="Delhi Durbar" label="Delhi Durbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15275798" start="4919" end="4934" title="Secretariat Building, New Delhi" label="the Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504164" start="4940" end="4947" title="Rajpath" label="Rajpath"/>
<link wikidata="Q245347" start="4999" end="5009" title="India Gate" label="India Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="5174" end="5190" title="Parliament of India" label="Parliament House"/>
<link wikidata="Q12455046" start="5235" end="5246" title="Sansad Marg" label="Sansad Marg"/>
<link wikidata="Q375624" start="5306" end="5328" title="Safdarjung&amp;#x27;s Tomb" label="Safdarjung&amp;#x27;s Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965215" start="5375" end="5402" title="Lutyens&amp;#x27; Bungalow Zone" label="Lutyens&amp;#x27; Bungalow Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630462" start="5458" end="5470" title="Raisina Hill" label="Raisina Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="5526" end="5542" title="Parliament of India" label="Parliament House"/>
<link wikidata="Q42941" start="5709" end="5713" title="Agra" label="Agra"/>
<link wikidata="Q245347" start="5817" end="5827" title="India Gate" label="India Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504164" start="5843" end="5850" title="Rajpath" label="Rajpath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633132" start="5885" end="5910" title="Old Delhi Railway Station" label="Old Delhi Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="5986" end="5998" title="Yamuna River" label="Yamuna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742296" start="6036" end="6061" title="New Delhi Railway Station" label="New Delhi Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527117" start="6104" end="6115" title="Ajmeri Gate" label="Ajmeri Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270707" start="6121" end="6130" title="Paharganj" label="Paharganj"/>
<link wikidata="Q15275798" start="6278" end="6297" title="Secretariat Building, New Delhi" label="Central Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q106103956" start="6299" end="6315" title="Sansad Bhavan" label="Parliament House"/>
<link wikidata="Q245347" start="6345" end="6355" title="India Gate" label="India Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341950" start="6428" end="6443" title="Connaught Place, New Delhi" label="Connaught Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q160558" start="6499" end="6512" title="Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught and Strathearn" label="Prince Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264509" start="6518" end="6535" title="Duke of Connaught" label="Duke of Connaught"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716046" start="6568" end="6586" title="Robert Tor Russell" label="Robert Tor Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061726" start="6611" end="6634" title="Central Public Works Department" label="Public Works Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q693367" start="6762" end="6773" title="North Delhi" label="North Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242297" start="6876" end="6885" title="Old Delhi" label="Old Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253776" start="6915" end="6941" title="Delhi Legislative Assembly" label="Delhi Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q817165" start="7093" end="7110" title="Bengal Presidency" label="Bengal Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772596" start="7115" end="7132" title="Madras Presidency" label="Madras Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580409" start="7186" end="7197" title="Gole Market" label="Gole Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644977" start="7336" end="7347" title="Lodi Colony" label="Lodi Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985076" start="7362" end="7374" title="Lodi Gardens" label="Lodi Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="7420" end="7431" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q56106" start="7480" end="7492" title="Independence Day (India)" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="7608" end="7627" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q467745" start="7665" end="7680" title="union territory" label="union territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="7762" end="7808" title="Constitution of India" label="Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595640" start="8169" end="8188" title="Lutyens&amp;#x27; Delhi" label="Lutyens&amp;#x27; Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061726" start="8216" end="8247" title="Central Public Works Department" label="Central Public Works Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q12426223" start="8355" end="8367" title="Chanakyapuri" label="Chanakyapuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q24948887" start="8503" end="8514" title="Shantipath" label="Shanti Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="8677" end="8696" title="Indo-Gangetic Plain" label="Indo-Gangetic Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q626690" start="8811" end="8824" title="Aravalli Range" label="Aravali Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253810" start="8869" end="8880" title="Delhi Ridge" label="Delhi Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="8970" end="8982" title="Yamuna River" label="Yamuna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q83486" start="9060" end="9068" title="Shahdara district" label="Shahdara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327269" start="9116" end="9131" title="Earthquake hazard zoning of India" label="seismic zone-IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="9422" end="9427" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="9736" end="9761" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="9763" end="9769" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="9802" end="9823" title="hot semi-arid climate" label="hot semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="9825" end="9831" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182878" start="10190" end="10200" title="dust storm" label="dust storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="10240" end="10248" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q643546" start="10249" end="10253" title="haze" label="haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="10261" end="10268" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q923628" start="10641" end="10644" title="India Meteorological Department" label="Met"/>
<link wikidata="Q821275" start="10785" end="10798" title="Palam Airport" label="Palam Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391599" start="10969" end="10975" title="Mercer (consulting firm)" label="Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="11080" end="11091" title="air quality" label="air quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="11111" end="11136" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="11279" end="11324" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="11371" end="11376" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973296" start="11381" end="11386" title="IQAir" label="IQAir"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="11518" end="11531" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q20747255" start="11594" end="11614" title="alternate-day travel" label="alternate-day travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="11703" end="11708" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="12194" end="12216" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q720050" start="12538" end="12560" title="compressed natural gas" label="compressed natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317952" start="13177" end="13183" title="Dwarka, Delhi" label="Dwarka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020933" start="13392" end="13418" title="Indian Medical Association" label="Indian Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260325" start="13509" end="13521" title="Punjabi Bagh" label="Punjabi Bagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364111" start="13539" end="13556" title="air quality index" label="air quality index"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288640" start="13575" end="13583" title="Rama Krishna Puram" label="RK Puram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751289" start="13652" end="13663" title="Anand Vihar" label="Anand Vihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="13762" end="13787" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661242" start="13938" end="13948" title="Indian Institute of Technology Bombay" label="IIT Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972508" start="13974" end="14004" title="McKelvey School of Engineering" label="McKelvey School of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="14008" end="14042" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q88580475" start="14174" end="14209" title="COVID-19 pandemic lockdown in India" label="COVID-19 pandemic lockdown in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="14236" end="14242" title="Yamuna" label="Yamuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="14247" end="14253" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="14667" end="14672" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="14729" end="14742" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="14986" end="14994" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="15082" end="15088" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="15098" end="15108" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="15117" end="15121" title="Sikh" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="15131" end="15135" title="Jain" label="Jain"/>
<link wikidata="Q200263" start="15176" end="15182" title="Parsi people" label="Parsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="15184" end="15192" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="15199" end="15202" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="15309" end="15328" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633119" start="15343" end="15362" title="Government of Delhi" label="Government of Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429205" start="15508" end="15535" title="New Delhi Municipal Council" label="New Delhi Municipal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192117" start="15617" end="15647" title="Municipal Corporation of Delhi" label="Municipal Corporation of Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192604" start="15652" end="15674" title="Delhi Cantonment Board" label="Delhi Cantonment Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790154" start="15847" end="15881" title="Chief Minister of Delhi" label="Chief Minister of the NCT of Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8560886" start="16081" end="16099" title="New Delhi district" label="New Delhi district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406722" start="16359" end="16381" title="State Domestic Product" label="State Domestic Product"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="16421" end="16424" title="Purchasing power parity" label="PPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q725503" start="16590" end="16601" title="Long and short scales" label="short scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q725503" start="16629" end="16640" title="Long and short scales" label="short scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341950" start="16655" end="16670" title="Connaught Place, New Delhi" label="Connaught Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="16679" end="16690" title="North India" label="North India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858263" start="16810" end="16825" title="Barakhamba Road" label="Barakhamba Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406722" start="17783" end="17805" title="State Domestic Product" label="State Domestic Product"/>
<link wikidata="Q80524" start="17815" end="17818" title="Indian rupee" label="Rs."/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="18162" end="18177" title="Tertiary sector of industry" label="tertiary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="18234" end="18243" title="Secondary sector of industry" label="secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="18248" end="18255" title="Primary sector of industry" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q725503" start="18432" end="18443" title="Long and short scales" label="short scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q224747" start="18623" end="18641" title="Indian bureaucracy" label="Indian bureaucracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139536" start="18781" end="18793" title="Republic Day (India)" label="Republic Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q56106" start="18795" end="18811" title="Independence Day (India)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q658185" start="18822" end="18836" title="Gandhi Jayanti" label="Gandhi Jayanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="18991" end="19014" title="prime minister of India" label="prime minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q45957" start="19045" end="19053" title="Red Fort" label="Red Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017832" start="19141" end="19160" title="Republic Day Parade" label="Republic Day Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q10244" start="19293" end="19299" title="Diwali" label="Diwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q848070" start="19325" end="19340" title="Maha Shivaratri" label="Maha Shivaratri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630226" start="19342" end="19346" title="Teej" label="Teej"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145922" start="19348" end="19358" title="Durga Puja" label="Durga Puja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671645" start="19360" end="19371" title="Chhath" label="Chhath Puja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612687" start="19373" end="19388" title="Mahavir Jayanti" label="Mahavir Jayanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174361" start="19390" end="19408" title="Guru Nanak Jayanti" label="Guru Nanak Jayanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q10259" start="19410" end="19414" title="Holi" label="Holi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006213" start="19416" end="19421" title="Lohri" label="Lohri"/>
<link wikidata="Q464458" start="19423" end="19434" title="Eid ul-Fitr" label="Eid ul-Fitr"/>
<link wikidata="Q514400" start="19436" end="19447" title="Eid ul-Adha" label="Eid ul-Adha"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="19449" end="19455" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10266" start="19457" end="19471" title="Raksha Bandhan" label="Raksha Bandhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="19477" end="19486" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273024" start="19492" end="19506" title="Qutub Festival" label="Qutub Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q187635" start="19631" end="19642" title="Qutub Minar" label="Qutub Minar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776600" start="19723" end="19751" title="International Mango Festival, Delhi" label="International Mango Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q220281" start="19762" end="19777" title="Vasant Panchami" label="Vasant Panchami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993340" start="19881" end="19898" title="Nipponzan Myohoji" label="Nipponzan Myohoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456873" start="19918" end="19930" title="Peace Pagoda" label="Peace Pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q17293" start="19995" end="20005" title="14th Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q270920" start="20196" end="20209" title="Royal Academy" label="Royal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q677555" start="20284" end="20302" title="Rashtrapati Bhawan" label="Rashtrapati Bhawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q245347" start="20523" end="20533" title="India Gate" label="India Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="20580" end="20595" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="20684" end="20695" title="Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="20728" end="20739" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="20743" end="20754" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259237" start="20763" end="20785" title="Third Anglo-Afghan War" label="Third Anglo-Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504164" start="20865" end="20872" title="Rajpath" label="Rajpath"/>
<link wikidata="Q550" start="20905" end="20919" title="Champs-Élysées" label="Champs-Élysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="20966" end="20983" title="Republic of India" label="Republic of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017832" start="21018" end="21037" title="Delhi Republic Day parade" label="Republic Day parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381516" start="21123" end="21136" title="Gandhi Smriti" label="Gandhi Smriti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="21172" end="21186" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210083" start="21264" end="21271" title="Raj Ghat and associated memorials" label="Rajghat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350154" start="21340" end="21353" title="Assassination of Mahatma Gandhi" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045115" start="21567" end="21580" title="Jantar Mantar (Delhi)" label="Jantar Mantar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341950" start="21592" end="21607" title="Connaught Place, New Delhi" label="Connaught Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163330" start="21621" end="21629" title="Maharaja" label="Maharaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392864" start="21630" end="21642" title="Jai Singh II" label="Jai Singh II"/>
<link wikidata="Q66485" start="21646" end="21652" title="Jaipur" label="Jaipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="21686" end="21695" title="astronomical" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338832" start="21906" end="21936" title="National Gallery of Modern Art" label="National Gallery of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974487" start="21938" end="21972" title="National Museum of Natural History, New Delhi" label="National Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138924" start="21974" end="21994" title="National Rail Museum, New Delhi" label="National Rail Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630755" start="21996" end="22037" title="National Handicrafts and Handlooms Museum, New Delhi" label="National Handicrafts and Handlooms Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974901" start="22039" end="22065" title="National Philatelic Museum, New Delhi" label="National Philatelic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987903" start="22067" end="22084" title="Nehru Planetarium" label="Nehru Planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721827" start="22086" end="22127" title="Shankar&amp;#x27;s International Dolls Museum" label="Shankar&amp;#x27;s International Dolls Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17747063" start="22192" end="22213" title="National War Memorial (India)" label="National War Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253810" start="22408" end="22427" title="Buddha Jayanti Park" label="Buddha Jayanti Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985076" start="22445" end="22457" title="Lodi Gardens" label="Lodi Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429205" start="22841" end="22868" title="New Delhi Municipal Council" label="New Delhi Municipal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q378157" start="23148" end="23161" title="Edwin Lutyens" label="Edwin Lutyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q787113" start="23322" end="23331" title="promenade" label="promenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504164" start="23344" end="23351" title="Rajpath" label="Rajpath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635068" start="23360" end="23367" title="Janpath" label="Janpath"/>
<link wikidata="Q677555" start="23421" end="23439" title="Rashtrapati Bhavan" label="Rashtrapati Bhavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q245347" start="23447" end="23457" title="India Gate" label="India Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635068" start="23463" end="23470" title="Janpath" label="Janpath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341950" start="23512" end="23528" title="Connaught Circus" label="Connaught Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630462" start="23807" end="23819" title="Raisina Hill" label="Raisina Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341950" start="24044" end="24059" title="Connaught Place, New Delhi" label="Connaught Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289728" start="24130" end="24144" title="Royal Crescent" label="Royal Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q264649" start="24773" end="24782" title="Palladian architecture" label="Palladian"/>
<link wikidata="Q335903" start="24915" end="24923" title="Charles Hardinge, 1st Baron Hardinge of Penshurst" label="Hardinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392799" start="24944" end="24955" title="Ernest Binfield Havell" label="E.B. Havell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294334" start="24976" end="25013" title="Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs" label="Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="25018" end="25037" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q821275" start="25167" end="25202" title="Indira Gandhi International Airport" label="Indira Gandhi International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379189" start="25220" end="25238" title="South West Delhi" label="southwest of Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037086" start="25617" end="25634" title="de Havilland Moth" label="de Havilland Moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595637" start="25714" end="25732" title="Safdarjung Airport" label="Safdarjung Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="25995" end="26033" title="9/11" label="the New York attacks in September 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q409068" start="26440" end="26470" title="Airports Council International" label="Airports Council International"/>
<link wikidata="Q735415" start="26778" end="26785" title="Skytrax" label="Skytrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812243" start="26832" end="26859" title="Noida International Airport" label="Noida International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595653" start="27013" end="27040" title="Delhi Transport Corporation" label="Delhi Transport Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q720050" start="27080" end="27102" title="compressed natural gas" label="compressed natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q510662" start="27646" end="27655" title="Ring Road" label="Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q510662" start="27893" end="27902" title="Ring Road" label="Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205783" start="28010" end="28020" title="DND Flyway" label="DND Flyway"/>
<link wikidata="Q278204" start="28114" end="28119" title="Noida" label="Noida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="28152" end="28165" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253763" start="28239" end="28263" title="Delhi Gurgaon Expressway" label="Delhi Gurgaon Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q238508" start="28304" end="28311" title="Gurgaon" label="Gurgaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="28344" end="28351" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253757" start="28359" end="28381" title="Delhi Faridabad Skyway" label="Delhi Faridabad Skyway"/>
<link wikidata="Q200663" start="28442" end="28451" title="Faridabad" label="Faridabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="28484" end="28491" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q25209307" start="28603" end="28630" title="National Highway 19 (India)" label="National Highway 19 (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="28767" end="28774" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="28791" end="28796" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="28813" end="28824" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q643144" start="28828" end="28855" title="National Highway 44 (India)" label="National Highway 44 (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28178832" start="28946" end="28973" title="National Highway 48 (India)" label="National Highway 48 (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="29025" end="29032" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212239" start="29036" end="29062" title="National Highway 9 (India)" label="National Highway 9 (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349902" start="29099" end="29105" title="Malout" label="Malout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249870" start="29119" end="29130" title="Pithoragarh" label="Pithoragarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595642" start="29281" end="29297" title="Northern Railway (India)" label="Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742296" start="29334" end="29359" title="New Delhi railway station" label="New Delhi railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633132" start="29361" end="29375" title="Old Delhi Railway Station" label="Delhi Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723139" start="29377" end="29410" title="Hazrat Nizamuddin railway station" label="Hazrat Nizamuddin railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751289" start="29412" end="29432" title="Anand Vihar Terminal railway station" label="Anand Vihar Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635051" start="29437" end="29450" title="Sarai Rohilla" label="Sarai Rohilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q97170365" start="29456" end="29474" title="Delhi Ring Railway" label="Delhi Ring Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334740" start="29538" end="29547" title="Inner Ring Road, Delhi" label="Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q271195" start="29621" end="29632" title="Delhi Metro" label="Delhi Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q200663" start="29674" end="29683" title="Faridabad" label="Faridabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q207098" start="29685" end="29694" title="Ghaziabad" label="Ghaziabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q238508" start="29696" end="29703" title="Gurgaon" label="Gurgaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q278204" start="29708" end="29713" title="Noida" label="Noida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30045" end="30066" title="#Network" label="10 colour-coded lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278116" start="30075" end="30087" title="List of Delhi Metro stations" label="255 stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029339" start="30807" end="30843" title="Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited" label="Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273577" start="31425" end="31438" title="E. Sreedharan" label="E. Sreedharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="31672" end="31688" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q695233" start="31785" end="31808" title="2010 Commonwealth Games" label="2010 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184175" start="31828" end="31847" title="Delhi Half Marathon" label="Delhi Half Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29267" start="31894" end="31910" title="1951 Asian Games" label="1951 Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q729509" start="31919" end="31935" title="1982 Asian Games" label="1982 Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209909" start="31981" end="31997" title="2019 Asian Games" label="2019 Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8488" start="32148" end="32168" title="1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q864849" start="32285" end="32309" title="Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, Delhi" label="Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q456749" start="32311" end="32327" title="Ambedkar Stadium" label="Ambedkar Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269725" start="32329" end="32357" title="Indira Gandhi Arena" label="Indira Gandhi Indoor Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217611" start="32359" end="32379" title="Arun Jaitley Stadium" label="Arun Jaitley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357255" start="32381" end="32407" title="R.K. Khanna Tennis Complex" label="R.K. Khanna Tennis Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317050" start="32409" end="32437" title="Dhyan Chand National Stadium" label="Dhyan Chand National Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530699" start="32442" end="32466" title="Siri Fort Sports Complex" label="Siri Fort Sports Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142901" start="32640" end="32647" title="UNESCAP" label="UNESCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="32779" end="32783" title="UNDP" label="UNDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q636107" start="32785" end="32790" title="UNODC" label="UNODC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="32792" end="32798" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="32800" end="32806" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q204344" start="32808" end="32811" title="WFP" label="WFP"/>
<link wikidata="Q14288" start="32813" end="32816" title="United Nations Office at Vienna" label="UNV"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="32818" end="32824" title="UNCTAD" label="UNCTAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="32826" end="32829" title="FAO" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q623036" start="32831" end="32836" title="UNFPA" label="UNFPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="32838" end="32841" title="WHO" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="32843" end="32853" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="32855" end="32858" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="32860" end="32863" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q487526" start="32865" end="32871" title="UNIFEM" label="UNIFEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="32873" end="32876" title="International Finance Corporation" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q588982" start="32881" end="32887" title="UNAIDS" label="UNAIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q27922066" start="32889" end="32918" title="UNHCR Representation in India" label="UNHCR Representation in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616369" start="32959" end="32964" title="List of diplomatic missions in India" label="hosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="33055" end="33105" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33106" end="33142" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development#Meetings" label="hosted its second meeting conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="33196" end="33210" title="NAM Summit" label="7th NAM Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086251" start="33220" end="33236" title="2012 BRICS summit" label="4th BRICS Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570993" start="33246" end="33257" title="IBSA Dialogue Forum" label="IBSA Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080836" start="33275" end="33306" title="Global Conference on CyberSpace" label="Global Conference on CyberSpace"/>
<link wikidata="Q19771" start="33340" end="33343" title="G20" label="G20"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="33399" end="33405" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="33416" end="33423" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253826" start="33456" end="33512" title="Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation" label="Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899921" start="33515" end="33543" title="Urban Health Resource Centre" label="Urban Health Resource Centre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51587" wikidata="Q7525" url="?curid=51587" title="Sevastopol">
<text>Sevastopol (), sometimes written Sebastopol, is the largest city in Crimea and a major port on the Black Sea. Due to its strategic location and the navigability of the city&#x27;s harbours, Sevastopol has been an important port and naval base throughout its history. Since the city&#x27;s founding in 1783 it has been a major base for Russia&#x27;s Black Sea Fleet. During the Cold War of the 20th century, it was a closed city. The total administrative area is and includes a significant amount of rural land. The urban population, largely concentrated around Sevastopol Bay, is 479,394, and the total population is 547,820.

Sevastopol, along with the rest of Crimea, is internationally recognised as part of Ukraine, and under the Ukrainian legal framework, it is administratively one of two cities with special status (the other being Kyiv). However, it has been occupied by Russia since 27 February 2014, before Russia annexed Crimea on 18 March 2014 and gave it the status of a federal city of Russia. Both Ukraine and Russia consider the city administratively separate from the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the Republic of Crimea, respectively. The city&#x27;s population has an ethnic Russian majority and a substantial minority of Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars.

Sevastopol&#x27;s unique naval and maritime features have been the basis for a robust economy. The city enjoys mild winters and moderately warm summers, characteristics that help make it a popular seaside resort and tourist destination, mainly for visitors from the former Soviet republics. The city is also an important centre for marine biology research. In particular, the military has studied and trained dolphins in the city for military use since the 1960s.

==Etymology==

The name of Sevastopolis was originally chosen following the same etymological trend as other cities in the Crimean peninsula; it was intended to express its ancient Greek origins. It is a compound of the Greek adjective, (&quot;sebastós&quot;, ; &#x27;venerable&#x27;) and the noun (&quot;pólis&quot;, &#x27;city&#x27;). is the traditional Greek equivalent (see Sebastian) of the Roman honorific &quot;Augustus&quot;, originally given to the first emperor of the Roman Empire, Augustus and later awarded as a title to his successors.

The city was probably named after Empress (&quot;Augusta&quot;) Catherine II of the Russian Empire who founded Sevastopol in 1783. She visited the city in 1787, accompanied by Joseph II, the Emperor of Austria, and other foreign dignitaries.

In the west of the city, there are well-preserved ruins of the ancient Greek port city of Chersonesos, founded in the 5th century BC by settlers from Heraclea Pontica. This name means &quot;peninsula&quot;, reflecting its immediate location. It is not related to the ancient Greek name for the Crimean Peninsula as a whole: &quot;Chersonēsos Taurikē&quot; (&quot;the Taurian Peninsula&quot;).

The name of the city is spelled as:
* English: &quot;Sevastopol&quot;, the current prevalent spelling; the previously common spelling &quot;Sebastopol&quot; is still used by some publications, and formerly by &quot;The Economist&quot;. The current spelling has the pronunciation , while the former spelling has the pronunciation .
* , , or &quot;Sivastopol&quot;; , .

==History==


===Ancient Chersonesus===
In the 6th century BC, a Greek colony was established in the area of the modern-day city. The Greek city of Chersonesus existed for almost two thousand years, first as an independent democracy and later as part of the Bosporan Kingdom. In the 13th and 14th centuries, it was sacked by the Golden Horde several times and was finally totally abandoned. The modern day city of Sevastopol has no connection to the ancient and medieval Greek city other than geographical location, but the ruins are a popular tourist attraction located on the outskirts of the city.

===Part of the Russian Empire===

Sevastopol was founded in June 1783 as a base for a naval squadron under the name Akhtiar (&quot;White Cliff&quot;), by Rear Admiral Thomas MacKenzie (Foma Fomich Makenzi), a native Scot in Russian service; soon after Russia annexed the Crimean Khanate. Five years earlier, Alexander Suvorov ordered that earthworks be erected along the harbour and Russian troops be placed there. 

In February 1784, Catherine the Great ordered Grigory Potemkin to build a fortress there and call it Sevastopol. The realisation of the initial building plans fell to Captain Fyodor Ushakov who in 1788 was named commander of the port and of the Black Sea squadron. The city was established on the western shore of Southern Bay which branches away from the bigger Sevastopol Bay. The ruins of ancient Chersonesus were situated to the west. The newly built settlement became an important naval base and later a commercial seaport. In 1797, under an edict issued by Emperor Paul I, the military stronghold was again renamed Akhtiar. Finally, on 29 April (10 May), 1826, the Senate returned the city&#x27;s name to Sevastopol. In 1803 to 1864 along with Mykolaiv the city was part of Nikolayev–Sevastopol Military Governorate.
===Crimean War===

From 1853 to 1856, the Crimean peninsula&#x27;s strategic position in controlling the Black Sea caused it to be the site of the principal engagements of the Crimean War, where Russia lost to a French-led alliance.

After a minor skirmish at Köstence (now Constanța), the allied commanders decided to attack Sevastopol as Russia&#x27;s main naval base in the Black Sea. After extended preparations, allied forces landed on the peninsula in September 1854 and marched to a point south of Sevastopol after winning the Battle of the Alma on 20 September. The Russians counterattacked on 25 October in what became the Battle of Balaclava and were repulsed, but the British Army&#x27;s forces were seriously depleted as a result. A second Russian counterattack, at Inkerman in November, ended in a stalemate as well. The front settled into the siege of Sevastopol, involving brutal conditions for troops on both sides.

Sevastopol finally fell after eleven months, after the French had assaulted Fort Malakoff. Isolated and facing a bleak prospect of invasion by the West if the war continued, Russia sued for peace in March 1856. France and Britain welcomed the development, owing to the conflict&#x27;s domestic unpopularity. The Treaty of Paris, signed on 30 March 1856, ended the war and forbade Russia from basing warships in the Black Sea. This hampered the Russians during the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78 and in the aftermath of that conflict, Russia moved to reconstitute its naval strength and fortifications in the Black Sea.

===World War II===

During World War II, Sevastopol withstood intensive bombardment by the Germans in 1941–42, supported by their Italian and Romanian allies during the Battle of Sevastopol. German forces used railway artillery—including history&#x27;s largest-ever calibre railway artillery piece in battle, the 80-cm calibre &quot;Schwerer Gustav&quot;—and specialised mobile heavy mortars to destroy Sevastopol&#x27;s extremely heavy fortifications, such as the Maxim Gorky Fortresses. After fierce fighting, which lasted for 250 days, the fortress city finally fell to Axis forces in July 1942. It was intended to be renamed to &quot;Theodorichshafen&quot; (in reference to Theodoric the Great and the fact that Crimea had been home to Germanic Goths until the 18th or 19th century) in the event of a German victory against the Soviet Union, and like the rest of Crimea was designated for future colonisation by the Third Reich. It was liberated by the Red Army on 9 May 1944 and was awarded the Hero City title a year later.

===Part of the Ukrainian SSR===
During the Soviet era, Sevastopol became a so-called &quot;closed city&quot;. This meant that any non-residents had to apply to the authorities for a temporary permit to visit the city.

On 29 October 1948, the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the Russian SFSR issued an &quot;ukaz&quot; (order) which confirmed the special status of the city. Soviet academic publications since 1954, including the &quot;Great Soviet Encyclopedia&quot;, indicated that Sevastopol, Crimean Oblast was part of the Ukrainian SSR.

In 1954, under Nikita Khrushchev, both Sevastopol and the remainder of the Crimean peninsula were administratively transferred from being territories within the Russian SFSR to being territories administered by the Ukrainian SSR. Administratively, Sevastopol was a municipality excluded from the adjacent Crimean Oblast. The territory of the municipality was 863.5 km2 and it was further subdivided into four raions (districts). Besides the City of Sevastopol proper, it also included two towns—Balaklava (having had no status until 1957), Inkerman, urban-type settlement Kacha, and 29 villages.

For the 1955 Ukrainian parliamentary elections on 27 February, Sevastopol was split into two electoral districts, Stalinsky and Korabelny (initially requested three Stalinsky, Korabelny, and Nakhimovsky). Eventually, Sevastopol received two people&#x27;s deputies of the Ukrainian SSR elected to the Verkhovna Rada, A. Korovchenko and M. Kulakov.

In 1957, the town of Balaklava was incorporated into Sevastopol.

===Part of Ukraine===
Following Ukraine&#x27;s declaration of independence from the USSR in 1991, Sevastopol became the principal base of the Ukrainian navy. As the key naval base of the former Soviet Black Sea Fleet, it was a source of tensions for Russia–Ukraine relations until a set-term lease agreement was signed in 1997.

On 10 July 1993, the Russian parliament passed a resolution declaring Sevastopol to be &quot;a federal Russian city&quot;. At the time, many supporters of President Boris Yeltsin had ceased taking part in the parliament&#x27;s work. On 20 July 1993, the United Nations Security Council denounced the decision of the Russian parliament. According to Anatoliy Zlenko, it was the first time that the council had to review and qualify actions of a legislative body.

On 14 April 1993, the Presidium of the Crimean Parliament called for the creation of the presidential post of the Crimean Republic. A week later, the Russian deputy, Valentin Agafonov, said that Russia was ready to supervise a referendum on Crimean independence and include the republic as a separate entity in the CIS. On 28 July 1993, one of the leaders of the Russian Society of Crimea, Viktor Prusakov, said that his organisation was ready for an armed mutiny and the establishment of Russian administration of Sevastopol.

In September, the commander of the joint Russian-Ukrainian Black Sea Fleet, , accused Ukraine of converting some of his fleet and conducting an armed assault on his personnel and threatened to take countermeasures placing the fleet on alert. (In June 1992, the Russian president Yeltsin and the Ukrainian president Leonid Kravchuk had agreed to divide the former Soviet Black Sea Fleet between Russia and Ukraine. Eduard Baltin had been appointed commander of the Black Sea Fleet by Yeltsin and Kravchuk on 15 January 1993.)

The Moscow mayor Yury Luzhkov to claim the city, and in December 1996, the Russian Federation Council officially endorsed the claim, threatening negotiations. In response, Ukraine proposed a &quot;special partnership&quot; with NATO in January 1997.

In May 1997, Russia and Ukraine signed the Russian–Ukrainian Friendship Treaty, ruling out Moscow&#x27;s territorial claims to Ukraine. This was followed by the Partition Treaty on the Status and Conditions of the Black Sea Fleet on 28 May 1997. A separate agreement established the terms of a long-term lease of land, facilities, and resources in Sevastopol and the Crimea by Russia. Russia kept its naval base, with around 15,000 troops stationed in Sevastopol.
The ex-Soviet Black Sea Fleet and its facilities were divided between Russia&#x27;s Black Sea Fleet and the Ukrainian Naval Forces. The two navies co-used some of the city&#x27;s harbours and piers, while others were demilitarised or used by either country. Sevastopol remained the location of the Russian Black Sea Fleet headquarters, and the Ukrainian Naval Forces Headquarters were also located in the city. A judicial row periodically continued over the naval hydrographic infrastructure both in Sevastopol and on the Crimean coast (especially lighthouses historically maintained by the Soviet and Russian Navy and also used for civil navigation support).

As in the rest of Crimea, Russian remained the predominant language of the city, although following the independence of Ukraine there were some attempts at Ukrainisation, with very little success. Russian society in general and even some outspoken government representatives never accepted the loss of Sevastopol and tended to regard it as temporarily separated from Russia.

In July 2009, the chairman of the Sevastopol city council, Valeriy Saratov (Party of Regions), said that Ukraine should increase the amount of compensation it is paying to the city of Sevastopol for hosting the foreign Russian Black Sea Fleet, instead of requesting such compensation from the Russian government and the Russian Ministry of Defense in particular.

On 27 April 2010, Russia and Ukraine ratified the Russian Ukrainian Naval Base for Gas treaty, which extended the Russian Navy&#x27;s lease of the Crimean facilities for 25 years after 2017 (through 2042) with the option to prolong the lease in five-year extensions. The ratification process in the Ukrainian parliament encountered stiff opposition and even resulted in a brawl in the parliament chamber. Eventually, the treaty was ratified by a 52% majority vote—236 of 450. The Russian Duma ratified the treaty by a 98% majority.

===Occupation and annexation by Russia===
On 23 February 2014, a pro-Russian rally took place in Nakhimov Square declaring allegiance to Russia and protesting against the new government in Kyiv following the overthrow of the president, Viktor Yanukovych. On 27 February, pro-Russian militia, including Russian troops, seized control of government buildings in Crimea, and by 28 February, controlled other strategic locations such as the military airport in Sevastopol.

On 16 March 2014, an internationally unrecognised referendum was held in Sevastopol with official results claiming an 89.51% turnout and 95.6% of voters choosing to join Russia. Ukraine and almost all other countries of the United Nations General Assembly consider the referendum illegal and illegitimate. 

On 18 March, Russia annexed Crimea, incorporating the Republic of Crimea and federal city of Sevastopol as federal subjects of Russia. However, the annexation remains internationally unrecognised, with most countries recognizing Sevastopol as a city with special status within Ukraine. While Russia has taken &quot;de facto&quot; control of Sevastopol and Crimea, the international community considers the area as part of Ukraine.

==Geography==
The city of Sevastopol is located at the southwestern tip of the Crimean peninsula in a headland known as Heracles peninsula on a coast of the Black Sea. The city is designated a special city-region of Ukraine which besides the city itself includes several of its outlying settlements. The city itself is concentrated mostly in the western portion of the region and around the long Bay of Sevastopol. This bay is a ria, a river canyon drowned by Holocene sea-level rise, and the outlet of Chorna River. Away in a remote location southeast of Sevastopol is located the former city of Balaklava (since 1957 incorporated within Sevastopol), the bay of which in the Soviet era served as a main port for the Soviet diesel-powered submarines.

The coastline of the region is mostly rocky, in a series of smaller bays, a great number of which are located within the Bay of Sevastopol. The biggest of them are Southern Bay (within the Bay of Sevastopol), Archer Bay, a gulf complex that consists of Deergrass Bay, the Bay of Cossack, Salty Bay, and many others. There are over thirty bays in the immediate region.

Three rivers flow through the region: the Belbek, Chorna, and Kacha. All three mountain chains of the Crimean mountains are represented in Sevastopol, the southern chain by the Balaklava Highlands, the inner chain by the Mekenziev Mountains, and the outer chain by the Kara-Tau Upland (Black Mountain).

===Climate===
Sevastopol has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen: &quot;Cfa&quot;). Due to the summer mean straddling it borders on a four-season oceanic climate, with cold winters and warm summers.

The average yearly temperature is during the day and around at night. In the coldest months, January and February, the average temperature is during the day and around at night. In the warmest months, July and August, the average temperature is around during the day and around at night. Generally, the summer/holiday season lasts 5 months, from around mid-May and into September, with the temperature often reaching or more in the first half of October.

The average annual temperature of the sea is , ranging from in February to in August. From June to September, the average sea temperature is greater than . In the second half of May and the first half of October; the average sea temperature is about . The average rainfall is about per year. There are about 2,345 hours of sunshine duration per year.

==Politics and government==

===Ukrainian administration===

According to the Constitution of Ukraine, Sevastopol is administered as a City with special status. Executive power in Sevastopol is exercised by the Sevastopol City State Administration, led by a chairman (also known as mayor) appointed by the Ukrainian president. The Sevastopol City Council is the legislature of Sevastopol. 

Sevastopol is administratively divided into four districts:
*Gagarin Raion
*Lenin Raion 
*Nakhimov Raion
*Balaklava Raion

===Russian occupation===
On 18 March 2014, Russia claimed to have annexed Crimea with Sevastopol being administered as a federal city of Russia, the others being Moscow and St. Petersburg.

;Executive
The head of the executive branch in the city is the Governor of Sevastopol. According to the city charter, amended on 29 November 2016, the governor is elected in a direct election for a term of five years and no more than two consecutive terms. The current governor is Mikhail Razvozhayev.

;Legislature
During the annexation of Ukrainian Crimea by Russia, the pro-Russian City Council threw its support behind Russian citizen Alexei Chaly as a &quot;people&#x27;s mayor&quot; and said it would not recognise orders from Kyiv. After Russia annexed Crimea, the Legislative Assembly of Sevastopol replaced the City Council.

;Administrative and municipal divisions
Within the Russian municipal framework, the territory of the federal city of Sevastopol is divided into nine municipal okrugs and the town of Inkerman. While individual municipal divisions are contained within the borders of the administrative districts, they are not otherwise related to the administrative districts.

==Economy==
Apart from navy-related civil facilities, Sevastopol hosts some other notable industries. An example is Stroitel, a major plastic manufacturer.

=== Industry ===
* Sevastopol Aircraft Plant, SMZ Sevastopol Shipyards (main at Naval Bay) &amp; Inkerman Shipyards, Balaklava Bay Shipyard
* Impuls 2 SMZ
* Chornomornaftogaz § Chernomorneftegaz (Chjornomor), oil/gas extraction, petrochemical, jack rigs and oil platforms, LNG and oil tankers.
* AO FNGUP Granit subsidiary of Almaz Antej, assembly, overhaul, and maintenance of SAM and radar EW complexes, ADS services.
* Sevastopol (Parus SPriborMZ, Mayak, NPO Elektron, NPP Kvant, Tavrida Elektronik, Musson, and other industrial plants)
* Sevastopol Economic Industrial Zone SevPZ (SE area)
* Persej SMZ ship repair and floating dock yard plant (South Bay, Sevastopol)
* Sevastopol ship repair and floating docks yards (various)
* Metallurgy, Chemical Plants, and other industries.
* Agriculture: rice, wheat, grapes, tea, fruits, and tobacco (lesser). 
* Mining: iron, titanium, manganese, aluminum, calcite silicates, and amethyst. 
* Kerch bridge, Taurida highway, Sevastopol GasTES plus solar FV plants, gas and petrol depots, and coal derivatives.

===Infrastructure===

There are different types of transport in Sevastopol:
* Bus – 101 lines
* Trolley bus – 14 lines
* Minibus – 52 lines
* Cutter – 6 lines
* Ferry – 1 line
* Express bus – 15 lines
* HEV train (local, suburban route) – 1 route
* Airport – 1

Sevastopol Shipyard comprises three facilities that together repair, modernise, and re-equip Russian Naval ships and submarines. The Sevastopol International Airport is used as a military aerodrome at the moment and being reconstructed to be used by international airlines.

Sevastopol maintains a large port facility in the Bay of Sevastopol and in smaller bays around the Heracles peninsula. The port handles traffic from passengers (local transportation and cruise), cargo, and commercial fishing. The port infrastructure is fully integrated with the city of Sevastopol and the naval bases of the Black Sea Fleet.

===Tourism===
Due to its military history, most streets in the city are named after Russian and Soviet military heroes. There are hundreds of monuments and plaques in various parts of Sevastopol commemorating its military past.

Attractions include:


== Demographics ==

The population of Sevastopol is 509,992, consisting of 479,394 urban residents and 30,598 rural (January 2021), making it the most populous city of the Crimean Peninsula.

The city has retained an ethnic Russian majority throughout its history. In 1989 the proportion of Russians living in the city was 74.4%, and by the time of the Ukrainian National Census, 2001, the ethnic groups of Sevastopol included Russians (71.6%), Ukrainians (22.4%), Belarusians (1.6%), Tatars (0.7%), Crimean Tatars (0.5%), Armenians (0.3%), Jews (0.3%), Moldovans (0.2%), and Azerbaijanis (0.2%).

Vital statistics for 2015:
*Births: 5 471 (13.7 per 1000)
*Deaths: 6 072 (15.2 per 1000)

===Life expectancy===

In 2015, Sevastopol had the largest decrease in life expectancy at birth among all regions of Russia.In 2020, after beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, Sevastopol became the only region of Russia where there was increase of life expectancy.In 2021, average life expectancy at birth in Sevastopol was 72.25 years (67.87 for males and 76.43 for females).

==Culture==

There are many historical buildings in the central and eastern parts of the city and Balaklava, some of which are architectural monuments. The Western districts have modern architecture. More recently, numerous skyscrapers have been built. Balaklava Bayfront Plaza (on hold), currently under construction, will be one of the tallest buildings in Ukraine, at with 43 floors.

After the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea the city&#x27;s monument to Petro Konashevych-Sahaidachny was removed and handed over to Kharkiv.

== Education ==
*Economics and Humanities Institute (Branch), Crimean Federal University
*Sevastopol National Technical University
*Sevastopol National University of Nuclear Energy and Industry

== Notable people ==
* Alla Kostromichova (born 1986) a Ukrainian fashion model and TV presenter.
* Arkady Averchenko (1881–1925) a Russian playwright and satirist.
* Oleksiy Bessarabov (born 1976) a Ukrainian journalist
* Igor Cassini (1915–2002) a Russian-American syndicated gossip columnist for the Hearst newspaper chain.
* Aleksei Chaly (born 1961) a businessman and former de facto mayor of Sevastopol.
* Alexander Galich (1918–1977) a Soviet poet, playwright, singer-songwriter and dissident.
* Gulyayev Dmitry Igorevich (born 1986), stage name &quot;Dimal&quot;, rapper, songwriter and entertainer, based in Malta.
* Lola Gjoka (1910–1985) an Albanian pianist
* Tatiana Godovalnikova (born 1962) a Russian contemporary artist.
* Rimma Kazakova (1932–2008) a Soviet/Russian poet who wrote popular songs.
* Sasha Krasny (1882– 1995), a Russian poet and songwriter.
* Aleksandr Kuznetsov (born 1992) a Ukrainian-Russian actor in Russian films and TV
* Ileana Leonidoff (1893–1968) emigrée actress in silent films; then dancer and choreographer.
* Kseniya Mishyna (born 1989) a Ukrainian film and stage actress.
* Mikhail Samoilovich Neiman (1905–1975) a Soviet physicist and academic professor.
* Aleksandr Nosatov (born 1963) an admiral in the Russian Navy.
* Ivan Papanin (1894–1986) a Soviet polar explorer, scientist and Counter Admiral
* Sergei Pinchuk (born 1971) a vice-admiral in the Russian Navy.
* Olga von Root (1902–1967), Russian noblewoman, singer, and stage actress
* Mikhail Sablin (1869–1920), an admiral in the Imperial Russian Navy
* Semen Semenchenko (born 1974), a Ukrainian politician and founder of the Donbas Battalion.
* Anton Shkaplerov (born 1972) a Russian cosmonaut with four spaceflights.
* Antonina Shuranova (1936–2003) a Russian stage, TV and film actress.
* Alexandra Voronin (1905—1993) the Russian wife of Norwegian fascist Vidkun Quisling
=== Sport ===
* Lyudmila Aksyonova (born 1947) 400 metre athlete, team bronze medallist at the 1976 Summer Olympics
* Aleksandr Fyodorov (born 1981) water polo player and team bronze medallist at the 2004 Summer Olympics.
* Svitlana Matevusheva (born 1981) a sailor and team silver medallist at the 2004 Summer Olympics
* Alexander Onischuk (born 1975) a Ukrainian-American chess Grandmaster
* Galina Prozumenshchikova (1948–2015) a Soviet breaststroke swimmer; five Olympic medals in 1964, 1968 and 1972
* Marina Durunda (born 1997) an Azerbaijani rhythmic gymnast; finalist at the 2016 Summer Olympics

==Gallery==
==See also==
*2121 Sevastopol – asteroid discovered in 1971 by Soviet astronomer Tamara Mikhailovna Smirnova and named after the city.
* Sebastopol, Victoria
* Novorossiysk (new planned headquarters of the Black Sea Fleet)
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* (Russian administration)
* (Ukrainian administration)
*Satellite picture by Google Maps
*The murder of the Jews of Sevastopol during World War II, at Yad Vashem website.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="0" end="10" title="Sevastopol" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="33" end="43" title="Sevastopol" label="Sebastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="68" end="74" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="99" end="108" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411928" start="223" end="227" title="Port of Sevastopol" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411903" start="232" end="242" title="Sevastopol Naval Base" label="naval base"/>
<link wikidata="Q934022" start="349" end="364" title="Black Sea Fleet" label="Black Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="377" end="385" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q211450" start="416" end="427" title="closed city" label="closed city"/>
<link wikidata="Q999039" start="561" end="575" title="Sevastopol Bay" label="Sevastopol Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="711" end="718" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124045" start="795" end="821" title="city with special status" label="cities with special status"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="839" end="843" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="879" end="885" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920546" start="924" end="938" title="Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation" label="annexed Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q183342" start="984" end="1006" title="federal cities of Russia" label="federal city of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q756294" start="1085" end="1114" title="Autonomous Republic of Crimea" label="Autonomous Republic of Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15966495" start="1123" end="1141" title="Republic of Crimea (Russia)" label="Republic of Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="1198" end="1205" title="Russians" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="1245" end="1255" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q117458" start="1260" end="1274" title="Crimean Tatars" label="Crimean Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q62916459" start="1312" end="1320" title="maritime" label="maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021711" start="1474" end="1488" title="seaside resort" label="seaside resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="1543" end="1566" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="former Soviet republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173" start="1609" end="1623" title="marine biology" label="marine biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="1686" end="1693" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812634" start="1711" end="1723" title="Military marine mammal" label="military use"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="1823" end="1835" title="etymology" label="etymological"/>
<link wikidata="Q246675" start="1986" end="1994" title="sebastos" label="sebastós"/>
<link wikidata="Q115440506" start="2120" end="2129" title="Sebastian (name)" label="Sebastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q211804" start="2160" end="2168" title="Augustus (honorific)" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="2235" end="2243" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282711" start="2342" end="2349" title="Augusta (honorific)" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="2357" end="2369" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine II"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2377" end="2391" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q76555" start="2469" end="2478" title="Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Joseph II"/>
<link wikidata="Q638445" start="2626" end="2637" title="Chersonesos Taurica" label="Chersonesos"/>
<link wikidata="Q302511" start="2686" end="2702" title="Heraclea Pontica" label="Heraclea Pontica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629621" start="2878" end="2885" title="Taurica" label="Taurikē"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145096" start="2903" end="2908" title="Tauri" label="Tauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="3145" end="3158" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q638445" start="3447" end="3458" title="Chersonesus (Crimea)" label="Chersonesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q321371" start="3557" end="3573" title="Bosporan Kingdom" label="Bosporan Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="3628" end="3640" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225430" start="4068" end="4084" title="Thomas MacKenzie (Russian admiral)" label="Thomas MacKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="4117" end="4121" title="Scottish people" label="Scot"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="4153" end="4159" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160440" start="4172" end="4187" title="Crimean Khanate" label="Crimean Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q154232" start="4209" end="4226" title="Aleksandr Suvorov" label="Alexander Suvorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="4336" end="4355" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q243201" start="4364" end="4380" title="Grigory Potyomkin" label="Grigory Potemkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q314339" start="4493" end="4507" title="Fyodor Ushakov" label="Fyodor Ushakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411928" start="4547" end="4551" title="Port of Sevastopol" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q934022" start="4563" end="4581" title="Black Sea Fleet" label="Black Sea squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q999039" start="4681" end="4695" title="Sevastopol Bay" label="Sevastopol Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324633" start="4804" end="4814" title="naval base" label="naval base"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="4838" end="4845" title="seaport" label="seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15189" start="4889" end="4895" title="Paul I of Russia" label="Paul I"/>
<link wikidata="Q41572" start="5068" end="5076" title="Mykolaiv" label="Mykolaiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="5317" end="5328" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="5401" end="5409" title="Constanța" label="Köstence"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="5415" end="5424" title="Constanța" label="Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q913604" start="5675" end="5693" title="Battle of the Alma" label="Battle of the Alma"/>
<link wikidata="Q464512" start="5773" end="5792" title="Battle of Balaclava" label="Battle of Balaclava"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969488" start="5820" end="5832" title="British Army during the Victorian Era" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q770536" start="5916" end="5927" title="Battle of Inkerman" label="at Inkerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q815216" start="5998" end="6017" title="Siege of Sevastopol (1854–1855)" label="siege of Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q586204" start="6136" end="6163" title="Battle of Malakoff" label="had assaulted Fort Malakoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q25638012" start="6255" end="6269" title="suing for peace" label="sued for peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q319260" start="6386" end="6401" title="Treaty of Paris (1856)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="6538" end="6566" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)" label="Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6719" end="6731" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q154860" start="6861" end="6881" title="Battle of Sevastopol" label="Battle of Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049358" start="6902" end="6919" title="railway artillery" label="railway artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q27578" start="7025" end="7040" title="Schwerer Gustav" label="Schwerer Gustav"/>
<link wikidata="Q699606" start="7051" end="7083" title="Karl-Gerät" label="specialised mobile heavy mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096918" start="7157" end="7179" title="Maxim Gorky Fortresses" label="Maxim Gorky Fortresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="7370" end="7389" title="Theodoric the Great" label="Theodoric the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="7441" end="7446" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="7649" end="7657" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q159438" start="7692" end="7701" title="Hero City (Soviet Union)" label="Hero City"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7766" end="7772" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q211450" start="7814" end="7825" title="closed city" label="closed city"/>
<link wikidata="Q234535" start="8163" end="8188" title="Great Soviet Encyclopedia" label="Great Soviet Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q139671" start="8223" end="8237" title="Crimean Oblast" label="Crimean Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="8254" end="8267" title="Ukrainian SSR" label="Ukrainian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="8285" end="8302" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350192" start="8385" end="8396" title="1954 transfer of Crimea" label="transferred"/>
<link wikidata="Q139671" start="8575" end="8589" title="Crimean Oblast" label="Crimean Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q12132454" start="9108" end="9130" title="People&amp;#x27;s Deputy of Ukraine" label="people&amp;#x27;s deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="9138" end="9151" title="Ukrainian SSR" label="Ukrainian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q176296" start="9167" end="9181" title="Verkhovna Rada" label="Verkhovna Rada"/>
<link wikidata="Q748363" start="9236" end="9245" title="Balaklava" label="Balaklava"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="9313" end="9320" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9343" end="9355" title="History of Ukraine#Independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q932840" start="9423" end="9437" title="Ukrainian navy" label="Ukrainian navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q934022" start="9482" end="9497" title="Black Sea Fleet" label="Black Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090117" start="9531" end="9555" title="Russia–Ukraine relations" label="Russia–Ukraine relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15942106" start="9564" end="9588" title="Partition Treaty on the Status and Conditions of the Black Sea Fleet" label="set-term lease agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q457869" start="9631" end="9649" title="Russian parliament" label="Russian parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="9775" end="9788" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Boris Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="9864" end="9895" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q488198" start="9959" end="9974" title="Anatoliy Zlenko" label="Anatoliy Zlenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="10268" end="10274" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="10388" end="10391" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="CIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q189732" start="10916" end="10931" title="Leonid Kravchuk" label="Leonid Kravchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q156379" start="11144" end="11156" title="Yury Luzhkov" label="Yury Luzhkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q186473" start="11210" end="11228" title="Federation Council (Russia)" label="Federation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q23636982" start="11421" end="11456" title="Russian–Ukrainian Friendship Treaty" label="Russian–Ukrainian Friendship Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15942106" start="11539" end="11607" title="Partition Treaty on the Status and Conditions of the Black Sea Fleet" label="Partition Treaty on the Status and Conditions of the Black Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q932840" start="11950" end="11972" title="Ukrainian Navy" label="Ukrainian Naval Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q182468" start="12306" end="12318" title="hydrography" label="hydrographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39715" start="12390" end="12401" title="lighthouses" label="lighthouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573443" start="12659" end="12672" title="Ukrainisation" label="Ukrainisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4266" start="12955" end="12971" title="Party of Regions" label="Party of Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077856" start="13293" end="13336" title="Russian Ukrainian Naval Base for Gas treaty" label="Russian Ukrainian Naval Base for Gas treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q176296" start="13542" end="13562" title="Ukrainian parliament" label="Ukrainian parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q715641" start="13723" end="13735" title="Russian Duma" label="Russian Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="13965" end="13969" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733401" start="13984" end="13993" title="Revolution of Dignity" label="overthrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459658" start="14012" end="14029" title="Viktor Yanukovych" label="Viktor Yanukovych"/>
<link wikidata="Q15838763" start="14296" end="14306" title="2014 Crimean status referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="14470" end="14501" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920546" start="14567" end="14588" title="Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation" label="Russia annexed Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15966495" start="14608" end="14626" title="Republic of Crimea (Russia)" label="Republic of Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q183342" start="14631" end="14643" title="Federal cities of Russia" label="federal city"/>
<link wikidata="Q43263" start="14661" end="14687" title="federal subjects of Russia" label="federal subjects of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124045" start="14799" end="14823" title="city with special status" label="city with special status"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135938" start="15106" end="15124" title="Heracles peninsula" label="Heracles peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="15143" end="15152" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q999039" start="15382" end="15399" title="Bay of Sevastopol" label="Bay of Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q554394" start="15415" end="15418" title="ria" label="ria"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="15446" end="15454" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044660" start="15489" end="15501" title="Chorna River (Crimea)" label="Chorna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q748363" start="15583" end="15592" title="Balaklava" label="Balaklava"/>
<link wikidata="Q748282" start="16209" end="16226" title="Crimean mountains" label="Crimean mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="16442" end="16467" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="16469" end="16475" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="16557" end="16572" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549039" start="17497" end="17520" title="Constitution of Ukraine" label="Constitution of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124045" start="17554" end="17578" title="City with special status" label="City with special status"/>
<link wikidata="Q16715714" start="17630" end="17666" title="Sevastopol City State Administration" label="Sevastopol City State Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659239" start="17750" end="17773" title="Sevastopol City Council" label="Sevastopol City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636420" start="17871" end="17884" title="Gagarin Raion" label="Gagarin Raion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215879" start="17886" end="17897" title="Lenin Raion, Sevastopol" label="Lenin Raion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036985" start="17900" end="17914" title="Nakhimov Raion" label="Nakhimov Raion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036976" start="17916" end="17931" title="Balaklava Raion" label="Balaklava Raion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920546" start="17983" end="18013" title="Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation" label="claimed to have annexed Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q183342" start="18054" end="18066" title="Federal cities of Russia" label="federal city"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="18095" end="18101" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="18106" end="18120" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16267964" start="18186" end="18208" title="Governor of Sevastopol (Russia)" label="Governor of Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q60828711" start="18404" end="18423" title="Mikhail Razvozhayev" label="Mikhail Razvozhayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920546" start="18450" end="18490" title="Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation" label="annexation of Ukrainian Crimea by Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15829163" start="18562" end="18574" title="Alexei Chaly" label="Alexei Chaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="18656" end="18660" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q15985376" start="18695" end="18729" title="Legislative Assembly of Sevastopol" label="Legislative Assembly of Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18817" end="18836" title="subdivisions of Russia#Municipal divisions" label="municipal framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427085" start="18907" end="18923" title="Administrative okrug" label="municipal okrugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q752183" start="18940" end="18948" title="Inkerman" label="Inkerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="19252" end="19259" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20081516" start="19321" end="19345" title="Sevastopol Shipyard" label="SMZ Sevastopol Shipyards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4514054" start="19432" end="19449" title="Chornomornaftogaz" label="Chornomornaftogaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q20081516" start="20594" end="20613" title="Sevastopol Shipyard" label="Sevastopol Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985601" start="20727" end="20759" title="Sevastopol International Airport" label="Sevastopol International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q999039" start="20919" end="20936" title="Bay of Sevastopol" label="Bay of Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135938" start="20968" end="20986" title="Heracles peninsula" label="Heracles peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q934022" start="21194" end="21209" title="Black Sea Fleet" label="Black Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="21636" end="21653" title="Crimean Peninsula" label="Crimean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976830" start="21817" end="21848" title="Ukrainian Census (2001)" label="Ukrainian National Census, 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="21891" end="21899" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="21909" end="21919" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="21929" end="21940" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="21949" end="21955" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q117458" start="21964" end="21978" title="Crimean Tatars" label="Crimean Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="21987" end="21996" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="22005" end="22008" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q487796" start="22018" end="22027" title="Moldovans" label="Moldovans"/>
<link wikidata="Q482942" start="22040" end="22052" title="Azerbaijani people" label="Azerbaijanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="22223" end="22238" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920546" start="22927" end="22960" title="2014 Russian annexation of Crimea" label="2014 Russian annexation of Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306345" start="22989" end="23018" title="Petro Konashevych-Sahaidachny" label="Petro Konashevych-Sahaidachny"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308" start="23050" end="23057" title="Kharkiv" label="Kharkiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q17749157" start="23122" end="23148" title="Crimean Federal University" label="Crimean Federal University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987511" start="23150" end="23190" title="Sevastopol National Technical University" label="Sevastopol National Technical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411934" start="23192" end="23253" title="Sevastopol National University of Nuclear Energy and Industry" label="Sevastopol National University of Nuclear Energy and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q26251458" start="23278" end="23296" title="Alla Kostromichova" label="Alla Kostromichova"/>
<link wikidata="Q602217" start="23355" end="23372" title="Arkady Averchenko" label="Arkady Averchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q74657307" start="23422" end="23440" title="Oleksiy Bessarabov" label="Oleksiy Bessarabov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5993204" start="23478" end="23490" title="Igor Cassini" label="Igor Cassini"/>
<link wikidata="Q15829163" start="23584" end="23597" title="Aleksei Chaly" label="Aleksei Chaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459284" start="23667" end="23683" title="Alexander Galich (writer)" label="Alexander Galich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161649" start="23758" end="23783" title="Dimal (rapper)" label="Gulyayev Dmitry Igorevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161649" start="23814" end="23819" title="Dimal (rapper)" label="Dimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11762484" start="23881" end="23891" title="Lola Gjoka" label="Lola Gjoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q106395092" start="23926" end="23947" title="Tatiana Godovalnikova" label="Tatiana Godovalnikova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023059" start="23993" end="24007" title="Rimma Kazakova" label="Rimma Kazakova"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425097" start="24069" end="24081" title="Sasha Krasny" label="Sasha Krasny"/>
<link wikidata="Q58851557" start="24129" end="24148" title="Aleksandr Kuznetsov (actor)" label="Aleksandr Kuznetsov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796378" start="24213" end="24229" title="Ileana Leonidoff" label="Ileana Leonidoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q65209359" start="24308" end="24323" title="Kseniya Mishyna" label="Kseniya Mishyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4316412" start="24374" end="24400" title="Mikhail Samoilovich Neiman" label="Mikhail Samoilovich Neiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q25390589" start="24458" end="24475" title="Aleksandr Nosatov" label="Aleksandr Nosatov"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="24506" end="24518" title="Russian Navy" label="Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q713943" start="24522" end="24534" title="Ivan Papanin" label="Ivan Papanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360884" start="24586" end="24601" title="Counter Admiral" label="Counter Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4363082" start="24604" end="24618" title="Sergei Pinchuk" label="Sergei Pinchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="24653" end="24665" title="Russian Navy" label="Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q113585698" start="24669" end="24682" title="Olga von Root" label="Olga von Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079463" start="24744" end="24758" title="Mikhail Sablin" label="Mikhail Sablin"/>
<link wikidata="Q583941" start="24790" end="24811" title="Imperial Russian Navy" label="Imperial Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17320569" start="24814" end="24831" title="Semen Semenchenko" label="Semen Semenchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939440" start="24887" end="24903" title="Donbas Battalion" label="Donbas Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q592219" start="24907" end="24923" title="Anton Shkaplerov" label="Anton Shkaplerov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4527942" start="24982" end="25000" title="Antonina Shuranova" label="Antonina Shuranova"/>
<link wikidata="Q21157946" start="25053" end="25070" title="Alexandra Voronin" label="Alexandra Voronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151364" start="25121" end="25136" title="Vidkun Quisling" label="Vidkun Quisling"/>
<link wikidata="Q437660" start="25153" end="25171" title="Lyudmila Aksyonova" label="Lyudmila Aksyonova"/>
<link wikidata="Q8444" start="25232" end="25252" title="1976 Summer Olympics" label="1976 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609534" start="25255" end="25273" title="Aleksandr Fyodorov (water polo)" label="Aleksandr Fyodorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="25337" end="25357" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16221630" start="25361" end="25381" title="Svitlana Matevusheva" label="Svitlana Matevusheva"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="25436" end="25456" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q378734" start="25459" end="25477" title="Alexander Onischuk" label="Alexander Onischuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q105269" start="25517" end="25528" title="Grandmaster (chess)" label="Grandmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q261588" start="25531" end="25555" title="Galina Prozumenshchikova" label="Galina Prozumenshchikova"/>
<link wikidata="Q15087781" start="25644" end="25658" title="Marina Durunda" label="Marina Durunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="25720" end="25740" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q773947" start="25768" end="25783" title="2121 Sevastopol" label="2121 Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="25786" end="25794" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="25817" end="25823" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q235708" start="25835" end="25862" title="Tamara Mikhailovna Smirnova" label="Tamara Mikhailovna Smirnova"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442721" start="25891" end="25911" title="Sebastopol, Victoria" label="Sebastopol, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15760" start="25914" end="25926" title="Novorossiysk" label="Novorossiysk"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="26156" end="26168" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q156591" start="26173" end="26183" title="Yad Vashem" label="Yad Vashem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51590" wikidata="Q1280" url="?curid=51590" title="Umbria">
<text>Umbria ( ; ) is a region of central Italy. It includes Lake Trasimeno and Marmore Falls, and is crossed by the Tiber. It is the only landlocked region on the Apennine Peninsula. The regional capital is Perugia.

The region is characterized by hills, mountains, valleys and historical towns such as the university centre of Perugia, Assisi (a World Heritage Site associated with St. Francis of Assisi), Terni, Norcia, Città di Castello, Gubbio, Spoleto, Orvieto, Todi, Castiglione del Lago, Narni, Amelia, Spello and other small cities.

== Geography ==
Umbria is bordered by Tuscany to the west and the north, Marche to the east and Lazio to the south. Partly hilly and mountainous, and partly flat and fertile owing to the valley of the Tiber, its topography includes part of the central Apennines, with the highest point in the region at Monte Vettore on the border of Marche, at ; the lowest point is Attigliano, . It is the only Italian region having neither a coastline nor a common border with other countries. The &quot;comune&quot; of Città di Castello has an exclave named &quot;Monte Ruperto&quot; within Marche. Contained within Umbria is the hamlet of Cospaia, which was a tiny republic from 1440 to 1826, created by accident.

Umbria is crossed by two valleys: the Umbrian valley (&quot;Valle Umbra&quot;), stretching from Perugia to Spoleto, and the Tiber Valley (&quot;Val Tiberina&quot;), north and west of the first one, from Città di Castello to the border with Lazio. The Tiber River forms the approximate border with Lazio, although its source is just over the Tuscan border. The Tiber&#x27;s three principal tributaries flow southward through Umbria. The Chiascio basin is relatively uninhabited as far as Bastia Umbra. About farther on, it joins the Tiber at Torgiano. The Topino, cleaving the Apennines with passes that the Via Flaminia and successor roads follow, makes a sharp turn at Foligno to flow NW for a few kilometres before joining the Chiascio below Bettona. The third river is the Nera, flowing into the Tiber further south, at Terni; its valley is called the &quot;Valnerina&quot;. The upper Nera cuts ravines in the mountains; the lower, in the , has created a wide floodplain.

In antiquity, the plain was covered by a pair of shallow, interlocking lakes, the Lacus Clitorius and the Lacus Umber. They were drained by the Romans over several hundred years. An earthquake in the 4th century and the political collapse of the Roman Empire resulted in the refilling of the basin. It was drained a second time, almost a thousand years later, during a 500-year period: Benedictine monks started the process in the 13th century, and the draining was completed by an engineer from Foligno in the 18th century.

The eastern part of the region, being crossed by many faults, has been often hit by earthquakes: the last ones have been that of 1997 (which hit Nocera Umbra, Gualdo Tadino, Assisi and Foligno) and those of August and October 2016 (which struck Norcia and the Valnerina).

In literature, Umbria is referred to as &quot;Il cuore verde d&#x27;Italia&quot; or &quot;The green heart of Italy&quot;. The phrase is taken from a poem by Giosuè Carducci, the subject of which is the source of the Clitunno River in Umbria.

==History==
===Antiquity===
The region is named for the Umbri people, an Italic people which was absorbed by the expansion of the Romans. The Umbri, unlike the Etruscans, with few exceptions did not live in an urban society, but occupied small dwellings located in the Apennines. Pliny the Elder recounted a fanciful derivation for the tribal name from the Greek ὄμβρος (&quot;ombros&quot;, &quot;a shower&quot;), which led to the idea that they had survived the Deluge familiar from Greek mythology, allowing them to claim to be the most ancient race in Italy. In fact, they belonged to a broader family of neighbouring peoples with similar roots. Their language was Umbrian, one of the Italic languages, related to Latin and Oscan. The town of Gubbio houses today the longest and most important document of any of the Osco-Umbrian group of languages, the Iguvine Tablets, written in Umbrian at the turn of the 2nd and 1st centuries BC. The northern part of the region was occupied by Gallic tribes.

The Umbri probably sprang, like neighbouring peoples, from the creators of the Terramara, and Proto-Villanovan culture in northern and central Italy, who entered north-eastern Italy at the beginning of the Bronze Age.

The Etruscans were the chief enemies of the Umbri. The Etruscan invasion extended from the western seaboard towards the north and east from about 700 to 500 BC. They eventually drove the Umbrians towards the Apennine uplands and captured 300 Umbrian towns. Nevertheless, the Umbrian population does not seem to have been eradicated in the conquered districts. The border between Etruria and Umbria was the Tiber river, as testified by the ancient name of Todi, &quot;Tular&quot; (&quot;border&quot;).

After the downfall of the Etruscans, Umbrians aided the Samnites in their struggle against Rome (308 BC). Later communications with Samnium were impeded by the Roman fortress of Narnia (founded 229 BC on the place of the umbrian &quot;Nequinum&quot;, conquered in 299 BC). Romans defeated the Samnites and their Gallic allies in the battle of Sentinum (295 BC). Allied Umbrians and Etruscans had to return home and defend each of their territories against simultaneous Roman attacks, leaving the Samnites without their help at Sentinum.

The Roman victory at Sentinum initiated a period of integration under the Roman rulers, who established some colonies, such as Spoletium, and built the via Flaminia (219 BC). The via Flaminia became a principal vector for Roman development in Umbria. During Hannibal&#x27;s invasion during the second Punic war, the battle of Lake Trasimene was fought inside the borders of today&#x27;s Umbria, but the local people did not aid the invader.

During the Roman civil war between Mark Antony and Octavian (40 BC), the city of Perugia supported Antony and was almost completely destroyed by Octavian. In Pliny the Elder&#x27;s time, 49 independent communities still existed in Umbria, and the abundance of inscriptions and the high proportion of recruits in the imperial army attest to its population. Under Augustus, Umbria became the Regio VI of Roman Italy.

Modern Umbria is different from Roman Umbria. Roman Umbria extended through most of what is now the northern Marche to Ravenna, but excluded the west bank of the Tiber, which belonged to Etruria. Thus Perugia was an Etruscan city and the area around Norcia was in the Sabine territory.

After the collapse of the Roman Empire, Ostrogoths and Byzantines struggled for supremacy in the region, and the decisive battle of the war between these two peoples took place near modern Gualdo Tadino.

===Middle Ages===

Soon after the end of the Gothic war, the Lombards invaded Italy and founded the duchy of Spoleto, covering much of today&#x27;s southern Umbria, but the Byzantine were able to keep in the region a corridor along the Via Flaminia linking Rome with the Exarchate of Ravenna and the Pentapolis. The Lombard king controlled also the northern part of the region ruled directly by Pavia. When Charlemagne conquered most of the Lombard kingdoms, some Umbrian territories were given to the Pope, who established temporal power over them. Some cities acquired a form of autonomy named &quot;comune&quot;. These cities were frequently at war with each other, often in a context of more general conflicts, either between the Papacy and the Holy Roman Empire or between the Guelphs and the Ghibellines.

In the early 14th century, the &quot;signorie&quot; arose and the most important of them were those of the Vitelli in Città di Castello, of the Baglioni in Perugia and of the Trinci in Foligno, but the region was subsumed by the middle of the same century into the Papal States by Cardinal Albornoz, who in this way prepared the return of the pope from Avignon to Rome. Città di Castello was subsumed later into the Papal States by Cesare Borgia. During the 15th century Renaissance spread in the northern part of the region. It was in this period that humanists started to use again the ancient denomination of &quot;Umbria&quot; to name the area, which until then had been named &quot;Ducato&quot;, after the Duchy of Spoleto in the southern part of it. The supremacy of the pope on Umbria was reinforced in 16th century through the erection of a fortress in Perugia by Pope Paul III, named after him &quot;Rocca Paolina&quot;. The papacy ruled the region uncontested until the end of the 18th century.

===Modern history===
After the French Revolution and the French conquest of Italy, Umbria became part of the ephemeral Roman Republic (1798–1799) and later, part of the Napoleonic Empire (1809–1814) under the name of department of Trasimène.

After Napoleon&#x27;s defeat, the Pope regained Umbria and ruled it until 1860. In that year, during Italian Risorgimento, Umbria with Marche and part of Emilia Romagna were annexed by Piedmontese King Victor Emmanuel II, and the people of Perugia destroyed in the same year the Rocca Paolina, symbol of the papal oppression. The region of Umbria, with capital Perugia, became part of the Kingdom of Italy in the following year. The region, whose economy was mainly based on agriculture, experienced a dramatic economic shift at the end of the 19th century with the founding of the &quot;Acciaierie di Terni&quot;, a major steelwork placed in Terni because of its abundance of electric power due to the Marmore waterfall and its secluded position.

The region of Umbria at the time was somewhat larger than today, comprising Rieti to the south, now part of Lazio. Rieti was detached and added to the Province of Rome (Lazio) in 1923. In 1927, the region of Umbria was divided into the provinces of Perugia and Terni.

During WWII, the industrial centers of the region like Terni and Foligno were heavily bombed and in 1944 became a battlefield between the allied forces and the Germans retreating towards the Gothic Line. In 1946, Umbria was incorporated into the Italian Republic as a region, comprising the two provinces of Perugia and Terni.

==Culture==
=== Main artistic centres ===

In the province of Perugia:
* Perugia
* Città di Castello
* Spoleto
* Assisi
* Gubbio
* Todi
* Foligno
* Castiglione del Lago
* Città della Pieve
* Spello
In the province of Terni:
* Orvieto
* Narni


== Economy ==
The present economic structure emerged from a series of transformations which took place mainly in the 1970s and 1980s. During this period, there was rapid expansion among small and medium-sized firms and a gradual retrenchment among the large firms which had hitherto characterised the region&#x27;s industrial base. This process of structural adjustment is still going on.

Economically the most important region is the upper Tiber valley with Città di Castello. Terni steelworks (stainless steel, titanium, alloy steel) and processing companies (automotive, stainless steel tubes, industrial food facility) account for 20 to 25% of Umbria&#x27;s GDP. In Terni there are also many multinational companies in the fields of chemistry, hydroelectric power, renewable sources of energy, and textiles (Alcantara, Cashmere). In the rest of the region the ornamental ceramics industry is much esteemed.

Umbrian agriculture is noted for its tobacco, olive oil and vineyards, which produce wines. Regional varietals include the white Orvieto, which draws agri-tourists to the vineyards in the area surrounding the medieval town of the same name. A notable wine is the Grechetto of Todi. Other noted wines produced in Umbria are Torgiano and Rosso di Montefalco. The Umbrian wineries are at the center of the &quot;Cantine Aperte&quot; or &quot;Open Cellars&quot; event, when local wine makers open their wineries to the public. Another typical Umbrian product is the black truffle found in Valnerina, an area that produces 45% of this product in Italy.

The food industry in Umbria produces processed pork-meats, confectionery, pasta and the traditional products of Valnerina in preserved form (truffles, lentils, cheese).

The unemployment rate stood at 8.2% in 2020.

===Tourism===
Umbria has many small and picturesque villages, 31 of them have been selected by (), a non-profit private association of small Italian towns of strong historical and artistic interest, that was founded on the initiative of the Tourism Council of the National Association of Italian Municipalities.

=== Umber ===

Umbria is the region where the Umber pigment was originally extracted. The name comes from &quot;terra d&#x27;ombra&quot;, or earth of Umbria, the Italian name of the pigment. The word also may be related to the Latin word &quot;umbra&quot;, meaning &quot;shadow&quot;. Umber is a natural brown or reddish-brown earth pigment that contains iron oxide and manganese oxide.

In the 20th century, natural umber pigments began to be replaced by pigments made with synthetic iron oxide and manganese oxide. Natural umber pigments are still being made, with Cyprus as a prominent source.

== Government and politics ==
Umbria was a former stronghold of the Italian Communist Party, forming with Tuscany, Emilia-Romagna and Marche what was then known as Italy&#x27;s &quot;Red Regions&quot;. Umbria was considered a stronghold of the Democratic Party and left-leaning parties for over 50 years, however in 2019 the candidate of the centre-right coalition Donatella Tesei won the region&#x27;s presidential election against her centre-left rival Vincenzo Bianconi, garnering 57.5% of the vote.

== Demographics ==
, the Italian national institute of statistics ISTAT estimated that 75,631 foreign-born immigrants live in Umbria, equal to 8.5% of the total population of the region.

== Administrative divisions ==
Umbria is divided into two provinces:



== Festivals ==

One of the most important festivals in Umbria is &quot;the festival of the Ceri (Candles)&quot;, also known as Saint Ubaldo Day in Gubbio. The race has been held every year since 1160, on the 15th day of May. The festival is focused around a race consisting of three teams of &quot;cerioli&quot;, carrying large symbolic &quot;candles&quot; topped by saints, including St. Ubald (the patron saint of Gubbio), S. Giorgio (St. George), and S. Antonio (Anthony the Great), and run through throngs of cheering supporters. The cerioli are clad in the distinctive colors of yellow, blue or black, according to the saint they support, with white trousers and red belts and neckbands. They travel up much of the mountain from the main square in front of the &quot;Palazzo dei Consoli&quot; to the basilica of St. Ubaldo, each team carrying a statue of their saint mounted on a wooden octagonal prism, similar to an hour-glass shape 4 metres tall and weighing about 280 kg (617 lb).

The race has strong devotional, civic, and historical overtones and is one of the best-known folklore manifestations in Italy, and therefore the Ceri were chosen as the heraldic emblem on the coat of arms of Umbria as a modern administrative region.

Umbria is not only known for its historical recollections such as the festival of the Ceri, &quot;Calendimaggio&quot; in Assisi and the &quot;giostra della Quintana&quot; in Foligno, but also for one of the biggest jazz music festivals called &quot;Umbria Jazz&quot;. &quot;Umbria Jazz&quot; was born as a festival in 1973 and since 2003 has been held in the Umbrian capital &quot;Perugia&quot; in July; it has become the fixed appointment of all jazz and good music lovers. Another important festival is the &quot;Festival dei Due Mondi&quot; (Festival of the Two Worlds), an annual summer music and opera festival which is held each June to early July in Spoleto.

== References ==
==Bibliography==
*

== External links ==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1280" start="0" end="6" title="Umbria" label="Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16110" start="18" end="24" title="Regions of Italy" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127320" start="28" end="41" title="central Italy" label="central Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188487" start="55" end="69" title="Lake Trasimeno" label="Lake Trasimeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q38580" start="74" end="87" title="Cascata delle Marmore" label="Marmore Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="111" end="116" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="158" end="176" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Apennine Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437" start="202" end="209" title="Perugia" label="Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437" start="323" end="330" title="Perugia" label="Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20103" start="332" end="338" title="Assisi" label="Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="342" end="361" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q676555" start="378" end="399" title="Francis of Assisi" label="St. Francis of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8621" start="402" end="407" title="Terni" label="Terni"/>
<link wikidata="Q20494" start="409" end="415" title="Norcia" label="Norcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20413" start="417" end="434" title="Città di Castello" label="Città di Castello"/>
<link wikidata="Q20458" start="436" end="442" title="Gubbio" label="Gubbio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20571" start="444" end="451" title="Spoleto" label="Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q541" start="453" end="460" title="Orvieto" label="Orvieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q20579" start="462" end="466" title="Todi" label="Todi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20390" start="468" end="488" title="Castiglione del Lago" label="Castiglione del Lago"/>
<link wikidata="Q10866" start="490" end="495" title="Narni" label="Narni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238" start="497" end="503" title="Amelia, Umbria" label="Amelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20559" start="505" end="511" title="Spello" label="Spello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="575" end="582" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279" start="610" end="616" title="Marche" label="Marche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282" start="633" end="638" title="Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="738" end="743" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="789" end="798" title="Apennine Mountains" label="Apennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417486" start="840" end="853" title="Monte Vettore" label="Monte Vettore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265" start="904" end="914" title="Attigliano" label="Attigliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="1027" end="1033" title="comune" label="comune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087556" start="1164" end="1171" title="Cospaia" label="Cospaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35431417" start="1364" end="1376" title="Tiber Valley" label="Tiber Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071692" start="1676" end="1684" title="Chiascio" label="Chiascio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20126" start="1727" end="1739" title="Bastia Umbra" label="Bastia Umbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q20590" start="1781" end="1789" title="Torgiano" label="Torgiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235297" start="1795" end="1801" title="Topino River" label="Topino"/>
<link wikidata="Q374149" start="1847" end="1859" title="Via Flaminia" label="Via Flaminia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20436" start="1910" end="1917" title="Foligno" label="Foligno"/>
<link wikidata="Q20143" start="1984" end="1991" title="Bettona" label="Bettona"/>
<link wikidata="Q932761" start="2016" end="2020" title="Nera (Italy)" label="Nera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="2360" end="2366" title="ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="2602" end="2613" title="Order of Saint Benedict" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="2796" end="2802" title="Fault (geology)" label="faults"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609430" start="2863" end="2875" title="1997 Umbria and Marche earthquake" label="that of 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q20491" start="2887" end="2899" title="Nocera Umbra" label="Nocera Umbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q20457" start="2901" end="2914" title="Gualdo Tadino" label="Gualdo Tadino"/>
<link wikidata="Q26689701" start="2949" end="2955" title="August 2016 Central Italy earthquake" label="August"/>
<link wikidata="Q27575005" start="2960" end="2972" title="October 2016 Central Italy earthquakes" label="October 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q20494" start="2987" end="2993" title="Norcia" label="Norcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43440" start="3172" end="3187" title="Giosuè Carducci" label="Giosuè Carducci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101868" start="3231" end="3245" title="Clitunno River" label="Clitunno River"/>
<link wikidata="Q389236" start="3314" end="3319" title="Umbri" label="Umbri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617880" start="3331" end="3344" title="Italic people" label="Italic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="3388" end="3394" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="3538" end="3553" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q36957" start="3926" end="3933" title="Umbrian language" label="Umbrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131848" start="3946" end="3962" title="Italic languages" label="Italic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3975" end="3980" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36653" start="3985" end="3990" title="Oscan language" label="Oscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20458" start="4004" end="4010" title="Gubbio" label="Gubbio"/>
<link wikidata="Q515194" start="4078" end="4090" title="Osco-Umbrian" label="Osco-Umbrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q943972" start="4115" end="4130" title="Iguvine Tablets" label="Iguvine Tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q273854" start="4244" end="4250" title="Gauls" label="Gallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410539" start="4339" end="4348" title="Terramara" label="Terramara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588933" start="4354" end="4378" title="Proto-Villanovan culture" label="Proto-Villanovan culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="4466" end="4476" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="4483" end="4492" title="Etruscans" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="4687" end="4695" title="Apennines" label="Apennine"/>
<link wikidata="Q463459" start="5037" end="5044" title="Samnium" label="Samnite"/>
<link wikidata="Q109251" start="5055" end="5063" title="Samnite Wars" label="struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="5072" end="5076" title="Ancient Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q463459" start="5113" end="5120" title="Samnium" label="Samnium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10866" start="5159" end="5164" title="Narni" label="Narni"/>
<link wikidata="Q635839" start="5314" end="5332" title="battle of Sentinum" label="battle of Sentinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q20571" start="5646" end="5655" title="Spoletium" label="Spoletium"/>
<link wikidata="Q374149" start="5671" end="5683" title="via Flaminia" label="via Flaminia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36456" start="5777" end="5785" title="Hannibal" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271" start="5813" end="5829" title="second Punic war" label="second Punic war"/>
<link wikidata="Q207250" start="5835" end="5859" title="battle of Lake Trasimene" label="battle of Lake Trasimene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747183" start="5972" end="5987" title="Roman civil war" label="Roman civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="5996" end="6007" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="6012" end="6020" title="Octavian" label="Octavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="6119" end="6134" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114493" start="6277" end="6290" title="Roman Army" label="imperial army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247527" start="6347" end="6359" title="Roman Umbria" label="the Regio VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247527" start="6409" end="6421" title="Roman Umbria" label="Roman Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="6496" end="6503" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130478" start="6578" end="6585" title="Perusia" label="Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q108356" start="6645" end="6651" title="Sabine" label="Sabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="6690" end="6702" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="6704" end="6714" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="6719" end="6729" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q769358" start="6777" end="6792" title="Battle of Taginae" label="decisive battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q20457" start="6853" end="6866" title="Gualdo Tadino" label="Gualdo Tadino"/>
<link wikidata="Q477973" start="6914" end="6924" title="Gothic War (535–554)" label="Gothic war"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="6930" end="6938" title="Lombards" label="Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829270" start="6969" end="6985" title="duchy of Spoleto" label="duchy of Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q694740" start="7140" end="7160" title="Exarchate of Ravenna" label="Exarchate of Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746044" start="7169" end="7179" title="Duchy of the Pentapolis" label="Pentapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="7276" end="7287" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107861" start="7471" end="7477" title="Medieval commune" label="comune"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="7603" end="7609" title="Church State" label="Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="7618" end="7635" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="7651" end="7658" title="Guelphs" label="Guelphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="7667" end="7678" title="Ghibellines" label="Ghibellines"/>
<link wikidata="Q914425" start="7718" end="7726" title="signoria" label="signorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q969610" start="7788" end="7795" title="Vitelli" label="Vitelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q20413" start="7799" end="7816" title="Città di Castello" label="Città di Castello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477813" start="7856" end="7862" title="Trinci" label="Trinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q20436" start="7866" end="7873" title="Foligno" label="Foligno"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="7946" end="7958" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="7962" end="7970" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q709181" start="7971" end="7979" title="Gil Álvarez Carrillo de Albornoz" label="Albornoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="8034" end="8041" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q187998" start="8113" end="8126" title="Cesare Borgia" label="Cesare Borgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829270" start="8392" end="8408" title="Duchy of Spoleto" label="Duchy of Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q133001" start="8558" end="8566" title="Paul III" label="Paul III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="8718" end="8735" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q175881" start="8806" end="8820" title="Roman Republic (18th century)" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="8856" end="8873" title="Napoleonic Empire" label="Napoleonic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788988" start="8918" end="8927" title="Trasimène" label="Trasimène"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="9039" end="9051" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="9115" end="9126" title="Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia" label="Piedmontese"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="9132" end="9150" title="Victor Emmanuel II" label="Victor Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="9319" end="9335" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38580" start="9633" end="9640" title="Marmore" label="Marmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16267" start="9755" end="9760" title="province of Rieti" label="Rieti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282" start="9787" end="9792" title="Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q696810" start="10139" end="10150" title="Gothic Line" label="Gothic Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="10194" end="10210" title="Italian Republic" label="Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16110" start="10216" end="10222" title="regions of Italy" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240" start="10326" end="10345" title="province of Perugia" label="province of Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437" start="10349" end="10356" title="Perugia" label="Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20413" start="10359" end="10376" title="Città di Castello" label="Città di Castello"/>
<link wikidata="Q20571" start="10379" end="10386" title="Spoleto" label="Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q20103" start="10389" end="10395" title="Assisi" label="Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20458" start="10398" end="10404" title="Gubbio" label="Gubbio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20579" start="10407" end="10411" title="Todi" label="Todi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20436" start="10414" end="10421" title="Foligno" label="Foligno"/>
<link wikidata="Q20390" start="10424" end="10444" title="Castiglione del Lago" label="Castiglione del Lago"/>
<link wikidata="Q20409" start="10447" end="10464" title="Città della Pieve" label="Città della Pieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q20559" start="10467" end="10473" title="Spello" label="Spello"/>
<link wikidata="Q16286" start="10481" end="10498" title="province of Terni" label="province of Terni"/>
<link wikidata="Q541" start="10502" end="10509" title="Orvieto" label="Orvieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q10866" start="10512" end="10517" title="Narni" label="Narni"/>
<link wikidata="Q20413" start="10980" end="10997" title="Città di Castello" label="Città di Castello"/>
<link wikidata="Q8621" start="10999" end="11004" title="Terni" label="Terni"/>
<link wikidata="Q583479" start="11333" end="11342" title="Alcantara (material)" label="Alcantara"/>
<link wikidata="Q333631" start="11344" end="11352" title="Cashmere wool" label="Cashmere"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="11479" end="11488" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q541" start="11562" end="11569" title="Orvieto" label="Orvieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q20579" start="11709" end="11713" title="Todi" label="Todi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11756" end="11764" title="Torgiano#Torgiano DOC" label="Torgiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q20478" start="11778" end="11788" title="Montefalco" label="Montefalco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093314" start="11995" end="12008" title="black truffle" label="black truffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q901731" start="12657" end="12662" title="Umber" label="Umber"/>
<link wikidata="Q265894" start="12938" end="12951" title="earth pigment" label="earth pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q721849" start="12966" end="12976" title="iron oxide" label="iron oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890178" start="12981" end="12996" title="manganese oxide" label="manganese oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="13178" end="13184" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q461886" start="13277" end="13300" title="Italian Communist Party" label="Italian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127320" start="13392" end="13403" title="Red belt (Italy)" label="Red Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q47729" start="13453" end="13469" title="Democratic Party (Italy)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q51027227" start="13574" end="13589" title="Donatella Tesei" label="Donatella Tesei"/>
<link wikidata="Q66717762" start="13598" end="13633" title="2019 Umbrian regional election" label="region&amp;#x27;s presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089" start="13959" end="13968" title="Provinces of Italy" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q167115" start="14101" end="14117" title="Saint Ubaldo Day" label="Saint Ubaldo Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q20458" start="14121" end="14127" title="Gubbio" label="Gubbio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261459" start="14363" end="14368" title="Ubald" label="Ubald"/>
<link wikidata="Q48438" start="14411" end="14421" title="St. George" label="St. George"/>
<link wikidata="Q170547" start="14440" end="14457" title="Anthony the Great" label="Anthony the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106929" start="15358" end="15380" title="giostra della Quintana" label="giostra della Quintana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738153" start="15731" end="15753" title="Festival dei Due Mondi" label="Festival dei Due Mondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20571" start="15873" end="15880" title="Spoleto" label="Spoleto"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51591" wikidata="Q1850" url="?curid=51591" title="Phnom Penh">
<text>Phnom Penh is the capital and most populous city of Cambodia. It has been the national capital since 1865 and has grown to become the nation&#x27;s primate city and its political, economic, industrial, and cultural centre. The city&#x27;s name derives from Wat Phnom, a Buddhist temple, and Lady Penh, the city&#x27;s founder. It sits at the confluence of the Tonlé Sap and Mekong rivers, and is the start of the Bassac River. It is also the seat of Cambodia&#x27;s monarchy, based at the Royal Palace. 

Founded in 1372, Phnom Penh succeeded Angkor Thom as the national capital in 1434 following the fall of Angkor, and remained so until 1497. It regained its capital status during the French colonial era. It underwent a period of investment and modernization during Cambodia&#x27;s independence period, earning the nickname the &quot;Pearl of Asia&quot; for its colonial French, New Khmer and Art Deco architecture. The city&#x27;s population swelled in the 1960s and 1970s as refugees fled from civil war and American bombing during the Vietnam War. Phnom Penh&#x27;s entire population was forcibly evacuated in 1975 by the Khmer Rouge, and faced persecution, forced labour and genocide. Phnom Penh remained largely uninhabited during the Democratic Kampuchea era until Vietnam-backed forces took the city in 1979. The city was reconstructed and infrastructure improved in the modern era with the support of international investment and aid. By 2019, it was home to more than 2 million people, approximately 14% of the Cambodian population.

The Greater Phnom Penh area includes the nearby Ta Khmau city and some districts of Kandal province. The city formerly functioned as a processing center, with textiles, pharmaceuticals, machine manufacturing, and rice milling. It is also home to many prominent schools, colleges and universities. Its cultural institutions and events have made it a hub for domestic and international tourism.

The city has hosted numerous regional and international events, the most notable being the 2002, 2012, and 2022 ASEAN Summit, the 32nd Southeast Asian Games, and the 12th ASEAN Para Games. Phnom Penh will be the first Cambodian city and the second city in Southeast Asia to host the Asian Youth Games in 2029.

==Etymology==
Phnom Penh (lit. &quot;Penh&#x27;s hill&quot;) takes its name from the present Wat Phnom (lit. &quot;hill temple&quot;), or from the ancient Funan Kingdom, which existed from the 1st to the 7th century AD in Southeast Asia and was the forerunner of the current Cambodian monarchy. Legend has it that in 1372, a wealthy widow named Penh found a Koki tree floating down the Tonlé Sap River after a storm. Inside the tree were four bronze Buddha statues and a stone statue of Vishnu. Penh ordered villagers to raise the height of the hill northeast of her house and used the Koki wood to build a temple on the hill to house the four Buddha statues, and a shrine for the Vishnu image slightly lower down. The temple became known as Wat Phnom Daun Penh, which is now known as Wat Phnom, a small hill in height.

Phnom Penh&#x27;s former official name is Krong Chaktomuk Serei Mongkol (, lit. &quot;city of Brahma&#x27;s faces&quot;), in its short form as Krong Chaktomuk (lit. &quot;city of four faces&quot;). &quot;Krong Chaktomuk&quot; is an abbreviation of the full name, given to it by King Ponhea Yat: &quot;Krong Chaktomuk Mongkol Sakal Kampuchea Thipadei Serei Theakreak Bavar Intabat Borei Roat Reach Seima Moha Nokor&quot; ( ). This loosely translates as &quot;the place of four rivers that gives the happiness and success of the Khmer Kingdom, the highest leader as well as impregnable city of the God Indra of the great kingdom&quot;.

==History==
The initial settlement of Phnom Penh is believed to have been established since the 5th century AD, according to the discovery of ancient kiln site in Choeung Ek commune of Dangkao district, southern part of central Phnom Penh in the early 2000s. Choeung Ek archaeological site was one of the largest kiln pottery center in Cambodia and the earliest known kiln sites in Southeast Asia to produce the ceremonial vessels known as kendi from 5th to 13th century. Archaeologists stated that a large community is surrounded by a circular earthwork structure that is 740 metres in diameter and 4 metres high, built in the 11th century. In addition, there are remnants of other ancient village infrastructure, irrigation system, inscription, Shiva linga as well as an ancient brick temple foundation and its ornate remains which dated back to Funan era.

First recorded a century after it is said to have taken place, the legend of the founding of Phnom Penh tells of a local woman, Penh (commonly referred to as &quot;Daun Penh&quot; (&quot;Lady Penh&quot; in Khmer), living at Chaktomuk, the future Phnom Penh. It was the late 14th century, and the Khmer capital was still at Angkor near Siem Reap to the north. Gathering firewood along the banks of the river, Lady Penh spied a floating koki tree in the river and fished it from the water. Inside the tree she found four Buddha statues and one of Vishnu.

The discovery was taken as a divine blessing, and to some a sign that the Khmer capital was to be brought to Phnom Penh from Angkor. To house the new-found sacred objects, Penh raised a small hill on the west bank of the Tonle Sap River and crowned it with a shrine, now known as Wat Phnom at the north end of central Phnom Penh. &quot;Phnom&quot; is Khmer for &quot;hill&quot; and Penh&#x27;s hill took on the name of the founder, and the area around it became known after the hill.

Phnom Penh first became the capital of Cambodia after Ponhea Yat, king of the Khmer Empire, moved the capital from Angkor Thom after it was captured and destroyed by Siam a few years earlier. There is a stupa behind Wat Phnom that houses the remains of Ponhea Yat and the royal family as well as the remaining Buddhist statues from the Angkorean era. In the 17th century, Japanese immigrants also settled on the outskirts of present-day Phnom Penh. A small Portuguese community survived in Phnom Penh until the 17th century, undertaking commercial and religious activity in the country.

Phnom Penh remained the royal capital for 73 years, from 1432 to 1505. It was abandoned for 360 years (from 1505 to 1865) by subsequent kings due to internal fighting between the royal pretenders. Later kings moved the capital several times and established their royal capitals at various locations in Tuol Basan (Srey Santhor), Pursat, Longvek, Lavear Em and Oudong.

It was not until 1866, under the reign of King Norodom I (1860–1904), the eldest son of King Ang Duong, who ruled on behalf of Siam, that Phnom Penh became the permanent seat of government and capital of Cambodia, and the current Royal Palace was built. Beginning in 1870, the French colonial authorities turned a riverside village into a city where they built hotels, schools, prisons, barracks, banks, public works offices, telegraph offices, law courts, and health services buildings. In 1872, the first glimpse of a modern city took shape when King Norodom employed the services of French contractor Le Faucheur to construct 300 brick houses for sale and rental to Chinese traders.

By the 1920s, Phnom Penh was known as the &quot;Pearl of Asia&quot;, and over the next four decades, Phnom Penh continued to experience rapid growth with the building of railways to Sihanoukville and Pochentong International Airport (now Phnom Penh International Airport). Phnom Penh&#x27;s infrastructure saw major modernisation under the rule of Norodom Sihanouk.

During the Vietnam War, Cambodia was used as a base by the People&#x27;s Army of Vietnam and the Viet Cong, and thousands of refugees from across the country flooded the city to escape the fighting between their own government troops, the People&#x27;s Army of Vietnam, the Viet Cong, the South Vietnamese and their allies, the Khmer Rouge, and American air strikes. By 1975, the population was 2–3 million, the bulk of whom were refugees from the fighting. The Khmer Rouge cut off supplies to the city for more than a year before it fell on 17 April 1975. Reports from journalists stated that the Khmer Rouge shelling &quot;tortured the capital almost continuously&quot;, inflicting &quot;random death and mutilation&quot; on millions of trapped civilians. The Khmer Rouge forcibly evacuated the entire city after taking it, in what has been described as a death march: François Ponchaud wrote that &quot;I shall never forget one cripple who had neither hands nor feet, writhing along the ground like a severed worm, or a weeping father carrying his ten-year old daughter wrapped in a sheet tied around his neck like a sling, or the man with his foot dangling at the end of a leg to which it was attached by nothing but skin&quot;; Jon Swain recalled that the Khmer Rouge were &quot;tipping out patients from the hospitals like garbage into the streets...In five years of war, this is the greatest caravan of human misery I have seen&quot;. All of its residents, including the wealthy and educated, were evacuated from the city and forced to do difficult labour on rural farms as &quot;new people&quot;. Tuol Sleng High School was taken over by Pol Pot&#x27;s forces and was turned into the S-21 prison camp, where people were detained and tortured. Pol Pot sought a return to an agrarian economy and therefore killed many people perceived as educated, &quot;lazy&quot;, spies, or political enemies. Many others starved to death as a result of failure of the agrarian society and the sale of Cambodia&#x27;s rice to China in exchange for bullets and weaponry. The former high school is now the Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum, where Khmer Rouge torture devices and photos of their victims are displayed. Choeung Ek (the Killing Fields), away, where the Khmer Rouge marched prisoners from Tuol Sleng to be murdered and buried in shallow pits, is also now a memorial to those who were killed by the regime.

The Khmer Rouge were driven out of Phnom Penh by the People&#x27;s Army of Vietnam in 1979, and people began to return to the city. Vietnam is historically a state with which Cambodia has had many conflicts, therefore this liberation was and is viewed with mixed emotions by the Cambodians. A period of reconstruction began, spurred by the continuing stability of government, attracting new foreign investment and aid by countries including France, Australia, and Japan. Loans were made from the Asian Development Bank and the World Bank to reinstate a clean water supply, roads and other infrastructure. The 1998 Census put Phnom Penh&#x27;s population at 862,000; and the 2008 census was 1.3 million. By 2019, its population reached over 2.2 million, based on general population census.

==Geography==

Phnom Penh is in the south-central region of Cambodia, and is fully surrounded by the Kandal province. The municipality is on the banks of the Tonlé Sap, Mekong, and Bassac Rivers. These rivers provide freshwater and other natural resources to the city. Phnom Penh and the surrounding areas consist of a typical flood plain area for Cambodia. Although Phnom Penh is at above the river, monsoon season flooding is a problem, and the river sometimes overflows its banks. Boeung Kak, Phnom Penh&#x27;s largest freshwater lake, was controversially filled in 2010 to make way for property development.

The city, at (11°33&#x27; North, 104°55&#x27; East), covers an area of , with some in the municipality and of roads. The agricultural land in the municipality amounts to with some under irrigation.

===Climate===
Phnom Penh has a tropical wet and dry climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;Aw&quot;). The climate is hot year-round with only minor variations. Temperatures typically range from and weather is subject to the tropical monsoons. The southwest monsoon blows inland bringing moisture-laden winds from the Gulf of Thailand and Indian Ocean from May to November, sees high temperatures accompanied by high humidity. The dry season lasts from December to April; when overnight temperatures can drop to .

==Administration==
Phnom Penh is an autonomous municipality of area with a government status equal to that of the provinces. The autonomous municipality is subdivided into 14 administrative divisions called &quot;khans&quot; (sections). The district s are subdivided into 105 &quot;sangkats&quot; (quarters), and further subdivided into 953 &quot;phums&quot; (villages). All &quot;khans&quot; are under the governance of Phnom Penh. Dangkao, Meanchey, Porsenchey, Sen Sok and Russey Keo are considered the outskirts of the city.

Phnom Penh is governed by the governor who acts as the top executive of the city as well as overseeing the Municipal Military Police, Municipal Police, and Bureau of Urban Affairs. Below the governor is the first vice governor and five vice governors. The chief of cabinet, who holds the same status as the vice governors, heads the cabinet consisting of eight deputy chiefs of cabinet who in turn are in charge of the 27 administrative departments. Every &quot;khans&quot; also has a chief.

==Demographics==
, Phnom Penh had a population of 2,129,371 people, with a total population density of 3,136 inhabitants per square kilometre in a city area. The population growth rate of the city is 3.92%. The city area has grown fourfold since 1979, and the metro area will continue to expand in order to support the city&#x27;s growing population and economy.

A survey by the National Institute of Statistics in 2017 showed that 95.3% of the population in Phnom Penh are Khmer, 4% Chams, and 0.7% others, predominantly Chinese, Vietnamese, and other small ethnic groups who are Thai, Budong, Mnong Preh, Kuy and Chong.

The official language is Khmer, but English and French are widely used in the city.

The number of slum-inhabitants at the end of 2012 was 105,771, compared with 85,807 at the start of 2012.

&quot;Note: As stated in the &quot;History&quot; paragraph (The 1998 Census put Phnom Penh&#x27;s population at 862,000;&quot; &quot;and the 2008 census was 1.3&quot; &quot;million.&quot;) &quot;the information collides with the information provided in the &quot;Historical population&quot; table. Needs editing.&quot;

===Religion===

The state religion is Theravada Buddhism. More than 97.8% of the people in Phnom Penh are Buddhists. Chams, South Asians, and small minority of Khmers have been practicing Islam for hundreds of years. A small percentage follow Christianity.

==Politics==
 
Phnom Penh is allocated 12 seats in the National Assembly, making it the largest constituency.

===Members of Parliament===
==Economy==

Phnom Penh is Cambodia&#x27;s economic centre as it accounts for a large portion of the Cambodian economy. Double-digit economic growth rates in recent years have triggered an economic boom in Phnom Penh, with new hotels, restaurants, schools, bars, high rises and residential buildings springing up in the city.

The economy is based on commercial interests such as garments, trading, and small and medium enterprises. In the past few years the property business has been booming, with rapidly increasing real estate prices. Tourism is also a major contributor in the capital as more shopping and commercial centres open, making Phnom Penh one of the major tourist destinations in South East Asia along with Siem Reap and Sihanoukville. According to the World Travel and Tourism Council, tourism made up 19.2 percent (US$2,053 million) of Cambodia&#x27;s GDP in 2009 and accounts for 13.7 percent of total employment. One of the most popular areas in Phnom Penh for tourists is Sisowath Quay, alongside the Tonle Sap River. Sisowath Quay is a five kilometre strip of road that includes restaurants, bars, and hotels.
The billion new urban development, Camko City, is meant to bolster the city landscape. The Bureau of Urban Affairs of Phnom Penh Municipality has plans to expand and construct new infrastructure to accommodate the growing population and economy. High rise buildings will be constructed at the entrance of the city and near the lakes and riverbanks. Furthermore, new roads, canals, and a railway system will be used to connect Camko City and Phnom Penh.

Other projects include:
* Grand Phnom Penh International City (under construction)
* Gold Tower 42 (On hold 32 floors construction begins again in the mid of 2018)
* Kokling super second floor house
* Vattanac Capital Tower
* The Peak 
With booming economic growth seen since the 1990s, new shopping venues have opened, such as Sorya Center Point, Aeon Mall Phnom Penh, Aeon Mall Sen Sok City, Aeon Mall Mean Chey and Olympia Mall. Many international brands have opened such as Mango, Salvatore Ferragamo, Hugo Boss, Padini Concept Store, Lily, Timberland, Jimmy Choo, CC Double O, MO, Brands Outlet, Nike, Converse, Pony, Armani Exchange, and Super Dry.

The tallest skyscraper in Phnom Penh is Vattanac Capital Tower at a height of , dominating Phnom Penh&#x27;s skyline with its neighbour skyscraper Canadia Tower (OCIC Tower). The tower was completed in December 2014. Modern high rises have been constructed all around the city, not concentrated in any one particular area.

The Central Market &quot;Phsar Thmei&quot; is a tourist attraction. The four wings of the yellow colored market are teeming with numerous stalls selling gold and silver jewelry, antique coins, clothing, clocks, flowers, food, fabrics and shoes. Phsar Thmei is undergoing under a major renovation, along with the creation of newer stalls.

==Education==
===Universities and colleges===
 


===Primary schools, secondary schools, and high schools===
===International schools===
===Supplementary and extra schools===

The Japanese Supplementary School of Phnom Penh, formerly known in English as the Phnom Penh Japanese School, is a part-time Japanese School, operated by the Japanese Association of Cambodia (JACAM;カンボジア日本人会 &quot;Kambojia Nihonjin-kai&quot;). It is in Sangkat Toek Thla in Sen Sok. It was established in 2002. It had 60 students in June 2011.

==Culture==

Phnom Penh also has its own dialect of Khmer. Speakers of the Phnom Penh dialect often elide syllables, which has earned it a reputation for being lazy speech. Phnom Penh is also known for its influence on New Khmer Architecture. Phnom Penh is notable for Ka tieu Phnom Penh, its variation on rice noodle soup, a dish available in sit-down cafes as well as street cafes.

The city hosts a number of music events throughout the city. Indie bands have grown in number due also in part to the emergence of private music schools such as SoundsKool Music (also operating in the city of Siem Reap), and Music Arts School (registered as a non-governmental organization). The Cambodian fishing dance originated in Phnom Penh at the Royal University of Fine Arts in the 1960s.
The two most visited museums in the city are the National Museum, which is the country&#x27;s leading historical and archaeological museum, and Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum, a former Khmer Rouge prison. The National Museum hosts celebrations of Cambodian dance and music, including a popular classic Apsara dance show of traditional folk dances as well as original creations.

=== Cambodian New Year ===
At this time, Phnom Penh celebrates Cambodian New Year, an occasion increasingly popular with tourists. During this typically hottest part of the year, water gets thrown around adding to the party atmosphere along with dancing and music. The precise date changes year-by-year but this holiday lasts, at least, three days. This festival marks the turn of the year based on the ancient Khmer calendar and also marks the end of the prior year harvest.

=== Water Festival ===
The largest annual festival in Phnom Penh, this lively gathering celebrates the reversing of the flow of the Tonlé Sap River. The holiday lasts three days as people flood into the city to enjoy the fireworks, boat races, live concerts, eating and partying. The boat racing dates back to ancient times marking the strengths of the Khmer marine forces during the Khmer Empire.

On 22 November 2010, at least 348 people were crushed to death in a bridge stampede at the festival.

=== Ancestors&#x27; Day ===
Ancestors&#x27; Day, also called Pchum Ben, is a very important aspect of Cambodian culture. It may be translated as &quot;gathering together&quot; to make offerings and is a time of reunion, commemoration, express love and appreciation for one&#x27;s ancestors. By offering food and good karma to those possibly trapped in the spirit world, living relatives help assuage their misery and guide them back into the cycle of reincarnation.

=== Visak Bochea ===
Vesākha is an annual holiday observed traditionally by Buddhists in Cambodia. Sometimes informally called &quot;Buddha&#x27;s Birthday&quot;, it actually encompasses the birth, enlightenment (nirvāṇa), and passing away (Parinirvāna) of Gautama Buddha.

==Cityscape and architecture==

The oldest structure is Wat Phnom from the founding days of the city, constructed in 1373. The main tourist attractions are the Royal Palace with the Silver Pagoda, and the National Museum, constructed during the French colonial era in the late-19th century in the classical Khmer style and hosting a vast collection of Khmer antiquities. The Independence Monument (Khmer: &quot;Vimean Akareach&quot;), although from the 1950s, is also constructed in the ancient Khmer style.

The French, who were the colonial masters from the 19th century to the 1940s, also left their mark, with various colonial villas, French churches, boulevards, and the Art Deco market Phsar Thom Thmei. A notable landmark of the colonial era is the Hotel Le Royal.

Starting with independence from the French in the 1950s and lasting until the era of the Khmer Rouge in the 1970s, Phnom Penh underwent tremendous growth as the capital city of a newly independent country. King Sihanouk was eager to present a new style of architecture and thus invigorate the process of nation building. A new golden era of architecture took off, with various projects and young Khmer architects, often educated in France, given opportunities to design and construct. This new movement was called &quot;New Khmer Architecture&quot; and was often characterised by a fusion of Bauhaus, European post-modern architecture, and traditional elements from Angkor. The most prominent architect was Vann Molyvann, who was nominated chief national architect by the king himself in 1956. Molyvann created landmark buildings such as the Preah Suramarit National Theatre or the Vann Molyvann House. Other architects helped construct the newly founded Royal Khmer University, the Institute of Foreign Languages, and the National Sports Centre. With the growth of the upper and entrepreneurial middle classes, new suburbs were built in the 1950s and 1960s. Although these buildings survived the Khmer Rouge era and the civil war, today they are under threat due to economic development and financial speculation. Villas and gardens from that era are being destroyed and redeveloped to make place for bigger structures. The landmark National Theatre by Molyvann was razed in 2008. A movement is rising in Cambodia to preserve this modernist heritage. Old villas are sometimes being converted into boutique hotels, such as the &quot;Knai Bang Chatt&quot;.

Monuments and memorials to the genocide of the Khmer Rouge era in the 1970s are the Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum (a former high school used as a concentration camp) and, on the outskirts of the city, the Choeung Ek Genocide Center. The Cambodia-Vietnam Friendship Monument was commissioned by the Vietnamese communists as symbol of Khmer-Vietnamese friendship during the late-1970s following the liberation of Cambodia from the Khmer Rouge.

The population, foreign investment, and urban development in Phnom Penh grew dramatically during the 1990s and early-2000s. The rapid growth resulted in the city&#x27;s infrastructure distinctly lacking (the drainage system is particularly notorious, and Phnom Penh frequently floods during the wet season), and a need for both residential and commercial spaces. The simultaneous demand for residential and commercial housing and the increase of international investment has led to the planning, if not construction, of several satellite cities. The largest of these cities are: Grand Phnom Penh International City, CamKo City, Diamond Island City, Boeung Kak Town, and Chruy Cangva City.

On the outskirts of the city, farmland has been developed into garment factories and housing for lower economic classes and those displaced by the new development in the city center.


=== 2035 master plan ===
Originally intended to be completed by 2020, the 2035 master plan is a French-funded project for the development of Phnom Penh. Although the plan was approved by the Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction in 2005, it has yet to be ratified by the Cabinet of Cambodia. The original plan details five edge-city projects connected to the historical city centre by waterways and tree-lined corridors.

==Media==
===Dailies===
====Khmer====
*&quot;Sralagn&#x27; Khmer&quot; (&quot;Love Khmer&quot;)
*&quot;Chakraval Daily&quot; (&quot;Universe&quot;)
*&quot;Kampuchea Thmei Daily&quot; (&quot;New Cambodia&quot;)
*&quot;Kampuchea Tgnai Nis&quot; (&quot;Cambodia Today&quot;)
*&quot;Kanychok Sangkhum&quot; (&quot;Social Reflection&quot;)
*&quot;Koh Santepheap&quot; (&quot;Island of Peace&quot;)
*&quot;Moneaksekar Khmer&quot; (&quot;Khmer Conscience&quot;) – Published by the Sam Rainsy Party.
*&quot;Rasmei Kampuchea&quot; (&quot;Light of Kampuchea&quot;) – Cambodia&#x27;s largest daily, it circulates about 18,000 copies.
*&quot;Samleng Yuvachun&quot; (&quot;Voice of Khmer Youth&quot;)
*&quot;Udomkate Khmer&quot; (&quot;Khmer Ideal&quot;)
*&quot;Wat Phnom Daily&quot; (&quot;Mount Temple&quot;)

====English====
*&quot;Phnom Penh Post&quot;, a daily English-language newspaper published in Phnom Penh.
*&quot;The Cambodia Daily&quot;, an English-language daily newspaper (fled from Cambodia in 2017, still operating online).
*&quot;Khmer Times&quot;, an English-language daily newspaper.

====Chinese====
*《柬華日報》(&quot;Jianhua Daily&quot;), a daily Chinese-language newspaper published in Phnom Penh.
*《星洲日報》(&quot;Sin Chew Daily&quot;), a Chinese-language daily newspaper, the Cambodian edition of the Malaysian Chinese daily of the same name.
*《華商日報》(&quot;Huashang Daily&quot;), a Chinese-language daily newspaper.
*《高棉日报》(&quot;Khmer Daily&quot;), a Chinese-language daily newspaper.
*《新柬埔寨》(&quot;New Cambodia&quot;), a Chinese-language daily newspaper.

===Magazines===
*&quot;AsiaLIFE Guide Phnom Penh&quot;, a monthly English-language lifestyle magazine published in Phnom Penh. (Ceased in 2018)
* &quot;F Magazine&quot;, the first fashion-forward magazine in Cambodia. Bi-lingual, written in English and Khmer.
* &quot;SOVRIN Magazine&quot;, is the fashion glossy magazine in Cambodia which written in khmer language.

===Online news===
*&quot;Thmey Thmey Phnom Penh&quot;
*&quot;Sabay News Phnom Penh&quot;
*&quot;Fresh News Phnom Penh&quot;

==Sport==
The martial arts of Bokator, Pradal Serey (Khmer kick boxing) and Khmer traditional wrestling have venues in Phnom Penh watched by dedicated spectators. Cambodia has increasingly become involved in modern sports over the last 30 years. As with the rest of the country, football and the martial arts are particularly popular. Ultimate fighting and freestyle boxing have also become more common in recent years.

The most prominent sporting venues in the city are the Morodok Techo National Stadium with a capacity of 60,000, which opened in 2021 as the home to the Cambodia national football team and the Phnom Penh National Olympic Stadium with a capacity of 30,000 — although the country never hosted the Olympic Games due to disruption by the civil war and the Khmer Rouge in the 1970s, which built in 1964 as the co-home to the Cambodia national football team. On completion, the stadium was one of the largest in Asia. Volleyball, basketball, and Tai-Kwon-Do games are often hosted at the stadium. The stadium closed in 2000, but was redeveloped and reopened.

In soccer ventures, Phnom Penh is formally represented by Phnom Penh Crown FC despite being home to numerous soccer teams who plays in the Cambodian League. Including Visakha, Nagaworld, Boeungket and the aforementioned Phnom Penh Crown, amongst many others.

The National Sports Centre of Cambodia hosts swimming, boxing, and volleyball competitions. Noted local football clubs include Phnom Penh Empire, Khemara Keila FC and Military Police. The city hosted the 2023 Southeast Asian Games and the 2023 ASEAN Para Games, this marked the first time that Cambodia has hosted a multi-sport event. The city will host the 2029 Asian Youth Games.

==Transport==

Phnom Penh International Airport is the largest and busiest airport in Cambodia. It is seven kilometres west of central Phnom Penh. The airport is connected to the city center by taxi, train, and shuttle bus. The airport is set to be replaced with the new Techo Takhmao International Airport in 2025. 

Cambodia&#x27;s national flag carrier, Cambodia Angkor Air (later rebranched as Air Cambodia in 2025), launched in 2009, is headquartered in Phnom Penh and has its main hub there, with an additional hub at the Siem Reap–Angkor International Airport.

Air France used to serve Phnom Penh from Paris-Charles de Gaulle but this service has since stopped. Qatar Airways now flies to and from Phnom Penh, via Saigon.

Taxis, pick-ups, and minibuses leave the city for destinations all over the country, but are fast losing ground to cheaper and more comfortable buses. Phnom Penh also has a rail service.

There are numerous bus companies, including Phnom Penh Public Transport and GST Express, running services to most provincial capitals, including Sihanoukville, Kampong Chhnang, Oudong and Takéo. Phnom Penh Sorya Transport Co. offers bus service to several provincial destinations along the National Routes and to Saigon. Giant Ibis is another bus company based in Phnom Penh, which travels to Sihanoukville, Kampot, Siem Reap and Saigon, and has free Wi-Fi, air conditioning and modest pricing.

The city is Cambodia&#x27;s main freshwater port, a major port on the Mekong River. It is linked to the South China Sea, 290 kilometres distant, via a channel of the Mekong in Vietnam.

===Public transport===

Phnom Penh is served by air conditioned public buses. Initial attempts by the Japanese government to develop a Phnom Penh bus service began in 2001. An update of the JICA urban transport master plan for Phnom Penh was completed and implemented in 2014. The city is now served by 21 bus lines, operated by the Phnom Penh municipal government. Private transportation within the city include the cycle rickshaw, known in Khmer as &quot;cyclo&quot;, the motorcycle taxi known in Khmer as &quot;moto&quot;, the auto rickshaw known locally as &quot;tuk-tuk&quot;, the trailer attached to a motorcycle taxi known in Khmer as &quot;remorque&quot;, and the standard automobile taxicab known in Khmer as &quot;taxi&quot;. Private forms of transportation used by locals include bicycles, motorbikes, and cars.

===Highways===
As the capital of Cambodia, a number of national highways connect the city with various parts of the country:
In 2023, a new expressway linking Phnom Penh with Sihanoukville came into operation. The expressway was built by China, which has a major role in infrastructure development in Cambodia through the Belt and Road Initiative.

==Water supply==
Water supply in Phnom Penh has improved dramatically in terms of access, service quality, efficiency, cost recovery and governance between 1993 and 2006. The number of customers has increased ninefold, service quality has improved from intermittent to continuous supply, water losses have been cut dramatically and the city&#x27;s water utility went from being bankrupt to making a modest profit. These achievements were recognized through international awards such as the 2006 Ramon Magsaysay Award and the 2010 Stockholm Industry Water Award. The city&#x27;s water utility is the Phnom Penh Water Supply Authority (PPWSA). Its main water sources are the Mekong River, the Tonle Sap river and the Tonle Bassac river.

==Twin towns – sister cities==
Phnom Penh is twinned with:

* Bangkok, Thailand
* Beijing, China
* Busan, South Korea
* Chongqing, China
* Cleveland, United States
* Hanoi, Vietnam
* Hefei, China
* Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
* Incheon, South Korea
* Kitakyushu, Japan
* Kunming, China
* Long Beach, United States
* Lowell, United States
* Shanghai, China
* Shenzhen, China
* Shantou, China
==Notable people==
 
* Tep Boprek, musician
*George Groslier, French polymath, historian, archaeologist
*Patricia Hy-Boulais, professional tennis player
*Sokyuth Kim (born 1999), footballer
*Theavy Mok (born 1963), first plastic surgeon in Cambodia
*Ieu Pannakar, film maker
*Makhali-Phâl, author
*Veth Rathana, actress
*Norodom Sihamoni, King of Cambodia
* Mu Sochua, politician 
*Preap Sovath, Cambodian singer
*Phal Sophorn, champion pradal serey boxer
* Chhet Sovanpanha, musician
*Loung Ung, author

==See also==
* Special Economic Zones of Cambodia

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*

==External links==

* Official city website
*Time in Phnom Penh
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1850" start="0" end="10" title="Phnom Penh" label="Phnom Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="18" end="25" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q504794" start="30" end="48" title="List of cities and towns in Cambodia" label="most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="52" end="60" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422929" start="148" end="160" title="primate city" label="primate city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818101" start="257" end="266" title="Wat Phnom" label="Wat Phnom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909296" start="291" end="300" title="Penh" label="Lady Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q939958" start="360" end="369" title="Tonlé Sap River" label="Tonlé Sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="374" end="380" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q978743" start="413" end="425" title="Bassac River" label="Bassac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q42298246" start="450" end="474" title="Monarchy of Cambodia" label="Cambodia&amp;#x27;s monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q420618" start="489" end="501" title="Royal Palace of Cambodia" label="Royal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q223665" start="543" end="554" title="Angkor Thom" label="Angkor Thom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919413" start="601" end="615" title="Dark ages of Cambodia" label="fall of Angkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173090" start="687" end="706" title="French protectorate of Cambodia" label="French colonial era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638486" start="769" end="804" title="First Kingdom of Cambodia" label="Cambodia&amp;#x27;s independence period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501716" start="865" end="880" title="French colonial architecture" label="colonial French"/>
<link wikidata="Q10587275" start="882" end="891" title="New Khmer Architecture" label="New Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="896" end="904" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q817206" start="999" end="1008" title="Cambodian Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1041" end="1052" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q85760415" start="1094" end="1120" title="Fall of Phnom Penh" label="forcibly evacuated in 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="1128" end="1139" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885072" start="1182" end="1190" title="Cambodian genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q330988" start="1243" end="1263" title="Democratic Kampuchea" label="Democratic Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q635533" start="1313" end="1317" title="Cambodian–Vietnamese War" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919387" start="1381" end="1391" title="Modern Cambodia" label="modern era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948407" start="1594" end="1602" title="Ta Khmau" label="Ta Khmau"/>
<link wikidata="Q466031" start="1630" end="1645" title="Kandal province" label="Kandal province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533965" start="1930" end="1937" title="Tourism in Cambodia" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654196" start="2052" end="2064" title="ASEAN Summit" label="ASEAN Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q22815157" start="2070" end="2096" title="2023 SEA Games" label="32nd Southeast Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q112944108" start="2106" end="2127" title="2023 ASEAN Para Games" label="12th ASEAN Para Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="2196" end="2210" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31909" start="2223" end="2240" title="Asian Youth Games" label="Asian Youth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818101" start="2344" end="2353" title="Wat Phnom" label="Wat Phnom"/>
<link wikidata="Q867782" start="2406" end="2419" title="Funan Kingdom" label="Funan Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="2473" end="2487" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42298246" start="2526" end="2544" title="Cambodian monarchy" label="Cambodian monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909296" start="2596" end="2600" title="Penh" label="Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160961" start="2609" end="2618" title="Aleurites moluccanus" label="Koki tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q939958" start="2637" end="2652" title="Tonlé Sap River" label="Tonlé Sap River"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="2701" end="2707" title="Buddha" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="2738" end="2744" title="Vishnu" label="Vishnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11389" start="3166" end="3172" title="Brahma" label="Brahma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385871" start="3350" end="3365" title="Ponhea Yat" label="King Ponhea Yat"/>
<link wikidata="Q128335" start="3672" end="3677" title="Indra" label="Indra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216178" start="3892" end="3899" title="Khan Dangkao" label="Dangkao"/>
<link wikidata="Q468895" start="4454" end="4465" title="Lingam" label="Shiva linga"/>
<link wikidata="Q867782" start="4555" end="4560" title="Funan" label="Funan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909296" start="4695" end="4699" title="Penh" label="Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="4773" end="4778" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385871" start="5660" end="5670" title="Ponhea Yat" label="Ponhea Yat"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="5684" end="5696" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q223665" start="5721" end="5732" title="Angkor Thom" label="Angkor Thom"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="5772" end="5776" title="Siam" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="5809" end="5814" title="stupa" label="stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="5916" end="5924" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q161652" start="5978" end="5986" title="Japanese people" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="6063" end="6073" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q845929" start="6379" end="6388" title="pretender" label="pretender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883937" start="6508" end="6520" title="Srey Santhor (town)" label="Srey Santhor"/>
<link wikidata="Q655547" start="6523" end="6529" title="Pursat" label="Pursat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101387" start="6531" end="6538" title="Lovek" label="Longvek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431796" start="6554" end="6560" title="Oudong" label="Oudong"/>
<link wikidata="Q559803" start="6610" end="6619" title="Norodom of Cambodia" label="Norodom I"/>
<link wikidata="Q530150" start="6656" end="6665" title="Ang Duong" label="Ang Duong"/>
<link wikidata="Q420618" start="6793" end="6805" title="Royal Palace, Phnom Penh" label="Royal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173090" start="6840" end="6867" title="Colonial Cambodia" label="French colonial authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588045" start="7232" end="7247" title="Chinese Cambodian" label="Chinese traders"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207676" start="7432" end="7445" title="Sihanoukville (city)" label="Sihanoukville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054163" start="7488" end="7520" title="Phnom Penh International Airport" label="Phnom Penh International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q160318" start="7598" end="7614" title="Norodom Sihanouk" label="Norodom Sihanouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="7628" end="7639" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936506" start="7676" end="7705" title="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam" label="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="7714" end="7723" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="7906" end="7919" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="7945" end="7956" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q85760415" start="8151" end="8172" title="Fall of Phnom Penh" label="fell on 17 April 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q326259" start="8475" end="8486" title="death march" label="death march"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085603" start="8488" end="8505" title="François Ponchaud" label="François Ponchaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271662" start="8850" end="8859" title="Jon Swain" label="Jon Swain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010950" start="9204" end="9214" title="new people (Kampuchea)" label="new people"/>
<link wikidata="Q39464" start="9263" end="9270" title="Pol Pot" label="Pol Pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q850268" start="9309" end="9313" title="Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum" label="S-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q850268" start="9712" end="9738" title="Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum" label="Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340590" start="9833" end="9847" title="Killing Fields" label="Killing Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="10023" end="10034" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="10151" end="10158" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q635533" start="10242" end="10252" title="Cambodian–Vietnamese War" label="liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="10460" end="10466" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="10468" end="10477" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="10483" end="10488" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="10515" end="10537" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="10546" end="10556" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q466031" start="10910" end="10925" title="Kandal province" label="Kandal province"/>
<link wikidata="Q199938" start="10967" end="10976" title="Tonlé Sap" label="Tonlé Sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="10978" end="10984" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q978743" start="10990" end="10996" title="Bassac River" label="Bassac"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="11136" end="11147" title="Floodplain" label="flood plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q890331" start="11293" end="11303" title="Boeung Kak" label="Boeung Kak"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="11608" end="11618" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q113562" start="11652" end="11680" title="tropical wet and dry climate" label="tropical wet and dry climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="11682" end="11711" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="11860" end="11867" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131217" start="11944" end="11960" title="Gulf of Thailand" label="Gulf of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="11965" end="11977" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q50201" start="12354" end="12358" title="Administrative divisions of Cambodia" label="khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50201" start="12423" end="12430" title="sangkat" label="sangkat"/>
<link wikidata="Q50201" start="12488" end="12492" title="Administrative divisions of Cambodia" label="phum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216178" start="12574" end="12581" title="Dangkao Section" label="Dangkao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803675" start="12583" end="12591" title="Meanchey" label="Meanchey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14847076" start="12593" end="12603" title="Porsenchey" label="Porsenchey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449896" start="12605" end="12612" title="Sen Sok" label="Sen Sok"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381269" start="12617" end="12627" title="Khan Russey Keo" label="Russey Keo"/>
<link wikidata="Q201028" start="13639" end="13644" title="Khmer people" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q383256" start="13649" end="13654" title="Chams" label="Chams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922522" start="13724" end="13737" title="List of ethnic groups in Cambodia" label="ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q472834" start="13746" end="13750" title="Thai people" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518802" start="13760" end="13770" title="Mnong people" label="Mnong Preh"/>
<link wikidata="Q56310" start="13772" end="13775" title="Kuy" label="Kuy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="13813" end="13818" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="13824" end="13831" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="13836" end="13842" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q201759" start="13887" end="13891" title="slum" label="slum"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="14338" end="14356" title="Theravada Buddhism" label="Theravada Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q383256" start="14417" end="14422" title="Chams" label="Chams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060646" start="14424" end="14436" title="South Asians" label="South Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q201028" start="14460" end="14466" title="Khmer people" label="Khmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="14488" end="14493" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234896" start="14613" end="14630" title="National Assembly of Cambodia" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q622035" start="14798" end="14815" title="Cambodian economy" label="Cambodian economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533965" start="15236" end="15243" title="Tourism in Cambodia" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11711" start="15419" end="15428" title="Siem Reap" label="Siem Reap"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207676" start="15433" end="15446" title="Sihanoukville (city)" label="Sihanoukville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530912" start="15689" end="15702" title="Sisowath Quay" label="Sisowath Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026827" start="15863" end="15873" title="Camko City" label="Camko City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917190" start="16483" end="16505" title="Vattanac Capital Tower" label="Vattanac Capital Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q136503" start="16760" end="16765" title="Mango (clothing)" label="Mango"/>
<link wikidata="Q981342" start="16767" end="16786" title="Salvatore Ferragamo" label="Salvatore Ferragamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q491627" start="16788" end="16797" title="Hugo Boss" label="Hugo Boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539185" start="16827" end="16837" title="The Timberland Company" label="Timberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362249" start="16839" end="16849" title="Jimmy Choo" label="Jimmy Choo"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="16883" end="16887" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q319515" start="16889" end="16897" title="Converse (shoe company)" label="Converse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228459" start="16899" end="16903" title="Pony International" label="Pony"/>
<link wikidata="Q635484" start="16905" end="16920" title="Armani Exchange" label="Armani Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q720479" start="16926" end="16935" title="Super Dry" label="Super Dry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917190" start="16978" end="16994" title="Vattanac Capital" label="Vattanac Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q190668" start="17287" end="17298" title="Phsar Thom Thmei" label="Phsar Thmei"/>
<link wikidata="Q11626839" start="17892" end="17917" title="hoshuko" label="part-time Japanese School"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="18174" end="18179" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q650250" start="18222" end="18227" title="elide" label="elide"/>
<link wikidata="Q10587275" start="18341" end="18363" title="New Khmer Architecture" label="New Khmer Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213650" start="18391" end="18398" title="Ka tieu" label="Ka tieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q42201" start="18568" end="18578" title="Indie band" label="Indie band"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="18767" end="18796" title="non-governmental organization" label="non-governmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374953" start="18859" end="18888" title="Royal University of Fine Arts" label="Royal University of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929750" start="18952" end="18967" title="National Museum of Cambodia" label="National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q850268" start="19047" end="19073" title="Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum" label="Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929750" start="19108" end="19123" title="National Museum of Cambodia" label="National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340705" start="19201" end="19213" title="Apsara Dance" label="Apsara dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961613" start="19341" end="19359" title="Cambodian New Year" label="Cambodian New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="20139" end="20151" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185980" start="20222" end="20237" title="Phnom Penh stampede" label="bridge stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818101" start="21053" end="21062" title="Wat Phnom" label="Wat Phnom"/>
<link wikidata="Q420618" start="21157" end="21169" title="Royal Palace, Phnom Penh" label="Royal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641555" start="21179" end="21192" title="Silver Pagoda, Phnom Penh" label="Silver Pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929750" start="21202" end="21217" title="National Museum, Phnom Penh" label="National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108673" start="21372" end="21393" title="Independence Monument, Phnom Penh" label="Independence Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q54114" start="21653" end="21662" title="boulevard" label="boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="21673" end="21681" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q190668" start="21689" end="21705" title="Phsar Thom Thmei" label="Phsar Thom Thmei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417406" start="21753" end="21767" title="Hotel Le Royal" label="Hotel Le Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q160318" start="21976" end="21989" title="Sihanouk" label="King Sihanouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q10587275" start="22290" end="22312" title="New Khmer Architecture" label="New Khmer Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="22362" end="22369" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q595448" start="22380" end="22404" title="post-modern architecture" label="post-modern architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q163607" start="22436" end="22442" title="Angkor" label="Angkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q379178" start="22477" end="22490" title="Vann Molyvann" label="Vann Molyvann"/>
<link wikidata="Q597036" start="22612" end="22644" title="Preah Suramarit National Theatre" label="Preah Suramarit National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q114364492" start="22652" end="22671" title="Vann Molyvann House" label="Vann Molyvann House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709572" start="22725" end="22747" title="Royal Khmer University" label="Royal Khmer University"/>
<link wikidata="Q259618" start="23368" end="23382" title="boutique hotel" label="boutique hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q850268" start="23511" end="23537" title="Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum" label="Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075734" start="23629" end="23655" title="Choeung Ek" label="Choeung Ek Genocide Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025211" start="23661" end="23697" title="Cambodia-Vietnam Friendship Monument" label="Cambodia-Vietnam Friendship Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867354" start="24933" end="24993" title="Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction (Cambodia)" label="Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q18210582" start="25036" end="25055" title="Cabinet of Cambodia" label="Cabinet of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582389" start="25232" end="25251" title="Sralagn&amp;#x27; Khmer" label="Sralagn&amp;#x27; Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068412" start="25290" end="25305" title="Chakraval Daily" label="Chakraval Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q6359370" start="25342" end="25363" title="Kampuchea Thmei Daily" label="Kampuchea Thmei Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q6359374" start="25404" end="25423" title="Kampuchea Thnai Nes" label="Kampuchea Tgnai Nis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365861" start="25466" end="25483" title="Kanychok Sangkhum" label="Kanychok Sangkhum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426149" start="25529" end="25543" title="Koh Santepheap" label="Koh Santepheap"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898854" start="25587" end="25604" title="Moneaksekar Khmer" label="Moneaksekar Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q656817" start="25661" end="25671" title="Sam Rainsy" label="Sam Rainsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295082" start="25686" end="25702" title="Rasmei Kampuchea" label="Rasmei Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409621" start="25817" end="25833" title="Samleng Yuvachun" label="Samleng Yuvachun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877284" start="25882" end="25896" title="Udomkate Khmer" label="Udomkate Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972951" start="25936" end="25951" title="Wat Phnom Daily" label="Wat Phnom Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q921095" start="26009" end="26024" title="Phnom Penh Post" label="Phnom Penh Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057820" start="26099" end="26117" title="The Cambodia Daily" label="The Cambodia Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q55615930" start="26222" end="26233" title="Khmer Times" label="Khmer Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521499" start="26405" end="26419" title="Sin Chew Daily" label="Sin Chew Daily"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26902" end="26912" title="F Magazine" label="F Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27018" end="27033" title="SOVRIN Magazine" label="SOVRIN Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27143" end="27154" title="Thmey Thmey" label="Thmey Thmey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27179" end="27189" title="Sabay News" label="Sabay News"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27214" end="27224" title="Fresh News" label="Fresh News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394188" start="27273" end="27280" title="Bokator" label="Bokator"/>
<link wikidata="Q967197" start="27282" end="27294" title="Pradal Serey" label="Pradal Serey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641667" start="27319" end="27346" title="Khmer traditional wrestling" label="Khmer traditional wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="27522" end="27530" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q85786340" start="27719" end="27749" title="Morodok Techo National Stadium" label="Morodok Techo National Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q318925" start="27817" end="27848" title="Cambodia national football team" label="Cambodia national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021522" start="27857" end="27892" title="Phnom Penh National Olympic Stadium" label="Phnom Penh National Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q36389" start="28204" end="28215" title="Taekwondo" label="Tai-Kwon-Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808462" start="28376" end="28395" title="Phnom Penh Crown FC" label="Phnom Penh Crown FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="28427" end="28433" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090809" start="28457" end="28473" title="Cambodian League" label="Cambodian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815667" start="28485" end="28492" title="Visakha FC" label="Visakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343076" start="28494" end="28503" title="Nagaworld FC" label="Nagaworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937261" start="28505" end="28514" title="Boeung Ket FC" label="Boeungket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808462" start="28538" end="28554" title="Phnom Penh Crown FC" label="Phnom Penh Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808462" start="28705" end="28722" title="Phnom Penh Empire" label="Phnom Penh Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740633" start="28724" end="28740" title="Khemara Keila FC" label="Khemara Keila FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q122878658" start="28745" end="28760" title="Military Police (Cambodian football club)" label="Military Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q22815157" start="28782" end="28808" title="2023 Southeast Asian Games" label="2023 Southeast Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q112944108" start="28817" end="28838" title="2023 ASEAN Para Games" label="2023 ASEAN Para Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q31909" start="28936" end="28958" title="2029 Asian Youth Games" label="2029 Asian Youth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054163" start="28976" end="29008" title="Phnom Penh International Airport" label="Phnom Penh International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="29155" end="29159" title="taxi" label="taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q870" start="29161" end="29166" title="train" label="train"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="29180" end="29183" title="bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q106616277" start="29232" end="29267" title="Techo Takhmao International Airport" label="Techo Takhmao International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q721639" start="29304" end="29316" title="flag carrier" label="flag carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q368781" start="29318" end="29337" title="Air Cambodia" label="Cambodia Angkor Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q106511570" start="29489" end="29527" title="Siem Reap–Angkor International Airport" label="Siem Reap–Angkor International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="29530" end="29540" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q46280" start="29571" end="29594" title="Charles de Gaulle Airport" label="Paris-Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208033" start="29631" end="29644" title="Qatar Airways" label="Qatar Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="29683" end="29689" title="Ho Chi Minh City" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29924" end="29951" title="Phnom Penh Public Transport" label="Phnom Penh Public Transport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29956" end="29967" title="GST Express" label="GST Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048147" start="30040" end="30055" title="Kampong Chhnang (town)" label="Kampong Chhnang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431796" start="30057" end="30063" title="Oudong" label="Oudong"/>
<link wikidata="Q613345" start="30068" end="30073" title="Takéo" label="Takéo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30075" end="30101" title="Phnom Penh Sorya Transport" label="Phnom Penh Sorya Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="30193" end="30199" title="Ho Chi Minh City" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="30310" end="30316" title="Ho Chi Minh City" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="30331" end="30336" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="30446" end="30458" title="Mekong River" label="Mekong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="30480" end="30495" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="30552" end="30559" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q958590" start="30752" end="30756" title="JICA" label="JICA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063637" start="30895" end="30926" title="Governor of Phnom Penh" label="Phnom Penh municipal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362895" start="30979" end="30993" title="cycle rickshaw" label="cycle rickshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q59720" start="31092" end="31105" title="auto rickshaw" label="auto rickshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207676" start="31561" end="31574" title="Sihanoukville (city)" label="Sihanoukville"/>
<link wikidata="Q19692715" start="31708" end="31732" title="Belt and Road Initiative" label="Belt and Road Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q777181" start="32230" end="32251" title="Ramon Magsaysay Award" label="Ramon Magsaysay Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618013" start="32265" end="32295" title="Stockholm Industry Water Award" label="Stockholm Industry Water Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="32408" end="32420" title="Mekong River" label="Mekong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q199938" start="32426" end="32435" title="Tonle Sap" label="Tonle Sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q978743" start="32450" end="32462" title="Tonle Bassac" label="Tonle Bassac"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="32516" end="32523" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="32533" end="32540" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="32553" end="32560" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16520" start="32570" end="32575" title="Busan" label="Busan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="32591" end="32600" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q962118" start="32610" end="32619" title="Cleveland, Tennessee" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="32637" end="32642" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185684" start="32654" end="32659" title="Hefei" label="Hefei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="32669" end="32685" title="Ho Chi Minh City" label="Ho Chi Minh City"/>
<link wikidata="Q20934" start="32697" end="32704" title="Incheon" label="Incheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188806" start="32720" end="32730" title="Kitakyushu" label="Kitakyushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q182852" start="32740" end="32747" title="Kunming" label="Kunming"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="32757" end="32767" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="32785" end="32791" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="32809" end="32817" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="32827" end="32835" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q59100" start="32845" end="32852" title="Shantou" label="Shantou"/>
<link wikidata="Q36988798" start="32883" end="32893" title="Tep Boprek" label="Tep Boprek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101610" start="32905" end="32920" title="George Groslier" label="George Groslier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174664" start="32965" end="32984" title="Patricia Hy-Boulais" label="Patricia Hy-Boulais"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283523" start="33014" end="33025" title="Sokyuth Kim" label="Sokyuth Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q16195358" start="33051" end="33061" title="Theavy Mok" label="Theavy Mok"/>
<link wikidata="Q5990121" start="33110" end="33122" title="Ieu Pannakar" label="Ieu Pannakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q63385437" start="33136" end="33148" title="Makhali-Phâl" label="Makhali-Phâl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923737" start="33158" end="33170" title="Veth Rathana" label="Veth Rathana"/>
<link wikidata="Q57319" start="33181" end="33197" title="Norodom Sihamoni" label="Norodom Sihamoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q42298246" start="33199" end="33215" title="King of Cambodia" label="King of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539074" start="33218" end="33227" title="Mu Sochua" label="Mu Sochua"/>
<link wikidata="Q425816" start="33242" end="33254" title="Preap Sovath" label="Preap Sovath"/>
<link wikidata="Q117828648" start="33274" end="33286" title="Phal Sophorn" label="Phal Sophorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094879" start="33318" end="33334" title="Chhet Sovanpanha" label="Chhet Sovanpanha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330022" start="33346" end="33355" title="Loung Ung" label="Loung Ung"/>
<link wikidata="Q25048385" start="33380" end="33414" title="Special Economic Zones of Cambodia" label="Special Economic Zones of Cambodia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51592" wikidata="Q3688" url="?curid=51592" title="Nouakchott">
<text>Nouakchott ( ; ; , ; ; ; ; , originally derived from , &#x27;place of the winds&#x27; or alternatively , &#x27;having no ears&#x27;) is the capital and largest city of Mauritania. Located in the southwestern part of the country, it is one of the largest cities in the Sahara. The city also serves as the administrative and economic center of Mauritania.

Once a mid-sized coastal village, Nouakchott was selected as the capital for the nascent nation of Mauritania, with construction beginning in 1958. It was originally designed to accommodate a population of 15,000, but experienced significant population growth in the 1970s when many Mauritanians fled their home villages due to drought and increasing desertification. Many of the newcomers settled in slum areas of the city that were poorly maintained and extremely overcrowded. By the mid-1980s, Nouakchott&#x27;s population was estimated to be between 400,000 and 500,000.

, the city had a population of nearly 1.5 million people and serves as the hub of the Mauritanian economy. It is home to a deepwater port and Nouakchott–Oumtounsy International Airport, one of the country&#x27;s two international airports. It also hosts the University of Nouakchott and several other more specialized institutions of higher learning.

==History==

Not too long ago, Nouakchott was known for being a small fishing town, fortified fishing village (&quot;ksar&quot;) in pre-colonial times and under French rule. As Mauritania prepared for independence, it lacked a capital city. The area of present-day Nouakchott was chosen by Moktar Ould Daddah, the first President of Mauritania, and his advisors. Ould Daddah desired the new capital to symbolize modernity and national unity, which ruled out existing cities or towns in the interior. The village was selected as the capital city for its central location between Saint-Louis, Senegal, the city from which the colony of Mauritania was governed, and Nouadhibou. Its location also meant that it avoided the sensitive issue of whether the capital was built in an area dominated by the Arabs, Amazigh (Berbers) or Sub-Saharan Africans.

Construction began in March 1958 to enlarge the village to house a population of 15,000, in 1959 Nouakchott started with its founding by indigenous people from the surrounding region, and the basics were completed by the time that the French granted independence on 28 November 1960. Nouakchott was planned with the expectation that commerce and other economic activities would not take place in the city. Nouakchott&#x27;s central business district was planned with broad streets and a grid-like structure; the new &quot;Cinquième Quartier&quot; (Fifth District) was located close to this area and became the location of a large open-air market and residential area within a few years. During the 1960s, the city obtained its own local government. By the 1970s, these new areas had grown so much that they replaced the old &quot;ksar&quot; in terms of importance, as they also hosted the governmental buildings and state enterprises.

The city was attacked twice in 1976 by the Polisario Front during the Western Sahara conflict, but the guerrillas caused little damage. The city has had massive and unconstrained growth, driven by the North African drought, since the beginning of the 1970s; hundreds of thousands moved there in search of a better life. The official censuses showed 134,000 residents in 1977 and 393,325 in 1988, although both figures were probably smaller than reality. The population is now estimated to consist of at least one third of the country&#x27;s population of 3.3 million, and the 2013 census showed a population of 958,399.

==Geography==
Located on the Atlantic coast of the Sahara Desert, it lies on the west coast of Africa. With the exception of Friendship Port and a small fishing port, the coastal strip is mostly left empty and allowed to flood. The coastline includes shifting sandbanks and sandy beaches. There are areas of quicksand close to the harbor. Nouakchott is largely flat, and some of the city lies below sea level. It is threatened by the sand dunes advancing from its eastern side which pose a daily problem. There have been efforts to save particular areas, including work by Jean Meunier. Owing to the rapid build-up, the city is quite spread out, with few tall buildings. Most buildings are one-story.

Nouakchott is built around a large tree-lined street, Avenue Gamal Abdel Nasser, which runs northeast through the city centre from the airport. It divides the city into two, with the residential areas in the north and the medina quarter, along with the &quot;kebbe&quot;, a shanty town formed due to the displacement of people from other areas by the desert. Other major streets are named (in French) for notable Mauritanian or international figures of the 1960s: Avenue Gamal Abdel Nasser, Avenue Charles de Gaulle, Avenue Kennedy, and Avenue Lumumba, for example.

The &quot;kebbe&quot; consists of cement buildings that are built overnight and made to look permanent to avoid destruction by the authorities. In 1999, it was estimated that more than half of the city&#x27;s inhabitants lived in tents and shacks, which were used for residential as well as business purposes. The city is broken into nine &quot;arrondissements&quot;, sub-divided into alphabetized &quot;Îlots&quot;. These are Teyarett, Ksar, Tevragh-Zeïna, Toujounine, Sebkha, El Mina, Dar-Naïm, Arafat and Riad. The Sebkha (Cinquième) Arrondissement is home to a large shopping area.

===Climate===
Nouakchott features a hot desert climate (Köppen: BWh) with hot temperatures throughout the year but cool winter night temperatures. Due to the city&#x27;s oceanside location, Nouakchott is generally not quite as hot as other cities with the same climate. Still, the city can experience sweltering days. While average high temperatures are relatively constant at around , average low temperatures can range from during the fall months (in this city fall is hotter than summer, with September and October being the hottest months) to during the winter months. Minimum temperatures can be as low as during winter nights in Nouakchott. Average rainfall in the city is a year.

==== Climate change ====
A 2019 paper published in PLOS One estimated that under Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5, a &quot;moderate&quot; scenario of climate change where global warming reaches ~ by 2100, the climate of Nouakchott in the year 2050 would most closely resemble the current climate of Khartoum. The annual temperature would increase by , and the temperature of the warmest month by , while the temperature of the coldest month would decrease by . According to Climate Action Tracker, the current warming trajectory appears consistent with , which closely matches RCP 4.5.

==== Sustainability ====
Responding to a 450% projected increase in electricity demand between 2010 and 2030, Nouakchott&#x27;s Sheikh Zayed solar power plant was completed in 2012 and is considered the largest solar power plant in Africa. The desert climate causes dust accumulation, which negatively impacts the performance of photovoltaic solar panels.

==Government==
Nouakchott is divided into three administrative regions (&quot;wilayat&quot;) led by governors appointed by the central government, each of which contains three departments (&quot;moughataa&quot;):

* Nouakchott-Nord (Nouakchott-North): Dar-Naim, Teyarett, Toujouonine 
* Nouakchott-Ouest (Nouakchott-West): Ksar, Sebkha, Tevragh-Zeina 
* Nouakchott-Sud (Nouakchott-South): Arafat, El Mina, Riyad

Separate from the &quot;wilayat&quot;, a directly elected regional council was established in Nouakchott in 2018, which took over the roles of promoting social and economic development from the Urban Community that it replaced. Fatimatou Abdel Malick was elected Council president in September 2018, and re-elected in May 2023.

Nouakchott was initially divided into four departments in 1973. In 1986 the current nine departments were created.

Formerly a district, in 1990 Nouakchott became a region of Mauritania. On 25 November 2014, it was split into the three current regions, with the previous governor of Nouakchott Mahi Ould Hamed becoming the first governor of Nouakchott-Nord.

==Demographics==

For comparison, its population was only 20,000 in 1969. Part of the difficulty in estimating the city&#x27;s population is that part of it is nomadic, setting up tents in suitable locations, then packing up when the need strikes. Some estimates put the 2008 population at over 2 million. The 2013 census gave the city&#x27;s population as 958,399.

===Slum resettlement===
In 2009, the government of Mauritania announced that it would begin a process of clearing the slum on the outskirts of Nouakchott, as 24,000 families would eventually be relocated to planned housing in the city. The process was scheduled to begin with the relocation of 9,000 families from the outskirts into the poor Arafat department neighborhood of &quot;Kosovo&quot;, popularly named for its high crime rate and poor services. The government planned to begin moving families in June 2009, despite concerns from aid agencies that needed infrastructure could not be put in place in the receiving neighborhood.

In 2013, it was reported that &quot;slums have been replaced by social dwellings for the poorest&quot;, with the World Bank reporting that the plan met with substantial success, resulting in access to improved services for 181,035 people in the slum areas. Now in 2023 the population is approximately 1.5M people.

==Economy==

Nouakchott is the center of the Mauritanian economy, with three-quarters of service sector enterprises located in the city with 90% of the city&#x27;s economic activity consisting of informal transactions. The &quot;Capital&quot; downtown area is home to the headquarters of multiple major national banks and companies and the site of a cluster of open-air markets.

The city is the focus of many modernization and foreign investment projects, with two five-star hotels finishing construction in 2024.

== Transport ==

Nouakchott has a Chinese-built deepwater port that opened in 1986. It was designed for a capacity of of cargo a year, but has been handling 1,500,000 tons (DWT) by 2009. China agreed in 2009 to invest US$282 million in the port, aiming to extend the main quay by over . As of 2011, the World Bank was investigating funding a new shipping container facility at the port.

Air service is provided by Nouakchott–Oumtounsy International Airport, which replaced the previous Nouakchott International Airport in June 2016.

The Cairo–Dakar Highway leg from Nouakchott to Nouadhibou was paved in 2004, although the Nouakchott-Rosso leg was paved before independence. A road (&quot;Route de l&#x27;Espoir&quot; (Road of Hope)) connects the city with Néma via Boutilimit and Kiffa. In the city, there is a public transport and commuter system, with vehicles serving major boulevards.

In July 2022 a tramway project was presented, without a scheduled opening date.

==Education==
The city is home to the University of Nouakchott Al Aasriya, the main university in Mauritania, opened in 1981. As of 1995, it had 70 professors and 2,800 students. Other higher education facilities include the Lebanese International University of Mauritania, the National School of Administration, the College of Science and Technology and the Higher Scientific Institute.

Public schools in Nouakchott are dispersed throughout the city, while private schools are concentrated in middle and upper-class districts. Among the most prominent international schools for citizens and expats alike are the American International School of Nouakchott, the Lycée Français Théodore Monod, and TLC International School.

== Culture ==

Attractions in Nouakchott include the National Museum of Mauritania, the National Library, the Port de Péche, and the National Archives. The city hosts several markets, including the Marocaine market and the beaches. One beach is devoted to fishing boats where fish can be bought fresh at the Fish market. Nouakchott is a principal selling place of native Saharan meteorites.

== Places of worship ==
Nouakchott, like the rest of the country, is populated by a Sunni Muslim super-majority, and mosques are extremely common in neighborhoods. The Saudi Mosque and Masjid Ibn Abbas are the most notable, due to their grand architecture and size.

There are also few Christian churches and temples: the most well-known is the Roman Catholic Diocese of Nouakchott (Catholic Church).

==Sport==
Nouakchott hosts ten of the fourteen teams of the Mauritanian Super D1 as of the 2023–2024 season, including ACS Ksar, AS Douanes, AS Garde Nationale, ASAC Concorde, ASC Police, ASC Tidjikja, FC Gourel Sangue, FC Tevragh-Zeina, Kaedi FC, and Nouakchott Kings.

==Twin towns – Sister cities==
Nouakchott is twinned with: 
* Madrid, Spain (1986) 
* Amman, Jordan (1999) 
* Lanzhou, China (2000)

== See also ==

* List of cities in Mauritania 
* Transport in Mauritania 
* Economy of Mauritania 
==References==
==Further reading==

* Armelle Choplin et Riccardo Ciavolella, 2008. &quot; Marges de la ville en marge du politique ? Logiques d’exclusion, de dépendance et d’autonomie à Nouakchott (Mauritanie) », Autrepart, n°45. 
* Choplin A., 2006. &quot;Fabriquer des villes-capitales entre monde arabe et Afrique noire: Nouakchott (Mauritanie) et Khartoum (Soudan), étude comparée&quot;. Université Paris 1, 535 p. 
* Choplin A., 2006. &quot;Le foncier urbain en Afrique: entre informel et rationnel, de Nouakchott, Mauritanie&quot;, Les annales de géographie, n°647, pp. 69–91. 
* Anne-Marie Frérot, &quot;Nouakchott, du puits nomade à la ville des pétroliers. Risques et représentations&quot;, &quot;Maghreb-Machrek&quot;, n°190, c. December 2006 – 2007. 
* Philippe Tanguy, « L&#x27;urbanisation irrégulière à Nouakchott: 1960-2000 », &quot;Insaniyat&quot;, n°22, October - December 2003, (vol. VII, 4). 
* Diagana I., 1993. &quot;Croissance urbaine et dynamique spatiale à Nouakchott, Thèse doct.&quot;: géographie: Lyon II, 314 p. 
* Pitte J.-R., 1977. &quot;Nouakchott, capitale de la Mauritanie&quot;. Paris : Univ. de Paris-Sorbonne, p. 200. 
* Mohamed Salem Ideidbi, Mauritanie : la Richesse d&#x27;une nation, Nouakchott, al-Manar, 2011.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3688" start="0" end="10" title="Nouakchott" label="Nouakchott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="140" end="147" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="168" end="178" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="268" end="274" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="683" end="690" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="706" end="721" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q201759" start="756" end="760" title="slum" label="slum"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="1054" end="1068" title="Port" label="deepwater port"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337089" start="1073" end="1115" title="Nouakchott–Oumtounsy International Airport" label="Nouakchott–Oumtounsy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119358" start="1189" end="1213" title="University of Nouakchott Al Aasriya" label="University of Nouakchott"/>
<link wikidata="Q210682" start="1444" end="1455" title="French West Africa" label="French rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q345385" start="1573" end="1591" title="Moktar Ould Daddah" label="Moktar Ould Daddah"/>
<link wikidata="Q273779" start="1861" end="1881" title="Saint-Louis, Senegal" label="Saint-Louis, Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q184184" start="1946" end="1956" title="Nouadhibou" label="Nouadhibou"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="2079" end="2084" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="2086" end="2093" title="Berbers" label="Amazigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="2107" end="2127" title="Black people" label="Sub-Saharan Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q738570" start="2554" end="2579" title="central business district" label="central business district"/>
<link wikidata="Q240425" start="3109" end="3124" title="Polisario Front" label="Polisario Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731384" start="3136" end="3159" title="Western Sahara conflict" label="Western Sahara conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="3281" end="3288" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="3716" end="3724" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965304" start="3812" end="3827" title="Friendship Port of Nouakchott" label="Friendship Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="3848" end="3852" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q28337" start="3947" end="3956" title="Shoal" label="sandbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q224090" start="3995" end="4004" title="quicksand" label="quicksand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128906" start="4611" end="4625" title="medina quarter" label="medina quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4782" end="4788" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="4990" end="4996" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="5579" end="5597" title="hot desert climate" label="hot desert climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="5599" end="5605" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q564954" start="6282" end="6290" title="PLOS One" label="PLOS One"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6312" end="6352" title="Representative Concentration Pathway#4.5" label="Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="6389" end="6403" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="6538" end="6546" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101409" start="6713" end="6735" title="Climate Action Tracker" label="Climate Action Tracker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6954" end="6984" title="List of power stations in Mauritania#Solar" label="Sheikh Zayed solar power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q846327" start="7246" end="7253" title="regions of Mauritania" label="regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263368" start="7359" end="7370" title="departments of Mauritania" label="departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669647" start="7399" end="7414" title="Nouakchott-Nord Region" label="Nouakchott-Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q892127" start="7435" end="7443" title="Dar-Naim" label="Dar-Naim"/>
<link wikidata="Q892417" start="7445" end="7453" title="Teyarett" label="Teyarett"/>
<link wikidata="Q892274" start="7455" end="7466" title="Toujouonine" label="Toujouonine"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669651" start="7470" end="7486" title="Nouakchott-Ouest Region" label="Nouakchott-Ouest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200125" start="7506" end="7510" title="Ksar, Mauritania" label="Ksar"/>
<link wikidata="Q891950" start="7512" end="7518" title="Sebkha, Mauritania" label="Sebkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q892759" start="7520" end="7533" title="Tevragh-Zeina" label="Tevragh-Zeina"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669653" start="7537" end="7551" title="Nouakchott-Sud Region" label="Nouakchott-Sud"/>
<link wikidata="Q892676" start="7572" end="7578" title="Arafat, Mauritania" label="Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q892423" start="7580" end="7587" title="El Mina, Mauritania" label="El Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q891956" start="7589" end="7594" title="Riyad, Mauritania" label="Riyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q121591435" start="7654" end="7670" title="Regional Council of Nouakchott" label="regional council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7790" end="7805" title="Urban Community of Nouakchott" label="Urban Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q28967004" start="7824" end="7846" title="Fatimatou Abdel Malick" label="Fatimatou Abdel Malick"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="8444" end="8449" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q892676" start="8993" end="9010" title="Arafat, Mauritania" label="Arafat department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="9401" end="9411" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965304" start="10167" end="10181" title="Friendship Port of Nouakchott" label="deepwater port"/>
<link wikidata="Q828909" start="10391" end="10395" title="Wharf" label="quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="10422" end="10432" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180158" start="10465" end="10483" title="shipping container" label="shipping container"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337089" start="10534" end="10576" title="Nouakchott–Oumtounsy International Airport" label="Nouakchott–Oumtounsy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801326" start="10606" end="10638" title="Nouakchott International Airport" label="Nouakchott International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506411" start="10658" end="10677" title="Cairo–Dakar Highway" label="Cairo–Dakar Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q861580" start="10755" end="10760" title="Rosso" label="Rosso"/>
<link wikidata="Q752257" start="10878" end="10882" title="Néma" label="Néma"/>
<link wikidata="Q895292" start="10887" end="10897" title="Boutilimit" label="Boutilimit"/>
<link wikidata="Q492778" start="10902" end="10907" title="Kiffa" label="Kiffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q115813994" start="11027" end="11042" title="Nouakchott tramway" label="tramway project"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119358" start="11131" end="11166" title="University of Nouakchott Al Aasriya" label="University of Nouakchott Al Aasriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="11191" end="11201" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="11241" end="11250" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443352" start="11318" end="11365" title="Lebanese International University (Mauritania)" label="Lebanese International University of Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146835" start="11410" end="11443" title="College of Science and Technology (Mauritania)" label="College of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885434" start="11756" end="11785" title="Lycée Français Théodore Monod (Mauritania)" label="Lycée Français Théodore Monod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370438" start="11871" end="11900" title="National Museum of Mauritania" label="National Museum of Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15116328" start="11906" end="11922" title="National Library of Mauritania" label="National Library"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11928" end="11941" title="Port de Péche" label="Port de Péche"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970446" start="11951" end="11968" title="National Archives of Mauritania" label="National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q330284" start="11993" end="12000" title="Marketplace" label="markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772282" start="12016" end="12032" title="Marocaine market" label="Marocaine market"/>
<link wikidata="Q40080" start="12041" end="12046" title="beach" label="beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454547" start="12126" end="12137" title="Fish market (Nouakchott)" label="Fish market"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12189" end="12207" title="Meteorite#The Sahara" label="Saharan meteorites"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="12294" end="12306" title="Sunni Muslim" label="Sunni Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362323" start="12307" end="12321" title="supermajority" label="super-majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916429" start="12378" end="12390" title="Saudi Mosque" label="Saudi Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="12496" end="12505" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q873207" start="12555" end="12591" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Nouakchott" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Nouakchott"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="12593" end="12608" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q582860" start="12684" end="12692" title="Super D1" label="Super D1"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208409" start="12731" end="12739" title="ACS Ksar" label="ACS Ksar"/>
<link wikidata="Q110818420" start="12741" end="12751" title="AS Douanes (Mauritania)" label="AS Douanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5653953" start="12753" end="12771" title="AS Garde Nationale" label="AS Garde Nationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654035" start="12773" end="12786" title="ASAC Concorde" label="ASAC Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257722" start="12788" end="12798" title="ASC Police" label="ASC Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208417" start="12800" end="12812" title="ASC Tidjikja" label="ASC Tidjikja"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12814" end="12830" title="FC Gourel Sangue" label="FC Gourel Sangue"/>
<link wikidata="Q297383" start="12832" end="12848" title="FC Tevragh-Zeina" label="FC Tevragh-Zeina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12850" end="12858" title="Kaedi FC" label="Kaedi FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834329" start="12864" end="12880" title="Nouakchott Kings" label="Nouakchott Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="12928" end="12935" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="12945" end="12951" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805" start="12969" end="12974" title="Amman" label="Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q183584" start="12993" end="13000" title="Lanzhou" label="Lanzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q506612" start="13034" end="13062" title="List of cities in Mauritania" label="List of cities in Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268632" start="13066" end="13089" title="Transport in Mauritania" label="Transport in Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q375832" start="13093" end="13114" title="Economy of Mauritania" label="Economy of Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850670" start="13655" end="13680" title="Les annales de géographie" label="Les annales de géographie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51593" wikidata="Q2280" url="?curid=51593" title="Minsk">
<text>Minsk ( ; ) is the capital and largest city of Belarus, located on the Svislach and the now subterranean Niamiha rivers. As the capital, Minsk has a special administrative status in Belarus and is the administrative centre of Minsk region and Minsk district. it has a population of about two million, making Minsk the 11th-most populous city in Europe. Minsk is one of the administrative capitals of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU).

First mentioned in 1067, Minsk became the capital of the Principality of Minsk, an appanage of the Principality of Polotsk, before being annexed by the Grand Duchy of Lithuania in 1242. It received town privileges in 1499. From 1569, it was the capital of Minsk Voivodeship, an administrative division of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. It was part of the territories annexed by the Russian Empire in 1793, as a consequence of the Second Partition of Poland. From 1919 to 1991, after the Russian Revolution, Minsk was the capital of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, which became a republic of the Soviet Union in 1922. Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Minsk became the capital of the newly independent Republic of Belarus.

== Etymology and historical names ==

The Old East Slavic name of the town was Мѣньскъ (i.e. &quot;Měnsk&quot; &lt; Early Proto-Slavic or Late Indo-European &quot;Mēnĭskŭ&quot;), derived from a river name &quot;Měn&quot; (&lt; &quot;Mēnŭ&quot;).
The resulting form of the name, &quot;Minsk&quot; (spelled either Минскъ or Мѣнскъ), was taken over both in Russian (modern spelling: Минск) and Polish (&quot;Mińsk&quot;), and under the influence of Russian this form also became official in Belarusian. The direct continuation of the name in Belarusian is &quot;Miensk&quot; (, ), which some Belarusian-speakers continue to use as their preferred name for the city.

When Belarus was under Polish rule, the names &quot;Mińsk Litewski&quot; (&quot;Minsk of Lithuania&quot;) and &quot;Mińsk Białoruski&quot; (&quot;Minsk of Belarus&quot;) were used to differentiate this place name from Mińsk Mazowiecki &#x27;Minsk in Masovia&#x27;. In modern Polish, &quot;Mińsk&quot; without an attribute usually refers to the city in Belarus, which is about 50 times bigger than Mińsk Mazowiecki; (cf. Brest-Litovsk and Brześć Kujawski for a similar case).

== History ==

=== Early history ===

The Svislach River valley was the settlement boundary between two early East Slavic tribes – the Krivichs and Dregovichs. By 980, the area was incorporated into the early medieval Principality of Polotsk, one of the earliest East Slavic principalities of Kievan Rus&#x27;. Minsk was first mentioned in the name form &quot;Měneskъ&quot; (Мѣнескъ) in the &quot;Primary Chronicle&quot; for the year 1067 in association with the Battle on the River Nemiga. 1067 is now widely accepted as the founding year of Minsk. City authorities consider the date of 3 March 1067 to be the exact founding date of the city, though the town (by then fortified by wooden walls) had certainly existed for some time by then. The origin of the name is unknown but there are several theories.

In the early 12th century, the Principality of Polotsk disintegrated into smaller fiefs. The Principality of Minsk was established by one of the Polotsk dynasty princes. In 1129, the Principality of Minsk was annexed by Kiev, the dominant principality of Kievan Rus&#x27;; however in 1146 the Polotsk dynasty regained control of the principality. By 1150, Minsk rivalled Polotsk as the major city in the former Principality of Polotsk. The princes of Minsk and Polotsk were engaged in years of struggle trying to unite all lands previously under the rule of Polotsk.

=== Late Middle Ages ===

Minsk escaped the Mongol invasion of Rus in 1237–1239. In 1242, Minsk became a part of the expanding Grand Duchy of Lithuania. It joined peacefully and local elites enjoyed high rank in the society of the Grand Duchy. In 1413, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and Kingdom of Poland entered into a union. Minsk became the centre of Minsk Voivodship (province). In 1441, as Grand Duke of Lithuania, Casimir IV included Minsk in a list of cities enjoying certain privileges, and in 1499, during the reign of his son, Alexander I Jagiellon, Minsk received town privileges under Magdeburg law. In 1569, after the Union of Lublin, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the Kingdom of Poland merged into a single state, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.

By the middle of the 16th century, Minsk was an important economic and cultural centre in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. It was also an important centre for the Eastern Orthodox Church. Following the Union of Brest, both the Eastern Catholic Churches and the Roman Catholic Church increased in influence.

In 1655, Minsk was conquered by troops of Tsar Alexei of Russia. Russians governed the city until 1660 when it was regained by John II Casimir, Grand Duke of Lithuania and King of Poland. By the end of the Polish-Russian War, Minsk had only about 2,000 residents and just 300 houses. The second wave of devastation occurred during the Great Northern War, when Minsk was occupied in 1708 and 1709 by the army of Charles XII of Sweden and then by the army of Peter the Great. The last decades of the Polish rule involved decline or very slow development, since Minsk had become a small provincial town of little economic or military significance.

=== Russian rule ===

Minsk was annexed by Russia in 1793 as a consequence of the Second Partition of Poland. In 1796, it became the centre of the Minsk Governorate. All of the initial street names were replaced by Russian names, though the spelling of the city&#x27;s name remained unchanged. It was briefly occupied by the Grande Armée during French invasion of Russia in 1812.

Throughout the 19th century, the city continued to grow and significantly improve. In the 1830s, major streets and squares of Minsk were cobbled and paved. A first public library was opened in 1836, and a fire brigade was put into operation in 1837. In 1838, the first local newspaper, &quot;Minskiye gubernskiye vedomosti&quot; (&quot;Minsk province news&quot;) went into circulation. The first theatre was established in 1844. By 1860, Minsk was an important trading city with a population of 27,000. There was a construction boom that led to the building of two- and three-story brick and stone houses in &quot;Upper Town&quot;.

Minsk&#x27;s development was boosted by improvements in transportation. In 1846, the Moscow-Warsaw road was laid through Minsk. In 1871, a railway link between Moscow and Warsaw ran via Minsk, and in 1873, a new railway from Romny in Ukraine to the Baltic Sea port of Libava (Liepāja) was also constructed. Thus Minsk became an important rail junction and a manufacturing hub. A municipal water supply was introduced in 1872, the telephone in 1890, the horse tram in 1892, and the first power generator in 1894. By 1900, Minsk had 58 factories employing 3,000 workers. The city also boasted theatres, cinemas, newspapers, schools and colleges, as well as numerous monasteries, churches, synagogues, and a mosque. According to the 1897 Russian census, the city had 91,494 inhabitants, with some 47,561 Jews constituting more than half of the city population.

=== 20th century ===


In the early years of the 20th century, Minsk was a major centre for the worker&#x27;s movement in Belarus. The 1st Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party, the forerunner to the Bolsheviks and eventually the CPSU, was held there in 1898. It was also one of the major centres of the Belarusian national revival, alongside Vilnius. However, the First World War significantly affected the development of Minsk. By 1915, Minsk was a battlefront city. Some factories were closed down, and residents began evacuating to the east. Minsk became the headquarters of the Western Front of the Russian army and also housed military hospitals and military supply bases.

The Russian Revolution had an immediate effect in Minsk. A Workers&#x27; Soviet was established in Minsk in October 1917, drawing much of its support from disaffected soldiers and workers. After the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, German forces occupied Minsk on 21 February 1918. On 25 March 1918, Minsk was proclaimed the capital of the Belarusian People&#x27;s Republic. The republic was short-lived; in December 1918, Minsk was taken over by the Red Army. In January 1919 Minsk was proclaimed the capital of the Byelorussian SSR, though later in 1919 (see Operation Minsk) and again in 1920, the city was controlled by the Second Polish Republic during the course of the Polish-Bolshevik War between 8 August 1919 and 11 July 1920 and again between 14 October 1920 and 19 March 1921. Under the terms of the Peace of Riga, Minsk was handed back to the Russian SFSR and became the capital of the Byelorussian SSR, one of the founding republics of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

A programme of reconstruction and development was begun in 1922. By 1924, there were 29 factories in operation; schools, museums, theatres and libraries were also established. Throughout the 1920s and the 1930s, Minsk saw rapid development with dozens of new factories being built and new schools, colleges, higher education establishments, hospitals, theatres and cinemas being opened. During this period, Minsk was also a centre for the development of Belarusian language and culture.
Before the Second World War, Minsk had a population of 300,000 people. The Germans captured Minsk in the Battle of Białystok–Minsk, as part of Operation Barbarossa; after it had been devastated by the Luftwaffe. However, some factories, museums, and tens of thousands of civilians had been evacuated to the east. The Germans designated Minsk the administrative centre of &quot;Generalbezirk Weißruthenien&quot;. Communists and sympathisers were killed or imprisoned, both locally and after being transported to Germany. Homes were requisitioned to house invading German forces. Thousands starved as food was seized by the German Army and paid work was scarce. Minsk was the site of one of the largest Nazi-run ghettos in the Second World War, temporarily housing over 100,000 Jews (see Minsk Ghetto). Some anti-Soviet residents of Minsk, who hoped that Belarus could regain independence, did support the Germans, especially at the beginning of the occupation, but by 1942, Minsk had become a major centre of the Soviet partisan resistance movement against the invasion, in what is known as the &quot;German-Soviet War&quot;. For this role, Minsk was awarded the title &quot;Hero City&quot; in 1974.

Minsk was recaptured by Soviet troops on 3 July 1944 in Minsk Offensive as part of Operation Bagration. The city was the centre of German resistance to the Soviet advance and saw heavy fighting during the first half of 1944. Factories, municipal buildings, power stations, bridges, most roads, and 80% of the houses were reduced to rubble. In 1944, Minsk&#x27;s population was reduced to a mere 50,000.
The historical centre was replaced in the 1940s and 1950s by Stalinist architecture, which favoured grand buildings, broad avenues and wide squares. Subsequently, the city grew rapidly as a result of massive industrialisation. Since the 1960s Minsk&#x27;s population has also grown apace, reaching 1 million in 1972 and 1.5 million in 1986.
Construction of Minsk Metro began on 16 June 1977, and the system was opened to the public on 30 June 1984, becoming the ninth metro system in the Soviet Union.
The rapid population growth was primarily driven by mass migration of young, unskilled workers from rural areas of Belarus, as well as by migration of skilled workers from other parts of the Soviet Union. To house the expanding population, Minsk spread beyond its historical boundaries. Its surrounding villages were absorbed and rebuilt as &quot;mikroraions&quot;, districts of high-density apartment housing.

=== Recent developments ===

Throughout the 1990s, after the fall of Communism, the city continued to change. As the capital of a newly independent country, Minsk quickly acquired the attributes of a major city. Embassies were opened, and a number of Soviet administrative buildings became government centres. During the early and mid-1990s, Minsk was hit by an economic crisis and many development projects were halted, resulting in high unemployment and underemployment. Since the late 1990s, there have been improvements in transport and infrastructure, and a housing boom has been underway since 2002. On the outskirts of Minsk, new &quot;mikroraions&quot; of residential development have been built. Metro lines have been extended, and the road system (including the Minsk BeltWay) has been improved. In recent years Minsk has been continuously decentralizing, with a third line of the Minsk Metro opening in 2020. More development is planned for several areas outside the city centre, while the future of the older neighborhoods is still unclear.

== Geography ==
Minsk is located on the southeastern slope of the Minsk Hills, a region of rolling hills running from the southwest (upper reaches of the river Nioman) to the northeast– that is, to Lukomskaye Lake in northwestern Belarus. The average altitude above sea level is . The physical geography of Minsk was shaped over the two most recent ice ages. The Svislach River, which flows across the city from the northwest to the southeast, is in the &quot;urstromtal&quot;, an ancient river valley formed by water flowing from melting ice sheets at the end of the last Ice Age. There are six smaller rivers within the city limits, all part of the Black Sea basin.

Minsk is in the area of mixed forests typical of most of Belarus. Pinewood and mixed forests border the edge of the city, especially in the north and east. Some of the forests were preserved as parks (for instance, the Chelyuskinites Park) as the city grew.

The city was initially built on the hills, which allowed for defensive fortifications, and the western parts of the city are the most hilly.

In from the northwestern edge of city lies large Zaslawskaye reservoir, often called the Minsk sea. It is the second largest reservoir in Belarus, constructed in 1956.

=== Climate ===
Minsk has a warm summer humid continental climate (Köppen &quot;Dfb&quot;), although its weather is oftentimes unpredictable, given its location between the strong influence of the moist air over the Atlantic Ocean and the dry air over the Eurasian landmass. Its weather is unstable and tends to change relatively often. The average January temperature is , while the average July temperature is . The lowest temperature was recorded on 17 January 1940, at and the warmest on 8 August 2015 at . Fog is frequent, especially in the autumn and spring. Minsk receives of precipitation annually, of which one-third falls during the cold period of the year (as snow or rain) and two-thirds during the warm period. Throughout the year, winds are generally westerly or northwesterly, bringing cool and moist air from the Atlantic.

=== Ecological situation ===
The ecological situation is monitored by Republican Centre of Radioactive and Environmental Control.
 During 2003–2008 the overall weight of contaminants increased from 186,000 to 247,400 tons. The change from gas as industrial fuel to mazut for financial reasons has worsened the ecological situation. However, the majority of overall air pollution is produced by cars. Belarusian traffic police &quot;DAI&quot; every year hold operation &quot;Clean Air&quot; to prevent the use of cars with extremely polluting engines. Sometimes the maximum normative concentration of formaldehyde and ammonia in air is exceeded in Zavodski District. Other major contaminants are Chromium-VI and nitrogen dioxide. Zavodski, Partyzanski and Leninski districts, which are located in the southeastern part of Minsk, are the most polluted areas in the city.

== Demographics ==

=== Population growth ===
=== Ethnic groups ===
During its first centuries, Minsk was a city with a predominantly Early East Slavic population (the forefathers of modern-day Belarusians). After the 1569 Polish–Lithuanian union, the city became a destination for migrating Poles (who worked as administrators, clergy, teachers and soldiers) and Jews (Ashkenazim, who worked in the retail trade and as craftsmen, as other opportunities were prohibited by discrimination laws). During the last centuries of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, many Minsk residents became polonised, adopting the language of the dominant Poles and assimilating to its culture.

After the second partition of Poland-Lithuania in 1793, Minsk and its larger region became part of the Russian Empire. The Russians dominated the city&#x27;s culture as had the Poles in the earlier centuries.

At the time of the 1897 census under the Russian Empire, Jews were the largest ethnic group in Minsk, at 52% of the population, with 47,500 of the 91,000 residents. Other substantial ethnic groups were Russians (25.5%), Poles (11.4%) and Belarusians (9%). The latter figure may be not accurate, as some local Belarusians were likely counted as Russians. A small traditional community of Lipka Tatars had been living in Minsk for centuries.

Between the 1880s and 1930s, many Jews, as well as peasants from other backgrounds, emigrated from the city to the United States as part of a Belarusian diaspora.

The high mortality of the First World War and the Second World War affected the demographics of the city, particularly the destruction of Jews under the Nazi occupation of the Second World War. Working through local populations, Germans instituted deportation of Jewish citizens to concentration camps, murdering most of them there. The Jewish community of Minsk suffered catastrophic losses in the Holocaust. From more than half the population of the city, the percentage of Jews dropped to less than 10% more than ten years after the war. After its limited population peaked in the 1970s, continuing anti-Semitism under the Soviet Union and increasing nationalism in Belarus caused most Jews to emigrate to Israel and western countries in the 1980s; by 1999, less than 1% of the population of Minsk was Jewish.

In the first three decades of the post-war years, the most numerous new residents in Minsk were rural migrants from other parts of Belarus; the proportion of ethnic Belarusians increased markedly. Numerous skilled Russians and other migrants from other parts of the Soviet Union migrated for jobs in the growing manufacturing sector. In 1959 Belarusians made up 63.3% of the city&#x27;s residents. Other ethnic groups included Russians (22.8%), Jews (7.8%), Ukrainians (3.6%), Poles (1.1%) and Tatars (0.4%). Continued migration from rural Belarus in the 1960s and 1970s changed the ethnic composition further. By 1979 Belarusians made up 68.4% of the city&#x27;s residents. Other ethnic groups included Russians (22.2%), Jews (3.4%), Ukrainians (3.4%), Poles (1.2%) and Tatars (0.2%).

According to the 1989 census, 82% percent of Minsk residents have been born in Belarus. Of those, 43% have been born in Minsk and 39% – in other parts of Belarus. 6.2% of Minsk residents came from regions of western Belarus (Grodno and Brest Regions) and 13% – from eastern Belarus (Mogilev, Vitebsk and Gomel Regions). 21.4% of residents came from central Belarus (Minsk Region).

According to the 1999 census, Belarusians make up 79.3% of the city&#x27;s residents. Other ethnic groups include Russians (15.7%), Ukrainians (2.4%), Poles (1.1%) and Jews (0.6%). The Russian and Ukrainian populations of Minsk peaked in the late 1980s (at 325,000 and 55,000 respectively). After the break-up of the Soviet Union many of them chose to move to their respective mother countries, although some families had been in Minsk for generations. Another factor in the shifting demographics of the city was the changing self-identification of Minsk residents of mixed ancestry – in independent Belarus they identify as Belarusians.

The Jewish population of Minsk peaked in the early 1970s at 50,000 according to official figures; independent estimates put the figure at between 100,000 and 120,000. Beginning in the 1980s, there has been mass-scale emigration to Israel, the US, and Germany. Today only about 10,000 Jews live in Minsk. The traditional minorities of Poles and Tatars have remained at much the same size (17,000 and 3,000 respectively). Rural Poles have migrated from the western part of Belarus to Minsk, and many Tatars have moved to Minsk from Tatarstan.

Some more recent ethnic minority communities have developed as a result of immigration. The most prominent are immigrants from the Caucasus countries – Armenians, Azerbaijanis and Georgians each numbering about 2,000 to 5,000. They began migrating to Minsk in the 1970s, and more immigrants have joined them since. Many work in the retail trade in open-air markets. A small but prominent Arab community has developed in Minsk, primarily represented by recent economic immigrants from Syria, Lebanon, Egypt, Algeria, etc. (In many cases, they are graduates of Minsk universities who decide to settle in Belarus and bring over their families). A small community of Romani, numbering about 2,000, are settled in suburbs of north-western and southern Minsk.

=== Languages ===

Throughout its history Minsk has been a city of many languages. Initially most of its residents spoke Ruthenian (which later developed into modern Belarusian). However, after 1569 the official language was Polish. In the 19th-century Russian became the official language and by the end of that century it had become the language of administration, schools and newspapers. The Belarusian national revival increased interest in the Belarusian language – its use has grown since the 1890s, especially among the intelligentsia. In the 1920s and early 1930s Belarusian was the major language of Minsk, including use for administration and education (both secondary and tertiary). However, since the late 1930s Russian again began gaining dominance.

A short period of Belarusian national revival in the early 1990s saw a rise in the numbers of Belarusian speakers. However, in 1994 the newly elected president Alexander Lukashenko slowly reversed this trend. Most residents of Minsk now use Russian exclusively in their everyday lives at home and at work, although Belarusian is understood as well. Substantial numbers of recent migrants from the rural areas use Trasyanka (a Russo-Belarusian mixed language) in their everyday lives.

=== Religion ===
There are no reliable statistics on the religious affiliations of those living in Minsk, or among the population of Belarus generally. The majority of Christians belong to the Belarusian Orthodox Church, which is the exarchate of the Russian Orthodox Church in Belarus. There is a significant minority of Roman Catholics.

As of 2006, there are approximately 30 religious communities of various denominations in Minsk. The only functioning monastery in the city is St Elisabeth Convent; its large complex of churches is open to visitors.

=== Crime ===

Minsk has the highest crime rate in Belarus – 193.5 crimes per 10,000 citizens. 20–25% of all serious crimes in Belarus, 55% of bribes and 67% of mobile phone thefts are committed in Minsk. However, attorney general Grigory Vasilevich stated that the homicide rate in Minsk in 2008 was &quot;relatively fine&quot;.

The crime rate grew significantly in 2009 and 2010: for example, the number of corruption crimes grew by 36% in 2009 alone. Crime detection level varies from 13% in burglary to 92% in homicide with an average 40.1%. Many citizens are concerned for their safety at night and the strongest concern was expressed by residents of Chizhovka and Shabany microdistricts (both in Zavodski District).

The SIZO-1 detention center, IK-1 general prison, and the KGB special jail called &quot;Amerikanka&quot; are all located in Minsk. Alexander Lukashenko&#x27;s rivals in the 2010 presidential election were imprisoned in the KGB jail along with other prominent politicians and civil activists. Ales Michalevic, who was kept in this jail, accused the KGB of using torture.

On 15 November 2020, more than 1,000 protesters were arrested during an anti-government protest. Protesters took to the streets in the capital, Minsk, following the death of an opposition activist, Raman Bandarenka. The activist died after allegedly being beaten up by the security forces. The protesters put flowers at the site where he was detained before succumbing to his injuries.
== Economy ==
Minsk is the economic capital of Belarus. It has developed industrial and services sectors which serve the needs not only of the city, but of the entire nation. Minsk&#x27;s contributions form nearly 46% of Belarusian budget. According to 2010 results, Minsk paid 15 trillion BYR to state budget while the whole income from all other regions was 20 trillion BYR. In the period January 2013 to October 2013, 70.6% of taxes in the budget of Minsk were paid by non-state enterprises, 26.3% by state enterprises, and 1.8% by individual entrepreneurs. Among the top 10 taxpayers were five oil and gas companies (including two Gazprom&#x27;s and one Lukoil&#x27;s subsidiaries), two mobile network operators (MTS and A1), two companies producing alcoholic beverages (Minsk-Kristall and Minsk grape wines factory) and one producer of tobacco goods.

In 2012, Gross Regional Product of Minsk was formed mainly by industry (26.4%), wholesale (19.9%), transportation and communications (12.3%), retail (8.6%) and construction (5.8%).

GRP of Minsk measured in Belarusian rubles was 55 billion (€20 billion) or around 1/3 of Gross domestic product of Belarus.

Minsk city has highest salaries in Belarus. As of December 2023 average gross salary in Minsk was 3,240 BYN per month (~ US$1,000).

=== Industry ===

Minsk is the major industrial centre of Belarus. According to 2012 statistics, Minsk-based companies produced 21.5% of electricity, 76% of trucks, 15.9% of footwear, 89.3% of television sets, 99.3% of washing machines, 30% of chocolate, 27.7% of distilled alcoholic beverages and 19.7% of tobacco goods in Belarus.

Today the city has over 250 factories and plants. Its industrial development started in the 1860s and was facilitated by the railways built in the 1870s. However, much of the industrial infrastructure was destroyed during World War I, especially during World War II. After the last war, the development of the city was linked to the development of industry, especially of R&amp;D-intensive sectors (heavy emphasis of R&amp;D intensive industries in urban development in the USSR is known in Western geography as &#x27;Minsk phenomenon&#x27;). Minsk was turned into a major production site for trucks, tractors, gears, optical equipment, refrigerators, television sets and radios, bicycles, motorcycles, watches, and metal-processing equipment. Outside machine-building and electronics, Minsk also had textiles, construction materials, food processing, and printing industries. During the Soviet period, the development of the industries was linked to suppliers and markets within the USSR. The break-up of the union in 1991 led to a serious economic meltdown in 1991–1994.

However, since the adoption of the neo-Keynesean policies under Alexander Lukashenko&#x27;s government in 1995, much of the gross industrial production was regained. Unlike many other cities in the CIS and Eastern Europe, Minsk was not heavily de-industrialised in the 1990s. About 40% of the workforce is still employed in the manufacturing sector.

Major industrial employers include:
*Minsk Tractor Plant – specialised in manufacturing tractors. Established in 1946 in eastern Minsk, is among major manufacturers of wheeled tractors in the CIS. Employs about 30,000 staff.
*Minsk Automobile Plant – specialising in producing trucks, buses, and mini-vans. Established in 1944 in south-eastern Minsk, is among major vehicle manufacturers in the CIS.
*Minsk Refrigerator Plant (also known as Atlant) – specialised in manufacturing household goods, such as refrigerators, freezers, and recently also of washing machines. Established in 1959 in the north-west of the city.
*Horizont – specialised in producing TV-sets, audio and video electronics. Established in 1950 in north-central Minsk.

=== Unemployment ===
In 2011 official statistics quote unemployment in Minsk at 0.3%. During the 2009 census 5.6% of Minsk residents of employable age called themselves unemployed.
The government effectively discourages official unemployment registration because of tiny unemployment benefits and obligatory public works. In 2015–2017 there was an attempt (cancelled in January 2018) to collect the taken from those who were unemployed unregistered for more than 6 months.

== Government and administrative divisions ==

Minsk is subdivided into nine &quot;raions&quot; (districts):
# 
# 
# 
# 

In addition, a number of residential neighbourhoods are recognised in Minsk, called microdistricts, with no separate administration.

== Culture ==

Minsk is the major cultural centre of Belarus. Its first theatres and libraries were established in the middle of the 19th century. It presently has 11 theatres and 16 museums, along with 20 cinemas and 139 libraries.

=== Churches ===
*The Orthodox Cathedral of the Holy Spirit is actually the former church of the Bernardine convent. It was built in the simplified Baroque style in 1642–87 and went through renovations in 1741–46 and 1869.
*The Cathedral of Saint Mary was built by the Jesuits as their principal church in 1700–10, restored in 1951 and 1997; it overlooks the recently restored 18th-century city hall, located on the other side of .
*Another two historic churches are the cathedral of Saint Joseph, formerly affiliated with the Bernardine monastery, built in 1644–52 and repaired in 1983, and the fortified church of Sts. Peter and Paul, originally built in the 1620s and recently restored, complete with its flanking twin towers.
*Church of St. Thomas Aquinas and the Dominican monastery in Minsk was a Catholic monastery complex founded in the early 17th century, destroyed in 1950. It was built in the Baroque style.
*The impressive Neo-Romanesque Roman Catholic Red Church (Cathedral of Sts. Simeon and Helene) was built in 1906–10 immediately after religious freedoms were proclaimed in Imperial Russia and the tsar allowed dissidents to build their churches;
*The largest church built in the Russian imperial period of the town&#x27;s history is dedicated to St. Mary Magdalene;
*Church of St. Adalbert and Benedictine monastery was a Roman Catholic monastic complex in Minsk originally belonging to the Benedictine order. Currently, the General Prosecutor&#x27;s Office of Belarus is located on this site;
*Many Orthodox churches were built after the dissolution of the USSR in a variety of styles, although most remain true to the Neo-Russian idiom. A good example is St. Elisabeth&#x27;s Convent, founded in 1999.


=== Cemeteries ===
*Kalvaryja (Calvary Cemetery) is the oldest surviving cemetery in the city. Many famous Belarusians are buried here. The cemetery was closed to new burials in the 1960s.
*Military Cemetery
*Eastern Cemetery (Minsk)|Eastern Cemetery
*Čyžoŭskija Cemetery (Minsk)|Čyžoŭskija Cemetery
*Northern Cemetery (Minsk)|Northern Cemetery

=== Theatres ===
Major theatres are:
*National Academic Grand Opera and Ballet Theatre of the Republic of Belarus
*Belarusian State Musical Theatre (performances in Russian)
*Maxim Gorky National Drama Theatre (performances in Russian)
*Janka Kupala National Theatre (performances in Belarusian)

=== Museums ===
Major museums include:
*Belarusian National Arts Museum
*Belarusian Great Patriotic War Museum
*Belarusian National History and Culture Museum
*Belarusian Nature and Environment Museum
*Maksim Bahdanovič Literary Museum
*Old Belarusian History Museum
*Yanka Kupala Literary Museum

Art galleries include:
*Ў gallery

=== Recreation areas ===
*Chelyuskinites Park
*Children&#x27;s Railroad
*Gorky Park (Minsk)
*Yanka Kupala Park

== Tourism ==
There are more than 400 travel agencies in Minsk, about a quarter of them provide agent activity, and most of them are tour operators.

== Sports ==
=== Football ===
*FC Dinamo Minsk
*FC Minsk
*FC Energetik-BGU Minsk
*FC Krumkachy Minsk
=== Ice hockey ===
*HC Dinamo Minsk
*HC Yunost Minsk

=== Handball ===
*SKA Minsk

=== Basketball ===
*BC Tsmoki-Minsk

=== International sporting events ===

In 2013, Minsk hosted the European Junior Rowing Championships at the Republican Center of Olympic Training for Rowing And Canoeing to the north-west of the city.

Minsk hosted the 2014 IIHF World Championship at the Minsk Arena.

In January 2016, the 2016 European Speed Skating Championships were held in the Minsk Arena – the only indoor speed skating rink in Belarus.

Minsk hosted the 2019 European Games in June.

The 2019 European Figure Skating Championships were held in the Minsk Arena from 21 to 27 January.

== Transportation ==

=== Local transport ===
Minsk has an extensive public transport system. Passengers are served by 8 tramway lines, over 70 trolleybus lines, 3 subway lines and over 100 bus lines. Trams were the first public transport used in Minsk (since 1892 – the horse-tram, and since 1929 – the electric tram). Public buses have been used in Minsk since 1924, and trolleybuses since 1952.

All public transport is operated by Minsktrans, a government-owned and -funded transport not-for-profit company. As of November 2021, Minsktrans used 1,322 buses (plus 93 electric buses), 744 trolleybuses and 135 tramway cars in Minsk.

The Minsk city government in 2003 decreed that local transport provision should be set at a minimum level of 1 vehicle (bus, trolleybus or tram) per 1,500 residents. The number of vehicles in use by Minsktrans is 2.2 times higher than the minimum level. 

Public transport fares are controlled by the &quot;city&#x27;s executive committee&quot; (city council). Single trip ticket for bus, trolleybus or tramway costs 0.75 BYN (≈ USD 0.3), 0.80 BYN for metro and 0.90 BYN for express buses. Monthly ticket for one kind of transport costs 33 BYN and 61 BYN for all five. Commercial marshrutka&#x27;s prices varies from 1.5 to 2 BYN.

=== Rapid transit ===
Minsk is the only city in Belarus with an underground metro system. Construction of the metro began in 1977, soon after the city reached over a million people, and the first line with 8 stations was opened in 1984. Since then it has expanded into three lines: Maskoŭskaja, Aŭtazavodskaja, and Zielienalužskaja which are long with 15, 14 and 4 stations, respectively. On 7 November 2012, three new stations on the Moskovskaya Line were opened and another on 3 June 2014.. Construction of the third line began in 2011 and the first stage opened in 2020. Some layout plans speculate on a possible fourth line running from Vyasnyanka to Serabranka micro-rayons.

Trains use 243 standard Russian metro-cars. On a typical day Minsk metro is used by 800,000 passengers. In 2007 ridership of Minsk metro was 262.1 million passengers, in 2017 ridership of Minsk metro was 284,1 million passengers,
making it the 5th busiest metro network in the former USSR (behind Moscow, St. Petersburg, Kyiv and Kharkiv). During peak hours trains run each 2–2.5 minutes. The metro network employs 3,435 staff.

Most of the urban transport is being renovated to modern standards. For instance, all metro stations built since 2001 have passenger lifts from platform to street level, thus enabling the use of the newer stations by disabled passengers.

=== Railway and intercity bus ===
Minsk is the largest transport hub in Belarus. Minsk is located at the junction of the Warsaw-Moscow railway (built in 1871) running from the southwest to the northeast of the city and the Liepaja-Romny railway (built in 1873) running from the northwest to the south. The first railway connects Russia with Poland and Germany; the second connects Ukraine with Lithuania and Latvia. They cross at the Minsk-&quot;Pasažyrski&quot; railway station, the main railway station of Minsk. The station was built in 1873 as Vilenski Vazkal. The initial wooden building was demolished in 1890 and rebuilt in stone. During World War II the Minsk railway station was completely destroyed. It was rebuilt in 1945 and 1946 and served until 1991. The new building of the Minsk-&quot;Pasažyrski&quot; railway station was built during 1991–2002. Its construction was delayed due to financial difficulties; now, however, Minsk boasts one of the most modern and up-to-date railway stations in the CIS. There were plans to move all suburban rail traffic from Minsk-&quot;Pasažyrski&quot; to the smaller stations, Minsk-&quot;Uschodni&quot; (East), Minsk-&quot;Paŭdniovy&quot; (South) and Minsk-&quot;Paŭnočny&quot; (North), by 2020. However, those plans were scrapped in favour of developing a more integrated system of suburban rail (branded as City Lines, operated by Belarusian Railways state enterprise). The system currently consists of 3 routes (to stations Bielaruś, Čyrvony Ściah, Rudziensk) all terminating at the central train station and is being served by 6 Stadler FLIRT train sets. 

There is an intercity bus station that links Minsk with the nearby airport, with the suburbs and other cities in Belarus and the neighboring countries. There are frequent services to Moscow, Smolensk, Vilnius, Riga and Warsaw.

=== Cycling ===
According to the 2019 survey of 1934 people, Minsk had around 811,000 adult bicycles and 232,000 child and adolescent bicycles. In Minsk there is one bike for every 1.9 people. The total number of bicycles in Minsk exceeds the total number of cars (770,000 personal automobiles). 39% of Minsk residents have a personal bike. 43% of Minsk residents ride a bicycle once a month or more. As of 2017, the level of bicycle use is about 1% of all transport movements (for comparison: 12% in Berlin, 50% in Copenhagen).

Since 2015, an annual bicycle parade / bicycle carnival is held in Minsk, during which vehicles are blocked for several hours along Pobediteley (Peramohi) Avenue. The number of participants in 2019 was more than 20,000 and the number of registrations was about 12,000. In 2017, the European Union funded the project &quot;Urban cycling in Belarus&quot; at a cost of €560,000, within the framework of which the public association Minsk Cycling Society together with the Council of Ministers created the regulatory document National Concept for the Development of Cycling in Belarus. In 2020, Minsk entered the top 3 most cycling cities in the CIS – after Moscow and Saint Petersburg.

=== Airports ===

Minsk National Airport is located to the east of the city. It opened in 1982 and the current railway station opened in 1987. It is an international airport with flights to Europe and the Middle East.

The former Minsk-1 Airport closed in 2015.

Minsk Borovaya Airfield (UMMB) is located in a suburb north-east of the city, next to Zaliony Luh Forest Park, housing Aero Club Minsk and Minsk Aviation Museum.

== Education ==
Minsk has about 451 kindergartens, 241 schools, 22 further education colleges, and 29 higher education institutions, including 12 major national universities. 

=== Major higher educational institutions ===

*Academy of Public Administration under the aegis of the President of the Republic of Belarus. The Academy was established in 1991 and it acquired the status of a presidential institution in 1995. The Academy has 3 institutes: &quot;Institute of Administrative Personnel&quot; which has 3 departments, &quot;Institute of Civil Service&quot; which has 3 departments and &quot;Research Institute of the Theory and Practice of Public administration&quot;.
*Belarusian State University. Major Belarusian universal university, founded in 1921. In 2006 had 15 major departments (Applied Mathematics and Informatics; Biology; Chemistry; Geography; Economics; International relations; Journalism; History; Humanitarian Sciences; Law; Mechanics and Mathematics; Philology; Philosophy and Social sciences; Physics; Radiophysics and Electronics). It also included 5 R&amp;D institutes, 24 Research Centres, 114 R&amp;D laboratories. The University employs over 2,400 lecturers and 1,000 research fellows; 1,900 of these hold PhD or Dr. Sc. degrees. There are 16,000 undergraduate students at the university, as well as over 700 PhD students. In 2018 Olga Chupris was the first female Vice-Rector appointed to the institution (Academic Work and Educational Innovations).
**Research Institute for Nuclear Problems of Belarusian State University
*Belarusian State University of Agricultural Technology. Specialised in agricultural technology and agricultural machinery.
*Belarusian National Technical University. Specialised in technical disciplines.
*Belarusian State Medical University. Specialised in Medicine and Dentistry. Since 1921 – Medicine Department of the Belarusian State University. In 1930 becomes separate as &quot;Belarusian Medical Institute&quot;. In 2000 upgraded to university level. Has six departments.
*Belarusian State Economic University. Specialised in Finance and Economics. Founded in 1933 as &quot;Belarusian Institute for National Economy&quot;. Upgraded to university level in 1992.
*Maxim Tank Belarusian State Pedagogical University. Specialised in teacher training for secondary schools.
*Belarusian State University of Informatics and Radioelectronics. Specialised in IT and radioelectronic technologies. Established in 1964 as &quot;Minsk Institute for Radioelectronics&quot;.
*Belarusian State University of Physical Training. Specialised in sports, coaches and PT teachers training.
*Belarusian State Technological University. Specialised in chemical and pharmaceutical technology, in printing and forestry. Founded in 1930 as &quot;Forestry Institute&quot; in Homel. In 1941 evacuated to Sverdlovsk, now Yekaterinburg. Returned to Gomel in 1944, but in 1946 relocated to Minsk as &quot;Belarusian Institute of Technology&quot;. Upgraded to university level in 1993. Has nine departments.
*Minsk State Linguistic University. Specialised in foreign languages. Founded in 1948 as &quot;Minsk Institute for Foreign Languages&quot;. In 2006 had 8 departments. Major focus on English, French, German and Spanish.
*Belarusian State University of Culture and Arts. Specializes in cultural studies, visual and Performing Arts. Founded in 1975 as &quot;Minsk Institute of Culture&quot;. Reorganized in 1993.
*International Sakharov Environmental Institute. Specialised in environmental sciences. Established in 1992 with the support from the United Nations. Focus on study and research of radio-ecological consequences of the Chernobyl nuclear power station disaster in 1986, which heavily affected Belarus.
*Minsk Institute of Management. The largest private higher educational institution in Belarus. Established in 1991. Specializes in Economics, Management, Marketing, Finance, Psychology and Information technology.

== Honors ==
A minor planet 3012 Minsk discovered by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Chernykh in 1979 is named after the city.

== Notable people ==

*Andrei Pavlovich Ablameyko (born 1970), Belarusian Greek Catholic priest
*Anton Adamovič (1909–1998), literary critic, novelist, publicist and historian
* Viktar Babaryka (born 1963), Belarusian public and opposition political figure, political prisoner
* Maksim Bahdanovič (1891–1917), poet, considered one of the founders of modern Belarusian literature
*Masha Bruskina (1924–1941), World War II partisan
*Siarhei Bulba (born 1967), Belarusian politician, army officer and former leader of the paramilitary organisation White Legion
* Veronika Cherkasova (1959–2004), journalist 
*Olga Chupris (born 1969), first female Vice Rector of the Belarusian State University
*Avraham Even-Shoshan (1906–1984), Israeli linguist and lexicographer
*Olga Fadeeva (born 1978), actress
*Sophie Fedorovitch (1893–1953), ballet, opera and theatre designer, birthplace
*Ella German (born 1937), girlfriend of Lee Harvey Oswald
*Moisei Ginzburg (1892–1946), constructivist architect
*Gennady Grushevoy (1950–2014), academic, politician, human rights and environmental activist, winner of the 1999 Rafto Prize
* Alés Harun (1887–1920), poet, writer and journalist
* Anatol Hrytskievich (1929–2015), Belarusian historian
* Hienadź Karpienka (1949–1999), scientist and politician
* Uładzimir Katkoŭski (1976–2007), one of the founders of the Belarusian Wikipedia
* Jauhien Kulik (1937–2002), artist and graphic designer who designed the 1991–95 coat of arms of Belarus, which was a version of the medieval symbol Pahonia
* Pavel Latushka (b.1973), Belarusian politician and opposition leader
*Maryna Linchuk (born 1987), fashion model
*Ivan Lubennikov (1951–2021), Russian painter, birthplace
* Janka Lučyna (Jan Niesłuchowski) (1851–1897), poet
* Leanid Marakou (1958–2016), journalist, writer
* Valery Marakoǔ (1909–1937), Belarusian poet and translator, victim of Stalin&#x27;s purges 
* Yan Matusevich (1946–1998) Catholic priest, and dean of the Belarusian Greek Catholic Church
*Louis B. Mayer (1884–1957) American film producer, one of the founders of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
*Bronislava Nijinska (1890–1972), ballerina and choreographer of the Ballets Russes, birthplace
*Lee Harvey Oswald (1939–1963), assassin of US President John F Kennedy, resided in Minsk from January 1960 to June 1962
*Hillel Pewsner (1922–2008), Chabad posek (legal scholar)
*Grigoriy Plaskov (1898-1972), Soviet artillery lieutenant, birthplace
*Alexander Rybak (born 1986), winner of the Eurovision Song Contest 2009 for Norway, birthplace
* Uładzimier Samojła (1878-1941), Belarusian critic, philosopher, journalist and a victim of Stalin&#x27;s purges
* Vitali Silitski (1972–2011), political scientist, analyst, the first director of the Belarusian Institute for Strategic Studies
* Aliaksiej Skoblia (nom de guerre Aliaksiej &quot;Tur&quot;) (1990–2022), Belarusian fighter-volunteer of the Kastuś Kalinoŭski Battalion posthumously awarded the title “Hero of Ukraine”
*Vanda Skuratovich (1925–2010), Roman Catholic activist
*Stanislav Shushkevich (1934–2022), Belarusian politician and scientist, the first head of state of independent Belarus
* Stefaniya Stanyuta (1905–2000), theater and movie actress 
*Alexander Taraikovsky (1986–2020), entrepreneur killed during the protests against the 2020 Belarusian presidential election
*Barys Tasman (1954–2022), journalist, sports writer
*George Tsisetski (b. 1985), film director, screenwriter, dramatist and visual artist
*Rachel Wischnitzer (1885–1989), architect and art historian
*Jazep Jucho (1921–2004), lawyer, historian and writer and a leading Belarusian authority on the laws of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania
*Simcha Zorin (1902–1974) World War II partisan
*Asher ben Löb Günzburg (1754–1823), rabbi

===Musicians===

* Angelica Agurbash (born 1970), Belarusian singer, Eurovision participant
*Marina Gordon (1917–2013) soprano, birthplace
*Irma Jaunzem (1897–1975), mezzo-soprano singer and folk song specialist
*Boris Khaykin (1904–1978), conductor
*Yung Lean (born 1996), Swedish rapper &amp; musician, birthplace
* Źmicier Sidarovič (1965–2014), musician
*Lavon Volski (b. 1965), musician

=== Sport ===
*Andrei Arlovski (born 1979), grew up and lived in Minsk before moving to the US to fight in the Ultimate Fighting Championship
*Victoria Azarenka (born 1989), former World No. 1 tennis player and 2012 and 2013 Australian Open winner, born in Minsk moving to Arizona at 16
*Yuri Bessmertny (born 1987), kickboxer
*Svetlana Boginskaya (born 1973), gold medal-winning gymnast at the 1988 and 1992 Olympics, birthplace
*Isaac Boleslavsky (1919-1977), chess grandmaster
*Darya Domracheva (born 1986), gold (4 times) and bronze medal-winning biathlete at the 2010 and 2014 Winter Olympics
*Boris Gelfand (born 1968), Israeli chess Grandmaster
*Max Geller (born 1971), Israeli Olympic wrestler
*Alexei Ignashov (born 1978), kickboxer, multiple Muay Thai and K-1 world champion
*Oleg Karavayev (1936-1978), wrestler and Olympic champion
* Viktar Kuprejčyk (1949–2017), chess grandmaster
*Isaak Mazel (1911-1945), chess master
*Max Mirnyi (born 1977), tennis player
*Aleksey Orlovich (born 2002), Belarusian professional footballer
*Artsiom Parakhouski (born 1987), basketball player
*Yulia Raskina (born 1982), individual rhythmic gymnast, won the All-Around Silver at the 2000 Sydney Olympics
* Roman Rubinshteyn (born 1996), Belarusian-Israeli basketball player in the Israeli Basketball Premier League
*Aryna Sabalenka (born 1998), 2023 Australian Open winner and former world No. 1 tennis player, born in Minsk moving to Miami at 23
* Yegor Sharangovich (born 1998), ice hockey player
*Yuri Shulman (born 1975), Belarusian-American chess grandmaster
*Mark Slavin (1954-1972), Israeli Olympic Greco-Roman wrestler and victim of the Munich massacre at the 1972 Summer Olympics
*Anna Smashnova (born 1976), Belarusian-born Israeli tennis player
*Roman Sorkin (born 1996), Belarusian-born Israeli basketball player in the Israeli Basketball Premier League
*Diana Vaisman (born 1998), Belarusian-born Israeli sprinter

==Twin towns – sister cities==

Minsk is twinned with:

*Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (2007)
*Ankara, Turkey (2007)
*Bangalore, India (1986)
*Beijing, China (2016)
*Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan (1997)
*Bonn, Germany (1993)
*Changchun, China (1992)
*Chişinău, Moldova (2000)
*Detroit, United States (1979)
*Dushanbe, Tajikistan (1998)
*Eindhoven, Netherlands (1994)
*Gaziantep, Turkey (2018)
*Hanoi, Vietnam (2004)
*Havana, Cuba (2005)
*Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam (2008)
*Islamabad, Pakistan (2015)
*Kaluga, Russia (2015)

*Murmansk, Russia (2014)
*Nizhny Novgorod, Russia (2017)
*Novosibirsk, Russia (2012)
*Rostov-on-Don, Russia (2018)
*Sendai, Japan (1973)
*Shanghai, China (2019)
*Shenzhen, China (2014)
*Tbilisi, Georgia (2015)
*Tehran, Iran (2006)
*Ufa, Russia (2017)
*Ulyanovsk, Russia (2015)
== See also ==
* List of squares in Minsk

== References ==
==Bibliography==
*

== Further reading ==
*


== External links ==
* A city guide for Minsk
* Minsk city on the official website of Belarus
* Why Minsk Is Not Like Other Capitals.
* Lost In Translation In Minsk – The &quot;Real Belarus&quot; Travel Tips.
* The Minsk Herald online magazine in English
* Photos of old Minsk
* Photos of Minsk during World War II</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="0" end="5" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="47" end="54" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q875547" start="71" end="79" title="Svislach (Berezina)" label="Svislach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630564" start="105" end="112" title="Nyamiha" label="Niamiha"/>
<link wikidata="Q192959" start="226" end="238" title="Minsk region" label="Minsk region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636191" start="243" end="257" title="Minsk district" label="Minsk district"/>
<link wikidata="Q993032" start="318" end="351" title="Largest cities in Europe" label="11th-most populous city in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="404" end="438" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173083" start="453" end="476" title="Eurasian Economic Union" label="Eurasian Economic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662372" start="543" end="564" title="Principality of Minsk" label="Principality of Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q617593" start="569" end="577" title="appanage" label="appanage"/>
<link wikidata="Q517333" start="585" end="608" title="Principality of Polotsk" label="Principality of Polotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="638" end="662" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942" start="684" end="699" title="town privileges" label="town privileges"/>
<link wikidata="Q782119" start="742" end="759" title="Minsk Voivodeship" label="Minsk Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="795" end="825" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="873" end="887" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025374" start="921" end="947" title="Second Partition of Poland" label="Second Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="978" end="996" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895" start="1027" end="1065" title="Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q236036" start="1082" end="1090" title="Republics of the Soviet Union" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1098" end="1110" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="1134" end="1165" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q35228" start="1281" end="1296" title="Old East Slavic" label="Old East Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q747537" start="1355" end="1373" title="Proto-Slavic language" label="Early Proto-Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="1377" end="1395" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Late Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917425" start="1672" end="1692" title="Russification of Belarus" label="influence of Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="1992" end="2001" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q648071" start="2121" end="2137" title="Mińsk Mazowiecki" label="Mińsk Mazowiecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q643843" start="2153" end="2160" title="Masovia" label="Masovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q140147" start="2323" end="2336" title="Brest, Belarus" label="Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q985649" start="2341" end="2356" title="Brześć Kujawski" label="Brześć Kujawski"/>
<link wikidata="Q875547" start="2421" end="2435" title="Svislach (Berezina)" label="Svislach River"/>
<link wikidata="Q48287" start="2514" end="2522" title="Krivichs" label="Krivichs"/>
<link wikidata="Q32799" start="2527" end="2537" title="Dregovichs" label="Dregovichs"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="2582" end="2596" title="Early Middle Ages" label="early medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q517333" start="2597" end="2620" title="Principality of Polotsk" label="Principality of Polotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="2672" end="2688" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q192551" start="2776" end="2793" title="Primary Chronicle" label="Primary Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418597" start="2842" end="2868" title="Battle on the Nemiga River" label="Battle on the River Nemiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q517333" start="3218" end="3241" title="Principality of Polotsk" label="Principality of Polotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662372" start="3280" end="3301" title="Principality of Minsk" label="Principality of Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q200797" start="3332" end="3339" title="Polotsk" label="Polotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483430" start="3407" end="3411" title="Principality of Kiev" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="3442" end="3458" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134220" start="3799" end="3821" title="Mongol invasion of Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Mongol invasion of Rus"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="3882" end="3906" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="4012" end="4036" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="4041" end="4058" title="Kingdom of Poland (1385–1569)" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q782119" start="4108" end="4124" title="Minsk Voivodeship" label="Minsk Voivodship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639920" start="4149" end="4172" title="Grand Duke of Lithuania" label="Grand Duke of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q53459" start="4174" end="4184" title="Casimir IV Jagiellon" label="Casimir IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q53450" start="4291" end="4312" title="Alexander Jagiellon" label="Alexander I Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942" start="4329" end="4344" title="town privileges" label="town privileges"/>
<link wikidata="Q163725" start="4351" end="4364" title="Magdeburg rights" label="Magdeburg law"/>
<link wikidata="Q963303" start="4385" end="4400" title="Union of Lublin" label="Union of Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="4406" end="4430" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="4439" end="4456" title="Kingdom of Poland (1385–1569)" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="4489" end="4519" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="4616" end="4646" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="4688" end="4711" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q845668" start="4727" end="4741" title="Union of Brest" label="Union of Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="4752" end="4777" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="Eastern Catholic Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731" start="4875" end="4886" title="Alexis of Russia" label="Tsar Alexei"/>
<link wikidata="Q53452" start="4960" end="4975" title="John II Casimir" label="John II Casimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q631991" start="5039" end="5057" title="Russo-Polish War (1654–1667)" label="Polish-Russian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="5168" end="5186" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q52934" start="5244" end="5265" title="Charles XII of Sweden" label="Charles XII of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="5290" end="5305" title="Peter I of Russia" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025374" start="5561" end="5587" title="Second Partition of Poland" label="Second Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q593230" start="5626" end="5643" title="Minsk Governorate" label="Minsk Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640962" start="5664" end="5676" title="street or road name" label="street names"/>
<link wikidata="Q504721" start="5804" end="5816" title="Grande Armée" label="Grande Armée"/>
<link wikidata="Q179250" start="5824" end="5849" title="French invasion of Russia" label="French invasion of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="6585" end="6591" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479029" start="6705" end="6767" title="Libau–Romny Railway" label="railway from Romny in Ukraine to the Baltic Sea port of Libava"/>
<link wikidata="Q167668" start="6769" end="6776" title="Liepāja" label="Liepāja"/>
<link wikidata="Q625083" start="6872" end="6894" title="water supply network" label="municipal water supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163579" start="7228" end="7242" title="Russian Empire Census" label="Russian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964957" start="7487" end="7545" title="1st Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party" label="1st Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="7569" end="7578" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="7599" end="7603" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="CPSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881959" start="7673" end="7700" title="Belarusian national revival" label="Belarusian national revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="7712" end="7719" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7734" end="7749" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q848492" start="7948" end="7965" title="Western Front (Soviet Union)" label="the Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q163059" start="8025" end="8040" title="military logistics" label="military supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="8053" end="8071" title="Russian Revolution (1917)" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="8248" end="8271" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk (Russia–Central Powers)" label="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918294" start="8273" end="8301" title="Belarusian-Polish administration of Minsk" label="German forces occupied Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q842199" start="8381" end="8414" title="Belarusian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Belarusian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="8492" end="8500" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895" start="8558" end="8574" title="Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Byelorussian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078181" start="8602" end="8617" title="Operation Minsk" label="Operation Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="8669" end="8691" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186284" start="8717" end="8737" title="Polish–Soviet War" label="Polish-Bolshevik War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076469" start="8853" end="8866" title="Peace of Riga" label="Peace of Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="8897" end="8909" title="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="Russian SFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="8995" end="9030" title="Soviet Union" label="Union of Soviet Socialist Republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9531" end="9547" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q327061" start="9625" end="9650" title="Battle of Białystok–Minsk" label="Battle of Białystok–Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="9663" end="9683" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563727" start="9685" end="9713" title="Bombing of Minsk in World War II" label="after it had been devastated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="9721" end="9730" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331803" start="9897" end="9924" title="Generalbezirk Weissruthenien" label="Generalbezirk Weißruthenien"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="10230" end="10236" title="ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q153336" start="10306" end="10318" title="Minsk Ghetto" label="Minsk Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q313830" start="10532" end="10547" title="Soviet partisans" label="Soviet partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q138796" start="10548" end="10567" title="resistance movement" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="10620" end="10637" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="German-Soviet War"/>
<link wikidata="Q159438" start="10694" end="10703" title="Hero City (Soviet Union)" label="Hero City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465049" start="10776" end="10791" title="Minsk Offensive" label="Minsk Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q151052" start="10803" end="10822" title="Operation Bagration" label="Operation Bagration"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="10977" end="10990" title="power station" label="power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134824" start="11184" end="11206" title="Stalinist architecture" label="Stalinist architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q232164" start="11480" end="11491" title="Minsk Metro" label="Minsk Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391083" start="11776" end="11790" title="skilled worker" label="skilled worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="11816" end="11828" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q114380" start="12399" end="12414" title="Financial crisis" label="economic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q604435" start="12680" end="12691" title="Microdistrict" label="mikroraions"/>
<link wikidata="Q674950" start="12701" end="12724" title="residential area" label="residential development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817363" start="12809" end="12822" title="MKAD (Minsk)" label="Minsk BeltWay"/>
<link wikidata="Q232164" start="12928" end="12939" title="Minsk Metro" label="Minsk Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622" start="13251" end="13257" title="Neman" label="Nioman"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="13321" end="13328" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="13428" end="13448" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="most recent ice ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q875547" start="13454" end="13468" title="Svislach (Berezina)" label="Svislach River"/>
<link wikidata="Q929061" start="13551" end="13561" title="urstromtal" label="urstromtal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12599" start="13630" end="13639" title="ice sheet" label="ice sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="13742" end="13751" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q622896" start="13784" end="13797" title="Temperate broadleaf and mixed forests" label="mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919909" start="13979" end="13998" title="Chelyuskinites Park" label="Chelyuskinites Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775081" start="14210" end="14231" title="Zaslawskaye reservoir" label="Zaslawskaye reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="14370" end="14395" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14397" end="14419" title="Köppen climate classification#Dfb/Dwb/Dsb: Warm summer continental or hemiboreal climates" label="Köppen &amp;quot;Dfb&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="14586" end="14593" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="14913" end="14926" title="precipitation" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="15387" end="15391" title="Tonne" label="tons"/>
<link wikidata="Q898757" start="15435" end="15440" title="mazut" label="mazut"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="15770" end="15782" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="15787" end="15794" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043177" start="15817" end="15834" title="Zavodski District" label="Zavodski District"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="15865" end="15873" title="Chromium" label="Chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q207895" start="15881" end="15897" title="nitrogen dioxide" label="nitrogen dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045200" start="15909" end="15920" title="Partyzanski District" label="Partyzanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044762" start="15925" end="15933" title="Leninsky District, Belarus" label="Leninski"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="16234" end="16245" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q825902" start="16263" end="16286" title="Polish–Lithuanian union" label="Polish–Lithuanian union"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="16410" end="16420" title="Ashkenazim" label="Ashkenazim"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="16568" end="16598" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q639715" start="16628" end="16637" title="Polonization" label="polonised"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="16820" end="16834" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="16840" end="16848" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163579" start="16946" end="16957" title="Russian Empire Census" label="1897 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q836076" start="17314" end="17326" title="Lipka Tatars" label="Lipka Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918997" start="17510" end="17529" title="Belarusian diaspora" label="Belarusian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="17685" end="17689" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="17927" end="17940" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="18511" end="18522" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="18560" end="18568" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="18612" end="18624" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="18840" end="18846" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="19832" end="19844" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916388" start="20158" end="20175" title="Jewish population" label="Jewish population"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481" start="20684" end="20693" title="Tatarstan" label="Tatarstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="20713" end="20728" title="minority group" label="ethnic minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="20827" end="20835" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="20848" end="20857" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q482942" start="20859" end="20871" title="Azerbaijani people" label="Azerbaijanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18973" start="20876" end="20885" title="Georgians" label="Georgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="21028" end="21040" title="retailing" label="retail trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="21180" end="21185" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="21187" end="21194" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="21196" end="21201" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="21203" end="21210" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="21359" end="21365" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q13211" start="21572" end="21581" title="Ruthenian language" label="Ruthenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091" start="21617" end="21627" title="Belarusian language" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="21654" end="21671" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21676" end="21682" title="Dialects of Polish#Northern Borderlands dialect" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q381142" start="21978" end="21992" title="intelligentsia" label="intelligentsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866" start="22375" end="22395" title="Alexander Lukashenko" label="Alexander Lukashenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q898799" start="22628" end="22637" title="Trasianka" label="Trasyanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q598783" start="22893" end="22919" title="Belarusian Orthodox Church" label="Belarusian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="22951" end="22974" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="23022" end="23037" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="23157" end="23166" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7211414" start="23182" end="23202" title="St Elisabeth Convent (Minsk)" label="St Elisabeth Convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q604435" start="23935" end="23948" title="microdistrict" label="microdistrict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043177" start="23959" end="23976" title="Zavodski District" label="Zavodski District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329608" start="24038" end="24041" title="State Security Committee of the Republic of Belarus" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866" start="24111" end="24131" title="Alexander Lukashenko" label="Alexander Lukashenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q240609" start="24153" end="24179" title="2010 Belarusian presidential election" label="2010 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q983697" start="24272" end="24287" title="Ales Michalevic" label="Ales Michalevic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101537713" start="24549" end="24565" title="Death of Raman Bandarenka" label="Raman Bandarenka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="24764" end="24780" title="Capital city" label="economic capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q102673" start="25372" end="25379" title="Gazprom" label="Gazprom"/>
<link wikidata="Q329347" start="25395" end="25401" title="Lukoil" label="Lukoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368919" start="25454" end="25457" title="MTS (network provider)" label="MTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888809" start="25462" end="25464" title="A1 Belarus" label="A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610525" start="25603" end="25625" title="Gross Regional Product" label="Gross Regional Product"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="26740" end="26747" title="Research and development" label="R&amp;amp;D"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="26817" end="26834" title="urban planning" label="urban development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866" start="27506" end="27526" title="Alexander Lukashenko" label="Alexander Lukashenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="27770" end="27790" title="Secondary sector of the economy" label="manufacturing sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q592110" start="27830" end="27849" title="Minsk Tractor Works" label="Minsk Tractor Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251215" start="28019" end="28041" title="Minsk Automobile Plant" label="Minsk Automobile Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295217" start="28194" end="28218" title="Minsk Refrigerator Plant" label="Minsk Refrigerator Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q124441" start="28344" end="28359" title="washing machine" label="washing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688" start="29090" end="29095" title="raion" label="raion"/>
<link wikidata="Q604435" start="29213" end="29226" title="microdistrict" label="microdistrict"/>
<link wikidata="Q598783" start="29519" end="29527" title="Belarusian Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="29594" end="29604" title="Cistercians" label="Bernardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="29645" end="29652" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637149" start="29725" end="29748" title="Cathedral of Saint Virgin Mary" label="Cathedral of Saint Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q128267" start="29981" end="29993" title="Saint Joseph" label="Saint Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917693" start="30228" end="30293" title="Church of St. Thomas Aquinas and the Dominican monastery in Minsk" label="Church of St. Thomas Aquinas and the Dominican monastery in Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q656211" start="30300" end="30308" title="Catholic Church in Belarus" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="30309" end="30318" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="30401" end="30408" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742825" start="30462" end="30472" title="Church of Saints Simon and Helena" label="Red Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="30765" end="30779" title="Mary Magdalene" label="Mary Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917534" start="30782" end="30830" title="Church of St. Adalbert and Benedictine monastery" label="Church of St. Adalbert and Benedictine monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="30837" end="30851" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="30906" end="30917" title="Benedictines" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409928" start="31054" end="31077" title="History of the Soviet Union (1985–1991)" label="dissolution of the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657160" start="31241" end="31250" title="Kalvaryja" label="Kalvaryja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663664" start="31411" end="31428" title="Military Cemetery (Minsk)" label="Military Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561905" start="31605" end="31680" title="National Opera and Ballet of Belarus" label="National Academic Grand Opera and Ballet Theatre of the Republic of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429567" start="31804" end="31833" title="Janka Kupala National Theatre" label="Janka Kupala National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091" start="31851" end="31861" title="Belarusian language" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584571" start="31904" end="31935" title="Belarusian National Arts Museum" label="Belarusian National Arts Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073524" start="31937" end="31974" title="Belarusian Great Patriotic War Museum" label="Belarusian Great Patriotic War Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034395" start="31976" end="32022" title="Belarusian National History and Culture Museum" label="Belarusian National History and Culture Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919614" start="32024" end="32064" title="Belarusian Nature and Environment Museum" label="Belarusian Nature and Environment Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12337378" start="32066" end="32099" title="Maksim Bahdanovič Literary Museum" label="Maksim Bahdanovič Literary Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511262" start="32101" end="32130" title="Old Belarusian History Museum" label="Old Belarusian History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q26690096" start="32186" end="32195" title="Ў gallery" label="Ў gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919909" start="32223" end="32242" title="Chelyuskinites Park" label="Chelyuskinites Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435807" start="32244" end="32268" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Railroad (Minsk)" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4504296" start="32270" end="32288" title="Gorky Park (Minsk)" label="Gorky Park (Minsk)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918730" start="32290" end="32307" title="Yanka Kupala Park" label="Yanka Kupala Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q211477" start="32490" end="32505" title="FC Dinamo Minsk" label="FC Dinamo Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q594092" start="32507" end="32515" title="FC Minsk" label="FC Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091283" start="32517" end="32539" title="FC Energetik-BGU Minsk" label="FC Energetik-BGU Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16910555" start="32541" end="32559" title="FC Krumkachy Minsk" label="FC Krumkachy Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q862266" start="32580" end="32595" title="HC Dinamo Minsk" label="HC Dinamo Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q36982" start="32597" end="32612" title="Yunost Minsk" label="HC Yunost Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520830" start="32632" end="32641" title="SKA Minsk" label="SKA Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q166349" start="32663" end="32678" title="BC Tsmoki-Minsk" label="BC Tsmoki-Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4403" start="32900" end="32928" title="2014 IIHF World Championship" label="2014 IIHF World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q641226" start="32936" end="32947" title="Arena" label="Minsk Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707231" start="32971" end="33012" title="2016 European Speed Skating Championships" label="2016 European Speed Skating Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q863096" start="33030" end="33041" title="Minsk Arena" label="Minsk Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112170" start="33109" end="33128" title="2019 European Games" label="2019 European Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q47472164" start="33143" end="33185" title="2019 European Figure Skating Championships" label="2019 European Figure Skating Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q863096" start="33203" end="33214" title="Minsk Arena" label="Minsk Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632574" start="33383" end="33399" title="Trolleybuses in Minsk" label="trolleybus lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="33727" end="33741" title="Non-profit organisation" label="not-for-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q21531507" start="34297" end="34300" title="BYR" label="BYN"/>
<link wikidata="Q21531507" start="34426" end="34429" title="New Belarusian ruble" label="BYN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711770" start="34455" end="34465" title="marshrutka" label="marshrutka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="34583" end="34588" title="rapid transit" label="metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q28604" start="34789" end="34800" title="Maskoŭskaja Line" label="Maskoŭskaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638932" start="34802" end="34816" title="Aŭtazavodskaja Line" label="Aŭtazavodskaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889805" start="34822" end="34838" title="Zelenaluzhskaya Line" label="Zielienalužskaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="35465" end="35476" title="Post-Soviet states" label="former USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="35493" end="35507" title="Saint Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="35509" end="35513" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308" start="35518" end="35525" title="Kharkiv" label="Kharkiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="35977" end="35983" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q167668" start="36079" end="36086" title="Liepāja" label="Liepaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q161994" start="36087" end="36092" title="Romny" label="Romny"/>
<link wikidata="Q801196" start="36290" end="36318" title="Minsk Passazhirsky railway station" label="Minsk-&amp;quot;Pasažyrski&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q14626453" start="36901" end="36914" title="Regional rail" label="suburban rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337" start="37658" end="37666" title="Smolensk" label="Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="37668" end="37675" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="37677" end="37681" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="37686" end="37692" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198632" start="38196" end="38202" title="Cycling in Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="38211" end="38221" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="38507" end="38521" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="38867" end="38870" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="CIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="38890" end="38906" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q777855" start="38927" end="38949" title="Minsk National Airport" label="Minsk National Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="39061" end="39082" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373238" start="39139" end="39154" title="Minsk-1 Airport" label="Minsk-1 Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005698" start="39560" end="39652" title="Academy of Public Administration (Belarus)" label="Academy of Public Administration under the aegis of the President of the Republic of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="39983" end="40004" title="Public administration" label="Public administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418908" start="40013" end="40040" title="Belarusian State University" label="Belarusian State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="40211" end="40234" title="International relations" label="International relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="40338" end="40353" title="Social sciences" label="Social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q42391999" start="40698" end="40710" title="Olga Chupris" label="Olga Chupris"/>
<link wikidata="Q381376" start="40820" end="40890" title="Research Institute for Nuclear Problems of Belarusian State University" label="Research Institute for Nuclear Problems of Belarusian State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4082743" start="40892" end="40946" title="Belarusian State University of Agricultural Technology" label="Belarusian State University of Agricultural Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000047" start="40963" end="40986" title="agricultural machinery" label="agricultural technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q815268" start="41016" end="41056" title="Belarusian National Technical University" label="Belarusian National Technical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510885" start="41097" end="41132" title="Belarusian State Medical University" label="Belarusian State Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628140" start="41372" end="41408" title="Belarusian State Economic University" label="Belarusian State Economic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027201" start="41561" end="41611" title="Maxim Tank Belarusian State Pedagogical University" label="Maxim Tank Belarusian State Pedagogical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374230" start="41628" end="41644" title="teacher education" label="teacher training"/>
<link wikidata="Q816145" start="41669" end="41732" title="Belarusian State University of Informatics and Radioelectronics" label="Belarusian State University of Informatics and Radioelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919998" start="41860" end="41908" title="Belarusian State University of Physical Training" label="Belarusian State University of Physical Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q4082750" start="41968" end="42009" title="Belarusian State Technological University" label="Belarusian State Technological University"/>
<link wikidata="Q186249" start="42039" end="42064" title="pharmaceutics" label="pharmaceutical technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678" start="42145" end="42150" title="Gomel" label="Homel"/>
<link wikidata="Q887" start="42189" end="42202" title="Yekaterinburg" label="Yekaterinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992066" start="42374" end="42407" title="Minsk State Linguistic University" label="Minsk State Linguistic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q150352" start="42424" end="42440" title="foreign language" label="foreign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646646" start="42593" end="42640" title="Belarusian State University of Culture and Arts" label="Belarusian State University of Culture and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143546" start="42657" end="42673" title="cultural studies" label="cultural studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503368" start="42784" end="42830" title="International Sakharov Environmental Institute" label="International Sakharov Environmental Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="43001" end="43041" title="Chernobyl disaster" label="Chernobyl nuclear power station disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631204" start="43084" end="43113" title="Minsk Institute of Management" label="Minsk Institute of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="43257" end="43267" title="Psychology" label="Psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022867" start="43312" end="43324" title="minor planet" label="minor planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q685045" start="43325" end="43335" title="3012 Minsk" label="3012 Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q318611" start="43368" end="43384" title="Nikolai Chernykh" label="Nikolai Chernykh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057980" start="43442" end="43468" title="Andrei Pavlovich Ablameyko" label="Andrei Pavlovich Ablameyko"/>
<link wikidata="Q792212" start="43482" end="43507" title="Belarusian Greek Catholic Church" label="Belarusian Greek Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920746" start="43516" end="43530" title="Anton Adamovič" label="Anton Adamovič"/>
<link wikidata="Q88451912" start="43597" end="43612" title="Viktar Babaryka" label="Viktar Babaryka"/>
<link wikidata="Q471207" start="43698" end="43715" title="Maksim Bahdanovič" label="Maksim Bahdanovič"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915595" start="43799" end="43813" title="Masha Bruskina" label="Masha Bruskina"/>
<link wikidata="Q33084599" start="43850" end="43863" title="Siarhei Bulba" label="Siarhei Bulba"/>
<link wikidata="Q467119" start="43979" end="43998" title="Veronika Cherkasova" label="Veronika Cherkasova"/>
<link wikidata="Q42391999" start="44025" end="44037" title="Olga Chupris" label="Olga Chupris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687402" start="44112" end="44132" title="Avraham Even-Shoshan" label="Avraham Even-Shoshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920100" start="44182" end="44194" title="Olga Fadeeva" label="Olga Fadeeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q13956779" start="44217" end="44235" title="Sophie Fedorovitch" label="Sophie Fedorovitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q48745" start="44297" end="44308" title="Ella German" label="Ella German"/>
<link wikidata="Q48745" start="44336" end="44353" title="Lee Harvey Oswald" label="Lee Harvey Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493977" start="44355" end="44370" title="Moisei Ginzburg" label="Moisei Ginzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q714110" start="44410" end="44427" title="Gennady Grushevoy" label="Gennady Grushevoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368365" start="44537" end="44547" title="Alés Harun" label="Alés Harun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083013" start="44591" end="44610" title="Anatol Hrytskievich" label="Anatol Hrytskievich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568233" start="44647" end="44664" title="Hienadź Karpienka" label="Hienadź Karpienka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493710" start="44705" end="44724" title="Uładzimir Katkoŭski" label="Uładzimir Katkoŭski"/>
<link wikidata="Q13033636" start="44788" end="44801" title="Jauhien Kulik" label="Jauhien Kulik"/>
<link wikidata="Q188047" start="44936" end="44943" title="Pahonia" label="Pahonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576047" start="44946" end="44960" title="Pavel Latushka" label="Pavel Latushka"/>
<link wikidata="Q269199" start="45016" end="45030" title="Maryna Linchuk" label="Maryna Linchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4267735" start="45059" end="45074" title="Ivan Lubennikov" label="Ivan Lubennikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590303" start="45118" end="45130" title="Janka Lučyna" label="Janka Lučyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028509" start="45171" end="45185" title="Leanid Marakou" label="Leanid Marakou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028498" start="45220" end="45234" title="Valery Marakou" label="Valery Marakoǔ"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="45290" end="45310" title="Great Purge" label="Stalin&amp;#x27;s purges"/>
<link wikidata="Q13134370" start="45314" end="45328" title="Yan Matusevich" label="Yan Matusevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q792212" start="45374" end="45406" title="Belarusian Greek Catholic Church" label="Belarusian Greek Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q319682" start="45408" end="45422" title="Louis B. Mayer" label="Louis B. Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="45482" end="45501" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q235209" start="45503" end="45522" title="Bronislava Nijinska" label="Bronislava Nijinska"/>
<link wikidata="Q48745" start="45599" end="45616" title="Lee Harvey Oswald" label="Lee Harvey Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="45655" end="45669" title="John F Kennedy" label="John F Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q65006951" start="45720" end="45734" title="Hillel Pewsner" label="Hillel Pewsner"/>
<link wikidata="Q17043423" start="45778" end="45794" title="Grigoriy Plaskov" label="Grigoriy Plaskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q131259" start="45849" end="45864" title="Alexander Rybak" label="Alexander Rybak"/>
<link wikidata="Q10157" start="45892" end="45920" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2009" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q172955" start="45946" end="45964" title="Uładzimier Samojła" label="Uładzimier Samojła"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618597" start="46060" end="46075" title="Vitali Silitski" label="Vitali Silitski"/>
<link wikidata="Q111593910" start="46190" end="46207" title="Aliaksiej Skoblia" label="Aliaksiej Skoblia"/>
<link wikidata="Q111235461" start="46299" end="46326" title="Kastuś Kalinoŭski Battalion" label="Kastuś Kalinoŭski Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3692608" start="46377" end="46394" title="Vanda Skuratovich" label="Vanda Skuratovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q314338" start="46433" end="46454" title="Stanislav Shushkevich" label="Stanislav Shushkevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920849" start="46554" end="46572" title="Stefaniya Stanyuta" label="Stefaniya Stanyuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q98399517" start="46614" end="46635" title="Death of Alexander Taraikovsky" label="Alexander Taraikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q75556449" start="46701" end="46738" title="2020 Belarusian presidential election" label="2020 Belarusian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4452334" start="46740" end="46752" title="Barys Tasman" label="Barys Tasman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4458133" start="46793" end="46809" title="George Tsisetski" label="George Tsisetski"/>
<link wikidata="Q214897" start="46879" end="46897" title="Rachel Wischnitzer" label="Rachel Wischnitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13134358" start="46940" end="46951" title="Jazep Jucho" label="Jazep Jucho"/>
<link wikidata="Q197806" start="47036" end="47072" title="Statutes of Lithuania" label="laws of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350722" start="47074" end="47086" title="Simcha Zorin" label="Simcha Zorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q128176785" start="47122" end="47144" title="Asher ben Löb Günzburg" label="Asher ben Löb Günzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q274306" start="47184" end="47201" title="Angelica Agurbash" label="Angelica Agurbash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569674" start="47258" end="47271" title="Marina Gordon" label="Marina Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539644" start="47305" end="47317" title="Irma Jaunzem" label="Irma Jaunzem"/>
<link wikidata="Q893653" start="47378" end="47391" title="Boris Khaykin" label="Boris Khaykin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15281410" start="47416" end="47425" title="Yung Lean" label="Yung Lean"/>
<link wikidata="Q13030872" start="47483" end="47500" title="Źmicier Sidarovič" label="Źmicier Sidarovič"/>
<link wikidata="Q983686" start="47524" end="47536" title="Lavon Volski" label="Lavon Volski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072192" start="47573" end="47588" title="Andrei Arlovski" label="Andrei Arlovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q10118" start="47701" end="47718" title="Victoria Azarenka" label="Victoria Azarenka"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="47831" end="47838" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4085827" start="47846" end="47861" title="Yuri Bessmertny" label="Yuri Bessmertny"/>
<link wikidata="Q233756" start="47886" end="47905" title="Svetlana Boginskaya" label="Svetlana Boginskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q8488" start="47962" end="47975" title="1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q357815" start="47989" end="48006" title="Isaac Boleslavsky" label="Isaac Boleslavsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q209193" start="48039" end="48055" title="Darya Domracheva" label="Darya Domracheva"/>
<link wikidata="Q9678" start="48135" end="48155" title="2014 Winter Olympics" label="2014 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q486778" start="48157" end="48170" title="Boris Gelfand" label="Boris Gelfand"/>
<link wikidata="Q20028909" start="48211" end="48221" title="Max Geller (Wrestler)" label="Max Geller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148677" start="48261" end="48276" title="Alexei Ignashov" label="Alexei Ignashov"/>
<link wikidata="Q332190" start="48344" end="48358" title="Oleg Karavayev" label="Oleg Karavayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376810" start="48404" end="48420" title="Viktor Kupreichik" label="Viktar Kuprejčyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673499" start="48453" end="48464" title="Isaak Mazel" label="Isaak Mazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q221359" start="48492" end="48502" title="Max Mirnyi" label="Max Mirnyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q102287631" start="48531" end="48547" title="Aleksey Orlovich" label="Aleksey Orlovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621836" start="48597" end="48616" title="Artsiom Parakhouski" label="Artsiom Parakhouski"/>
<link wikidata="Q861320" start="48649" end="48662" title="Yulia Raskina" label="Yulia Raskina"/>
<link wikidata="Q59517556" start="48761" end="48778" title="Roman Rubinshteyn" label="Roman Rubinshteyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462454" start="48836" end="48869" title="Israeli Basketball Premier League" label="Israeli Basketball Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q23448791" start="48871" end="48886" title="Aryna Sabalenka" label="Aryna Sabalenka"/>
<link wikidata="Q110487795" start="48900" end="48920" title="2023 Australian Open – Women&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2023 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q336210" start="48939" end="48964" title="List of WTA number 1 ranked singles tennis players" label="world No. 1 tennis player"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="48990" end="48995" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q29788539" start="49004" end="49022" title="Yegor Sharangovich" label="Yegor Sharangovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376801" start="49055" end="49067" title="Yuri Shulman" label="Yuri Shulman"/>
<link wikidata="Q473785" start="49120" end="49131" title="Mark Slavin" label="Mark Slavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q229007" start="49200" end="49215" title="Munich massacre" label="Munich massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q233521" start="49245" end="49259" title="Anna Smashnova" label="Anna Smashnova"/>
<link wikidata="Q78675697" start="49312" end="49324" title="Roman Sorkin" label="Roman Sorkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462454" start="49387" end="49420" title="Israeli Basketball Premier League" label="Israeli Basketball Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q24847163" start="49422" end="49435" title="Diana Vaisman" label="Diana Vaisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="49524" end="49531" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519" start="49540" end="49549" title="Abu Dhabi" label="Abu Dhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="49580" end="49586" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355" start="49603" end="49612" title="Bangalore" label="Bangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="49628" end="49635" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="49651" end="49658" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="49679" end="49683" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q92161" start="49701" end="49710" title="Changchun" label="Changchun"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="49726" end="49734" title="Chişinău" label="Chişinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="49752" end="49759" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9365" start="49783" end="49791" title="Dushanbe" label="Dushanbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9832" start="49812" end="49821" title="Eindhoven" label="Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q93338" start="49843" end="49852" title="Gaziantep" label="Gaziantep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="49869" end="49874" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="49892" end="49898" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="49913" end="49929" title="Ho Chi Minh City" label="Ho Chi Minh City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362" start="49947" end="49956" title="Islamabad" label="Islamabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837" start="49975" end="49981" title="Kaluga" label="Kaluga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763" start="49999" end="50007" title="Murmansk" label="Murmansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q891" start="50024" end="50039" title="Nizhny Novgorod" label="Nizhny Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q883" start="50056" end="50067" title="Novosibirsk" label="Novosibirsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q908" start="50084" end="50097" title="Rostov-on-Don" label="Rostov-on-Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q46747" start="50114" end="50120" title="Sendai" label="Sendai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="50136" end="50144" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="50160" end="50168" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="50184" end="50191" title="Tbilisi" label="Tbilisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="50209" end="50215" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q911" start="50230" end="50233" title="Ufa" label="Ufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627" start="50250" end="50259" title="Ulyanovsk" label="Ulyanovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4365454" start="50292" end="50316" title="List of squares in Minsk" label="List of squares in Minsk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51594" wikidata="Q3437" url="?curid=51594" title="Perugia">
<text>Perugia ( , ; ; ) is the capital city of Umbria in central Italy, crossed by the River Tiber. The city is located about north of Rome and southeast of Florence. It covers a high hilltop and part of the valleys around the area.

The history of Perugia goes back to the Etruscan period; Perugia was one of the main Etruscan cities.

The city is also known as a university town, with the University of Perugia founded in 1308, the University for Foreigners, and some smaller colleges such as the Academy of Fine Arts &quot;Pietro Vannucci&quot; () public athenaeum founded in 1573, the Perugia University Institute of Linguistic Mediation for translators and interpreters, the Music Conservatory of Perugia, founded in 1788, and other institutes.

Perugia is also a well-known cultural and artistic centre of Italy. The city hosts multiple annual festivals and events, e.g., former Eurochocolate Festival (October), now in Bastia Umbra, the Umbria Jazz Festival (July), and the International Journalism Festival (in April), and is associated with multiple notable people in the arts.

Painter Pietro Vannucci, nicknamed Perugino, was a native of Città della Pieve, near Perugia. He decorated the local &quot;Sala del Cambio&quot; with a series of frescoes; eight of his pictures can also be seen in the National Gallery of Umbria.

Perugino may have been the teacher of Raphael, the great Renaissance artist who produced five paintings in Perugia (today no longer in the city) and one fresco. Another painter, Pinturicchio, lived in Perugia. Galeazzo Alessi is the most famous architect from Perugia.

The city&#x27;s symbol is the griffin, which can be seen in the form of plaques and statues on buildings around the city. It is also the symbol of the local football club A.C. Perugia, who have previously played in the Serie A. Having never been Italian champions, the club went unbeaten in the 1978–79 season in spite of finishing second in the championship.

== History ==
=== Umbrians and Etruscans ===
Perugia was an Umbrian settlement but first appears in written history as &quot;Perusia&quot;, one of the 12 confederate cities of Etruria; it was first mentioned in Q. Fabius Pictor&#x27;s account, used by Livy, of the expedition carried out against the Etruscan League by Fabius Maximus Rullianus in 310 or 309 BC. At that time a thirty-year &quot;indutiae&quot; (truce) was agreed upon; however, in 295 Perusia took part in the Third Samnite War and was forced, with Volsinii and Arretium (Arezzo), to sue for peace in the following year.

=== Roman period ===
In 216 and 205 BC, it assisted Rome in the Second Punic War, but afterwards it is not mentioned until 41–40 BC, when Lucius Antonius took refuge there, and was defeated by Octavian after a long siege, and its senators sent to their deaths. A number of lead bullets used by slingers have been found in and around the city. The city was burnt, we are told, with the exception of the temples of Vulcan and Juno—the massive Etruscan terrace-walls, naturally, can hardly have suffered at all—and the town, with the territory for a mile round, was allowed to be occupied by whoever chose. It must have been rebuilt almost at once, for several bases for statues exist, inscribed &quot;Augusto sacr(um) Perusia restituta&quot;; but it did not become a &quot;colonia&quot;, until 251–253 AD, when it was resettled as &quot;Colonia Vibia Augusta Perusia&quot;, under the emperor Trebonianus Gallus.

=== Early Middle Ages ===
It is hardly mentioned except by the geographers until it was the only city in Umbria to resist Totila and the Ostrogoths, who captured it and laid the city waste in 547, after a long siege, apparently after the city&#x27;s Byzantine garrison evacuated. Negotiations with the besieging forces fell to the city&#x27;s bishop, Herculanus, as representative of the townspeople. Totila is said to have ordered the bishop to be flayed and beheaded. St. Herculanus (Sant&#x27;Ercolano) later became the city&#x27;s patron saint.

=== Middle Ages ===
In the Lombard period, Perugia is spoken of as one of the principal cities of Tuscia. In the 9th century, with the consent of Charlemagne and Louis the Pious, it passed under the popes; but by the 11th century, its commune was asserting itself, and for many centuries the city continued to maintain an independent life, warring against many of the neighbouring lands and cities— Foligno, Assisi, Spoleto, Todi, Siena, Arezzo, etc. In 1186, Henry VI, &quot;rex romanorum&quot; and future emperor, granted diplomatic recognition to the consular government of the city; afterward, Pope Innocent III, whose major aim was to give state dignity to the dominions having been constituting the patrimony of St. Peter, acknowledged the validity of the imperial statement and recognised the established civic practices as having the force of law.On various occasions, the popes found asylum from the tumults of Rome within its walls, and it was the meetingplace of five conclaves (Perugia Papacy), including those that elected Honorius III (1216), Clement IV (1265), Celestine V (1294), and Clement V (1305); the papal presence was characterised by a pacificatory rule between the internal rivalries. But Perugia had no mind simply to subserve the papal interests and never accepted papal sovereignty; the city used to exercise a jurisdiction over the members of the clergy, moreover in 1282, Perugia was excommunicated due to a new military offensive against the Ghibellines regardless of a papal prohibition. On the other hand, side by side with the 13th-century bronze griffin of Perugia above the door of the Palazzo dei Priori stands, as a Guelphic emblem, the lion, and Perugia remained loyal for the most part to the Guelph party in the struggles of Guelphs and Ghibellines, but this dominant tendency was rather an anti-Germanic and Italian political strategy. The Angevin presence in Italy appeared to offer a counterpoise to papal powers; in 1319, Perugia declared the Angevin Saint Louis of Toulouse &quot;Protector of the city&#x27;s sovereignty and of the Palazzo of its Priors&quot; and set his figure among the other patron saints above the rich doorway of the Palazzo dei Priori. Midway through the 14th century Bartholus of Sassoferrato, who was a renowned jurist, asserted that Perugia was dependent upon neither imperial nor papal support. In 1347, at the time of Rienzi&#x27;s unfortunate enterprise in reviving the Roman republic, Perugia sent 10 ambassadors to pay him honour, and when papal legates sought to coerce it by foreign soldiers, or to exact contributions, they met with vigorous resistance, which broke into open warfare with Pope Urban V in 1369; in 1370, the noble party reached an agreement signing the treaty of Bologna, and Perugia was forced to accept a papal legate; however. the vicar-general of the Papal States, Gérard du Puy, Abbot of Marmoutier and nephew of Gregory IX, was expelled by a popular uprising in 1375, and his fortification of Porta Sole was razed to the ground.

==== The lordships of Perugia ====
===== Biordo Michelotti (1393–1398) =====
On August 5, 1393, the condottiero (mercenary captain) Biordo Michelotti, a member of the popular faction known as the Raspanti, made his triumphant entry into Perugia, and the general council appointed him as the &quot;knight of the people&quot; of Perugia and the &quot;general captain&quot; of the militias. A special commission of twenty-five citizens was tasked with banishing one hundred and fifty noblemen, while Biordo decided the return of noble individuals who were not considered guilty of sedition. Among the exiled noblemen was Braccio da Montone, one of the most skilled military leaders of the time, who vowed not to seek &quot;any pact or agreement with the Raspanti of Perugia.&quot;

It was precisely against the exiled nobles, especially Braccio da Montone, the soul and leader of the noble movement in exile, that the government of the Raspanti directed its efforts after the turmoil of 1393. Holding virtually all power, Biordo was recognized as the first &quot;lord of Perugia,&quot; even though during his short rule (1393–1398), he left intact the priory and all existing communal institutions, focusing solely on extending his dominion beyond Perugia. After the splendid marriage with Giovanna Orsini, Biordo and his bride took residence in the Porta Sole palace, but on March 10, 1398, Biordo fell victim to a conspiracy orchestrated by Francesco Guidalotti, abbot of San Pietro. In their new residence, Michelotti was stabbed by Giovanni and Annibaldo, brothers of the abbot of San Pietro.
===== Gian Galeazzo Visconti (1400–1402) =====
The death of Michelotti removed an important point of reference, and factions threatened the stability within and outside the walls. Meanwhile, the twenty-five worked diligently to find an institution that could protect the city and alleviate a very high debt. The people&#x27;s demands for independence were no longer as urgent, and in the 15th century, the common belief was that they had to accept a ruler or master capable of providing the minimum requirements for survival. The choice fell on the Duchy of Milan, and on January 21, 1400, Gian Galeazzo Visconti was proclaimed the lord of Perugia by the voluntary submission of the city. In response to the delegation of the ten representatives that Perugia had sent him, he canceled the debt of the Perugians. His lordship was short-lived, and on October 3, 1402, Visconti passed away.
==== Braccio da Montone (1416–1424) ====
In 1408, Ladislao D&#x27;Angiò Durazzo, the King of Naples, successfully captured Perugia and intended to have it administered by Braccio Fortebracci. However, Braccio vehemently opposed this idea and declined the offer. Nonetheless, in 1411, Perugia surrendered to the King of Naples, opting to be ruled by a foreigner rather than a nobleman. Braccio viewed this as a profound betrayal by his fellow citizens and fled. In November 1410, Braccio besieged Perugia but failed to capture it due to the city&#x27;s resistance. He defeated pursuing troops and terrorized surrounding towns. In April 1416, he returned with a large army and attacked Perugia. After a victory in July, Perugia surrendered, marking the end of the Raspanti government. Braccio ruled moderately. In 1417, he entered Rome and proclaimed himself Defender of the City, later returning to Umbria. After conflicts and military successes, he was appointed Vicar by the Pope. Upon returning to Perugia, he undertook public works. He left for Bologna, returned, and went to Calabria. When denied entry to L&#x27;Aquila, he laid siege but faced opposition from the Pope and Queen. A league attacked him near Pescara in 1424, leading to his death. His son later buried him in Perugia with honors. During the rule of Braccio Fortebracci da Montone, significant public works were undertaken, such as Braccio&#x27;s residence in the square, of which only the loggias remain, or the &quot;Sopramuro,&quot; to which Braccio had another series of supporting structures built: the &quot;briglie di Braccio.&quot;

=== The Renaissance ===
==== Baglioni family (1438–1540) ====

During the period 1438–1479, the Baglioni family held a covert lordship over Perugia, which was not characterized by complete control of civic powers. Braccio I Baglioni, leveraging his position as captain of the militias of the Holy See and being the nephew of Braccio da Montone, the previous Lord of the City, exerted an influence over Perugia that quickly established its supremacy. During those years, the Umbrian center experienced a period of flourishing growth as the Baglioni implemented a policy of expansion and beautification of the city, including the construction of new roads and palaces.Between 1429 and 1433, the Palazzo dei Priori was expanded, new churches and private chapels were built, and the patronage of the Baglioni attracted artists such as Piero della Francesca, Pinturicchio, and Raphael, making Perugia an important artistic center. During this time, Perugia became a significant hub of the Umbrian Renaissance, marked by the production of the eight panels depicting the life of Saint Bernardino, a collaborative effort involving Pinturicchio, Piermatteo d&#x27;Amelia, and the young Perugino, among others, commonly referred to as the &quot;1473 workshop.&quot; Pietro &quot;Perugino&quot; Vannucci created numerous works in the city, including a cycle of frescoes in the Hall of Audiences of the Collegio del Cambio.

Additionally, the Baglioni family commissioned the construction of an imposing aristocratic palace as their private residence, of which only the part incorporated into the Rocca Paolina remains today. The palace was decorated by Domenico Veneziano with a painting cycle depicting noble Perugian families and great military leaders of the past.

Following mutual atrocities of the Oddi and the Baglioni families, power was at last concentrated in the Baglioni, who though they had no legal position, defied all other authority, though their bloody internal squabbles culminated in a massacre, 14 July 1500. Gian Paolo Baglioni was lured to Rome in 1520 and beheaded by Leo X; and in 1540, Rodolfo, who had slain a papal legate, was defeated by Pier Luigi Farnese, and the city, captured and plundered by his soldiery, was deprived of its privileges. A citadel known as the Rocca Paolina, after the name of Pope Paul III, was built, to designs of Antonio da Sangallo the Younger &quot;&quot;ad coercendam Perusinorum audaciam&quot;.&quot;
In 1797, the city was conquered by French troops. On 4 February 1798, the &quot;Tiberina Republic&quot; was formed, with Perugia as capital, and the French tricolour as flag. In 1799, the Tiberina Republic merged to the Roman Republic.

In 1832, 1838, and 1854, Perugia was hit by earthquakes. Following the collapse of the Roman republic of 1848–49, when the Rocca was in part demolished, it was seized in May 1849 by the Austrians. In June 1859, the inhabitants rebelled against the temporal authority of the pope and established a provisional government, but the insurrection was quashed bloodily by Pius IX&#x27;s troops. In September 1860, the city was united finally, along with the rest of Umbria, as part of the Kingdom of Italy. During World War II, the city suffered only some damage and was liberated by the British 8th army on 20 June 1944.

== Economy ==
Perugia has become famous for chocolate, mostly because of a single firm, Perugina, whose &quot;Baci&quot; (&quot;kisses&quot; in English) are widely exported. Perugian chocolate is popular in Italy. The company&#x27;s plant located in San Sisto (Perugia) is the largest of Nestlé&#x27;s nine sites in Italy. According to the Nestlé USA official website, today Baci is the most famous chocolate brand in Italy.

The city hosts a chocolate festival, EuroChocolate, every October.

== Geography ==
Perugia is the capital city of the region of Umbria. Cities&#x27; distances from Perugia: Assisi , Siena , Florence , Rome .

=== Climate ===
Though Perugia is located in the central part of Italy, the city experiences a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;Cfa&quot;) similar to much of Northern Italy due to its inland location and the diverse, hilly topography of Umbria. Typically, summers are warm to hot and humid, while winters are cold with occasional snowfall. The climate in this area has mild differences between highs and lows, with adequate rainfall year-round.


== Demographics ==
In 2007, there were 163,287 people residing in Perugia, located in the province of Perugia, Umbria, of whom 47.7% were male and 52.3% were female. Minors (children ages 18 and younger) totalled 16.41 percent of the population compared to pensioners who number 21.51 percent. This compares with the Italian average of 18.06 percent (minors) and 19.94 percent (pensioners). The average age of Perugia residents is 44 compared to the Italian average of 42. In the five years between 2002 and 2007, the population of Perugia grew by 7.86 percent, while Italy as a whole grew by 3.85 percent.

, 90.84% of the population was Italian. The largest immigrant group came from other European countries (particularly from Albania and Romania): 3.93%, the Americas: 2.01%, and North African: 1.3%. The majority of inhabitants are Roman Catholic.
== Education ==
Perugia today hosts two main universities, the ancient Università degli Studi (University of Perugia) and the Foreigners University (&quot;Università per Stranieri&quot;). &quot;Stranieri&quot; serves as an Italian language and culture school for students from all over the world. Other educational institutions are the Perugia Fine Arts Academy &quot;Pietro Vannucci&quot; (founded in 1573), the Perugia Music Conservatory for the study of classical music, and the RAI Public Broadcasting School of Radio-Television Journalism. The city is also host to the Umbra Institute, an accredited university program for American students studying abroad. The &quot;Università dei Sapori&quot; (University of Tastes), a National centre for Vocational Education and Training in Food, is located in the city as well.

== Frazioni ==
The &quot;comune&quot; includes the &quot;frazioni&quot; of Bagnaia, Bosco, Capanne, Casa del Diavolo, Castel del Piano, Cenerente, Civitella Benazzone, Civitella d&#x27;Arna, Collestrada, Colle Umberto I, Cordigliano, Colombella, Farneto, Ferro di Cavallo, Fontignano, Fratticiola Selvatica, La Bruna, La Cinella, Lacugnano, Lidarno, Madonna Alta, Migiana di Monte Tezio, Monte Bagnolo, Monte Corneo, Montelaguardia, Monte Petriolo, Mugnano, Olmo, Parlesca, Pianello, Piccione, Pila, Pilonico Materno, Piscille, Ponte della Pietra, Poggio delle Corti, Ponte Felcino, Ponte Pattoli, Ponte Rio, Ponte San Giovanni, Ponte Valleceppi, Prepo, Pretola, Ramazzano-Le Pulci, Rancolfo, Ripa, Sant&#x27;Andrea delle Fratte, Sant&#x27;Egidio, Sant&#x27;Enea, San Fortunato della Collina, San Giovanni del Pantano, Sant&#x27;Andrea d&#x27;Agliano, Santa Lucia, San Marco, Santa Maria Rossa, San Martino dei Colli, San Martino in Campo, San Martino in Colle, San Sisto, Solfagnano, Villa Pitignano. Other localities are Boneggio, Canneto, Colle della Trinità, Monte Pulito, Montevile, Pieve di Campo, Montemalbe and Monte Morcino.

Collestrada, in the territory of the suburb of Ponte San Giovanni, saw a battle between the inhabitants of Perugia and Assisi in 1202.

== Main sights ==

=== Churches ===
* &quot;Cathedral of S. Lorenzo&quot;
* &quot;San Pietro&quot;: late 16th-century church and abbey.
* &quot;San Domenico&quot;: Basilica church of the Dominican order, building began in 1394 and finished in 1458. Before 1234, this site housed markets and a horse fair. The exterior design attributed to Giovanni Pisano, while its interior redecorated in Baroque fashion by Carlo Maderno. The massive belfry was partially cut around the mid-16th century. The interior hosts the splendid tomb of Pope Benedict XI and a wooden choir from the Renaissance period. The stained glass window of the Basilica of San Domenico is one of the biggest in the world.
*&quot;Sant&#x27;Angelo&quot;, also called &quot;San Michele Arcangelo&quot;: small paleo-Christian church from the 5th–6th centuries. Sixteen antique columns frame circular layout recalling the Roman church of Santo Stefano Rotondo.
*&quot;Sant&#x27;Antonio Abate&quot;.
*&quot;San Bernardino&quot;: church with façade by Agostino di Duccio.
*&quot;San Ercolano&quot;: 14th-century church that resembles a polygonal tower. This church once had two floors. Its upper floor was demolished when the Rocca Paolina was built. Baroque interior decorations commissioned from 1607. The main altar has a sarcophagus found in 1609.
*&quot;Santa Giuliana&quot;: church and monastery founded by heir of a female monastery in 1253. In its later years, the church gained a reputation for dissoluteness. Later, the Napoleonic forces turned the church into a granary. Now, the church is a military hospital. The church, with a single nave, bears only traces of 13th century frescoes, which probably used to cover all of the walls. The cloister is a noteworthy example of mid-14th-century Cistercian architecture from . The upper part of the &quot;campanile&quot; is from the 13th century.
*&quot;San Bevignate&quot;: church of the Templar.
*Chiesa of San Prospero.
*Church of the Compagnia della Morte.
=== Secular buildings ===
* The Palazzo dei Priori (Town Hall, encompassing the Collegio del Cambio, Collegio della Mercanzia, and Galleria Nazionale), one of Italy&#x27;s greatest buildings. The Collegio del Cambio has frescoes by Pietro Perugino, while the Collegio della Mercanzia has a fine later 14th century wooden interior.
** Galleria Nazionale dell&#x27;Umbria, the National Gallery of Umbrian art in Middle Ages and Renaissance (it includes works by Duccio, Piero della Francesca, Beato Angelico, Perugino)
* &quot;Fontana Maggiore&quot;, a medieval fountain designed by Fra Bevignate and sculpted by Nicola and Giovanni Pisano.
* Chapel of &quot;San Severo&quot;, which retains a fresco painted by Raphael and Perugino.
* the &quot;Rocca Paolina&quot;, a Renaissance fortress (1540–1543) of which only a bastion today is remaining. The original design was by Antonio and Aristotile da Sangallo, and included the &quot;Porta Marzia&quot; (3rd century BC), the tower of Gentile Baglioni&#x27;s house and a medieval cellar.
* Orto Botanico dell&#x27;Università di Perugia, the university&#x27;s botanical garden
*Palazzo Donini, the centre of the Regional Council of Region of Umbria.

=== Medieval towers ===

* Sciri&#x27;s tower (XIII century), the most well-known among the remaining towers in Perugia. It takes its name from the Sciri family and is the only control tower on the noble blocks that still stands. Standing at 42 meters tall and featuring a square shape, it has recently undergone a renovation that has restored its ancient hues, including the distinctive color of the building stone. In 1680, the tower was incorporated into the Convent of the Franciscan Tertiaries of Sister Lucia.
* Torre del Cassero di Porta Sant&#x27;Angelo (XIV century), is the most imposing among the medieval city gates of Perugia, and it&#x27;s the only one with a defensive-military structure. Like the town itself, the gate derives its name from the ancient early Christian church dedicated to Saint Michael the Archangel.&quot;

=== Antiquities ===
* The Hypogeum of the Volumnus family (&quot;Ipogeo dei Volumni&quot;), an Etruscan chamber tomb
* Etruscan Well (&quot;Pozzo Etrusco&quot;).
* National Museum of Umbrian Archaeology, where one of the longest inscription in Etruscan is conserved, the so-called &quot;Cippus perusinus&quot;.
* Etruscan Arch (also known as &quot;Porta Augusta&quot;), an Etruscan gate with Roman elements.

=== Modern architecture ===
* &quot;Centro Direzionale&quot; (1982–1986), an administration civic center owned by the Umbria Region. The building was designed by the Pritzker Architecture prizewinner Aldo Rossi.
=== Art ===
Perugia has had a rich tradition of art and artists. The Early Renaissance painter Pietro Perugino created some of his masterpieces in the Perugia area. The High Renaissance master Raphael was also active in Perugia and painted his famous Oddi Altar there in 1502–04.

Today, the Galleria Nazionale dell&#x27;Umbria in Perugia houses a number of masterpieces, including the &quot;Madonna with Child and six Angels&quot;, which represents the Renaissance Marian art of Duccio. And the private Art collection of Fondazione Cassa di Risparmio di Perugia has two separate locations.

The Collegio del Cambio is an extremely well preserved representation of a Renaissance building and houses a magnificent Pietro Perugino fresco. The newly re-opened Academy of Fine Arts has a small but impressive plaster casts gallery and Perugian paintings and drawings from the 16th century on.

== Culture ==
* The Umbria Jazz Festival is one of the most important venues for Jazz in Europe and has been held annually since 1973, usually in July.
* Sagra Musicale Umbra is a classical and chamber music festival.
* The International Journalism Festival (&quot;Festival del Giornalismo&quot;).
* Eurochocolate, chocolate festival and fair usually held in October each year. &quot;From 2021, the festival is held in Umbriafiere in the city of Bastia Umbra&quot;
* Music Fest Perugia, music festival for young talented musicians, usually in the summer.

==Notable people==
* Trebonianus Gallus (206–253), Roman emperor
* Aaron the Bookseller, dealer in Hebrew and other ancient manuscripts
* Bartolo da Sassoferrato (1314–1357), medieval jurist
* Baldo degli Ubaldi (1327–1400), medieval jurist
* Biordo Michelotti (1352–1398), condottiero
* Braccio da Montone (1368–1424), condottiero
* Matteo da Perugia (fl. 1390–1416), composer
* Niccolò Piccinino (1386–1444), condottiero
* Agostino di Duccio (), sculptor
* Perugino (1450–1523), painter
* Pinturicchio (1454–1513), painter
*Giulio III (1487–1555), pope
* Galeazzo Alessi (1512–1572), architect
* Vincenzo Danti (1530–1576), sculptor and civil engineer
* Ignazio Danti (1536–1586), mathematician, cosmographer, and bishop
*Giovanni Andrea Angelini Bontempi (1624–1705), composer
*Baldassarre Orsini (1732–1820), architect, academic, and art historian
*Annibale Mariotti (1738–1801), physician and poet
* Francesco Morlacchi (1784–1841), composer
* Gertrude Prosperi (1799-1847), Roman Catholic professed religious
* Assunta Pieralli (1807–1865), poet and teacher
* Luisa Spagnoli (1877–1935), entrepreneur
* Giuseppe Prezzolini (1882–1982), writer
* Gerardo Dottori (1884–1977), painter
* Gabriele Santini (1886–1964), orchestral conductor
* Aldo Capitini (1899–1968), philosopher
* Sandro Penna (1906–1977), poet
*Walter Binni (1913–1997), literary critic
* Walkiria Terradura (1924-2023), Partisan
*Antonietta Stella (1929–2022), soprano
* Francesco Ascani (born 1952), racing driver
* Giovanni Mirabassi (born 1970), jazz musician
* Marco Taccucci (born 1977), footballer
* Lorela Cubaj (born 1999), basketball player

== Sport ==

AC Perugia Calcio is the main football club in the city, playing in Italy&#x27;s third-highest division Serie C. The club plays at the 28,000-seat Stadio Renato Curi, named after a former player who died during a match. From 1983 to 2001, the stadium held four matches for the Italy national football team.

Perugia has two water polo teams: L.R.N. Perugia and Gryphus. The team of LRN Perugia is currently in SERIE B (second-highest division) and the Gryphus team is in the SERIE C (the third highest) division. The L.R.N Perugia has also a women&#x27;s water polo team which is also playing in the division of SERIE B.

Sir Safety Umbria Volley, in English Sir Sicoma Colussi Perugia, is an Italian volleyball club, playing at the top level of the Italian Volleyball League. They won their first Italian championship in 2018. Notable players include Luciano de Cecco of Argentina, Aleksandar Atanasijević of Serbia, and Wilfredo Leon of Poland. 

The martial arts in Perugia have been present since the sixties with Chinese techniques, followed by judo. Later there were karate contact (later called kickboxing), karate, taijiquan, jūjutsu, kendo, aikido, taekwondo and, in recent years, krav maga has also arrived.

In 2014 Jessica Scricciolo, under the Ju-Jitsu Sports Group Perugia, won the title of World Champion in the Fighting System speciality, 55 kg. In March 2015 at the World Championship of Greece (J.J.I.F.) Andrea Calzon&#x27; (Ju-Jitsu Sports Group Perugia) won the gold medal in the Ne-Waza (U21.56 kg) and a bronze medal in the Fighting System.

== Transport ==
An electric tramway operated in Perugia from 1901 until 1940. It was decommissioned in favour of buses, and since 1943 trolley buses – the latter were in service until 1975.

Two elevators were established since 1971:
* Mercato Coperto (Parking) – Terrazza Mercato Coperto
* Galleria Kennedy – Mercato Coperto (Pincetto)

This was followed by public escalators:
* Rocca Paolina: Piazza Partigiani – Piazza Italia (1983)
* Cupa-Pellini: Piazzale della Cupa – Via dei Priori (1989)
* Piazzale Europa – Piazzale Bellucci (1993)
* Piazzale Bellucci – Corso Cavour (1993)
* Minimetrò: Pincetto – Piazza Matteotti (2008)

Since 1971 Perugia has taken several measures against car traffic, when the first traffic restriction zone was implemented. These zones were expanded over time and at certain hours of the day driving is forbidden in the city centre. Large parking lots are provided in the lower town, from where the city can be reached via public transport.

Since 2008, an automated people mover called Minimetrò has also been in operation. It has seven stations, with one terminal at a large parking lot, and the other in the city centre.
Perugia railway station, also known as Perugia Fontivegge, was opened in 1866. It forms part of the Foligno–Terontola railway, which also links Florence with Rome. The station is situated at Piazza Vittorio Veneto, in the heavily populated district of Fontivegge, about southwest of the city centre.

Perugia San Francesco d&#x27;Assisi – Umbria International Airport is located outside the city.

From the bus station there has been a daily connection of ITA Airways from 1 December 2022, by bus, to and from Rome Fiumicino Airport, allowing a connection with the airline&#x27;s hub. 

==International relations==

===Twin towns – sister cities===

Perugia is twinned with:

* Scranton, U.S.
* Aix-en-Provence, France
* Bratislava, Slovakia, since 1962
* Grand Rapids, U.S.
* Potsdam, Germany
* Seattle, U.S.
* Tübingen, Germany
==See also==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3437" start="0" end="7" title="Perugia" label="Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280" start="41" end="47" title="Umbria" label="Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="87" end="92" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="129" end="133" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="151" end="159" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q125458111" start="313" end="328" title="Etruscan cities" label="Etruscan cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="359" end="369" title="university" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q748085" start="385" end="406" title="University of Perugia" label="University of Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q779549" start="428" end="453" title="University for Foreigners Perugia" label="University for Foreigners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061266" start="879" end="892" title="Eurochocolate" label="Eurochocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q20126" start="920" end="932" title="Bastia Umbra" label="Bastia Umbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q546381" start="938" end="958" title="Umbria Jazz Festival" label="Umbria Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q584846" start="975" end="1008" title="International Journalism Festival" label="International Journalism Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5827" start="1117" end="1125" title="Perugino" label="Perugino"/>
<link wikidata="Q20409" start="1143" end="1160" title="Città della Pieve" label="Città della Pieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="1244" end="1250" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739127" start="1300" end="1326" title="Galleria Nazionale dell&amp;#x27;Umbria" label="National Gallery of Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="1367" end="1374" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="1386" end="1397" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591" start="1507" end="1519" title="Pinturicchio" label="Pinturicchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q381757" start="1539" end="1554" title="Galeazzo Alessi" label="Galeazzo Alessi"/>
<link wikidata="Q130223" start="1629" end="1636" title="griffin" label="griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q721747" start="1671" end="1677" title="Commemorative plaque" label="plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q179700" start="1683" end="1689" title="statue" label="statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16344" start="1770" end="1782" title="A.C. Perugia" label="A.C. Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="1818" end="1825" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q538427" start="1894" end="1901" title="1978–79 Serie A" label="1978–79"/>
<link wikidata="Q389236" start="2020" end="2025" title="Umbri" label="Umbri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130478" start="2085" end="2092" title="Perusia" label="Perusia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2114" end="2125" title="Etruscan civilization#Etruscan League" label="confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q206730" start="2136" end="2143" title="Etruria" label="Etruria"/>
<link wikidata="Q313500" start="2171" end="2194" title="Quintus Fabius Pictor" label="Q. Fabius Pictor&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="2212" end="2216" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2260" end="2275" title="Etruscan civilization#Etruscan League" label="Etruscan League"/>
<link wikidata="Q435352" start="2279" end="2303" title="Fabius Maximus Rullianus" label="Fabius Maximus Rullianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208383" start="2355" end="2363" title="Truce" label="indutiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q109251" start="2436" end="2453" title="Samnite Wars" label="Third Samnite War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13378" start="2498" end="2504" title="Arezzo" label="Arezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271" start="2612" end="2628" title="Second Punic War" label="Second Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q318803" start="2686" end="2701" title="Lucius Antonius (brother of Mark Antony)" label="Lucius Antonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="2741" end="2749" title="Augustus" label="Octavian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2821" end="2850" title="Sling_(weapon)#Ammunition" label="lead bullets used by slingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640" start="2961" end="2967" title="Vulcan (mythology)" label="Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q125046" start="2972" end="2976" title="Juno (mythology)" label="Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q756780" start="3319" end="3326" title="Colonia (Roman)" label="colonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171023" start="3438" end="3456" title="Trebonianus Gallus" label="Trebonianus Gallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159707" start="3581" end="3587" title="Totila" label="Totila"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="3596" end="3606" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q980830" start="3810" end="3820" title="Herculanus of Perugia" label="Herculanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145315" start="3908" end="3914" title="flayed" label="flayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="3994" end="4006" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="4036" end="4043" title="Lombards" label="Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q695728" start="4107" end="4113" title="Tuscia" label="Tuscia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="4155" end="4166" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q43974" start="4171" end="4186" title="Louis the Pious" label="Louis the Pious"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107861" start="4244" end="4251" title="Medieval commune" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q20436" start="4408" end="4415" title="Foligno" label="Foligno"/>
<link wikidata="Q20103" start="4417" end="4423" title="Assisi" label="Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20571" start="4425" end="4432" title="Spoleto" label="Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q20579" start="4434" end="4438" title="Todi" label="Todi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751" start="4440" end="4445" title="Siena" label="Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q13378" start="4447" end="4453" title="Arezzo" label="Arezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="4469" end="4477" title="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489757" start="4563" end="4569" title="consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q128076" start="4607" end="4624" title="Pope Innocent III" label="Pope Innocent III"/>
<link wikidata="Q766473" start="4714" end="4736" title="Patrimonium Sancti Petri" label="patrimony of St. Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q186431" start="4988" end="4997" title="Papal conclave" label="conclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171023" start="4999" end="5013" title="Perugia Papacy" label="Perugia Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q160182" start="5045" end="5057" title="Pope Honorius III" label="Honorius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q172928" start="5066" end="5076" title="Pope Clement IV" label="Clement IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q118081" start="5085" end="5096" title="Pope Celestine V" label="Celestine V"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="5109" end="5118" title="Pope Clement V" label="Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004573" start="5631" end="5649" title="Palazzo dei Priori" label="Palazzo dei Priori"/>
<link wikidata="Q338814" start="5684" end="5688" title="lion (heraldry)" label="lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="5775" end="5798" title="Guelphs and Ghibellines" label="Guelphs and Ghibellines"/>
<link wikidata="Q939200" start="5891" end="5898" title="Capetian House of Anjou" label="Angevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q196157" start="6011" end="6028" title="Louis of Toulouse" label="Louis of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q439050" start="6246" end="6271" title="Bartholus of Sassoferrato" label="Bartholus of Sassoferrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q433189" start="6401" end="6414" title="Cola di Rienzi" label="Rienzi&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q133046" start="6678" end="6690" title="Pope Urban V" label="Pope Urban V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="6768" end="6775" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772015" start="6874" end="6887" title="Gérard du Puy" label="Gérard du Puy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124831" start="6923" end="6933" title="Pope Gregory IX" label="Gregory IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904231" start="7082" end="7099" title="Biordo Michelotti" label="Biordo Michelotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q357539" start="8641" end="8663" title="Gian Galeazzo Visconti" label="Gian Galeazzo Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q896536" start="9528" end="9546" title="Braccio da Montone" label="Braccio da Montone"/>
<link wikidata="Q896536" start="9694" end="9713" title="Braccio da Montone" label="Braccio Fortebracci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238848" start="11162" end="11177" title="Baglioni family" label="Baglioni family"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="11425" end="11433" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591" start="12256" end="12268" title="Pinturicchio" label="Pinturicchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256294" start="12270" end="12294" title="Piermatteo Lauro de&amp;#x27; Manfredi da Amelia" label="Piermatteo d&amp;#x27;Amelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5827" start="12310" end="12318" title="Pietro Perugino" label="Perugino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5827" start="12389" end="12425" title="Pietro Perugino" label="Pietro &amp;quot;Perugino&amp;quot; Vannucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q666214" start="12524" end="12543" title="Collegio del Cambio" label="Collegio del Cambio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142042" start="13152" end="13171" title="Gian Paolo Baglioni" label="Gian Paolo Baglioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q49237" start="13214" end="13219" title="Pope Leo X" label="Leo X"/>
<link wikidata="Q364023" start="13289" end="13307" title="Pier Luigi Farnese" label="Pier Luigi Farnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437424" start="13418" end="13431" title="Rocca Paolina" label="Rocca Paolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q133001" start="13451" end="13464" title="Pope Paul III" label="Pope Paul III"/>
<link wikidata="Q357276" start="13491" end="13522" title="Antonio da Sangallo the Younger" label="Antonio da Sangallo the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q43192" start="13739" end="13748" title="Flag of France" label="tricolour"/>
<link wikidata="Q175881" start="13803" end="13817" title="Roman Republic (18th century)" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072140" start="13907" end="13932" title="Roman Republic (19th century)" label="Roman republic of 1848–49"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="14006" end="14013" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q579577" start="14145" end="14161" title="1859 Perugia uprising" label="the insurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="14186" end="14200" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pius IX&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="14303" end="14319" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14328" end="14340" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q270202" start="14402" end="14418" title="Eighth Army (United Kingdom)" label="British 8th army"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="14481" end="14490" title="chocolate" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080968" start="14525" end="14533" title="Perugina" label="Perugina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061266" start="14900" end="14913" title="EuroChocolate" label="EuroChocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="15168" end="15193" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="15195" end="15224" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280" start="15661" end="15667" title="Umbria" label="Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="16118" end="16123" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="16189" end="16196" title="Italian people" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="16242" end="16248" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="16280" end="16287" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="16292" end="16299" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="16313" end="16321" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="16334" end="16347" title="North African" label="North African"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="16387" end="16401" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q748085" start="16474" end="16496" title="University of Perugia" label="Università degli Studi"/>
<link wikidata="Q779549" start="16529" end="16550" title="University for Foreigners Perugia" label="Foreigners University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134686" start="17283" end="17291" title="frazioni" label="frazioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236794" start="17394" end="17415" title="Civitella d&amp;#x27;Arna" label="Civitella d&amp;#x27;Arna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070894" start="17499" end="17509" title="Fontignano" label="Fontignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196348" start="17835" end="17853" title="Ponte San Giovanni" label="Ponte San Giovanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q20103" start="18480" end="18486" title="Assisi" label="Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132503" start="18541" end="18564" title="Perugia Cathedral" label="Cathedral of S. Lorenzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q644850" start="18579" end="18589" title="San Pietro, Perugia" label="San Pietro"/>
<link wikidata="Q644828" start="18641" end="18653" title="San Domenico, Perugia" label="San Domenico"/>
<link wikidata="Q314932" start="18836" end="18851" title="Giovanni Pisano" label="Giovanni Pisano"/>
<link wikidata="Q122328" start="18906" end="18919" title="Carlo Maderno" label="Carlo Maderno"/>
<link wikidata="Q169301" start="19027" end="19043" title="Pope Benedict XI" label="Pope Benedict XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3585315" start="19192" end="19208" title="Church of Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo, Perugia" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q919456" start="19396" end="19417" title="Santo Stefano Rotondo" label="Santo Stefano Rotondo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19426" end="19449" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Antonio Abate di Perugia" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Antonio Abate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19464" end="19478" title="San Bernardino, Perugia" label="San Bernardino"/>
<link wikidata="Q395755" start="19508" end="19526" title="Agostino di Duccio" label="Agostino di Duccio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19535" end="19547" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Ercolano, Perugia" label="San Ercolano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19815" end="19829" title="Santa Giuliana, Perugia" label="Santa Giuliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q200334" start="20317" end="20326" title="campanile" label="campanile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985909" start="20366" end="20379" title="San Bevignate" label="San Bevignate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="20401" end="20408" title="Knights Templar" label="Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55178333" start="20411" end="20433" title="Chiesa of San Prospero (Perugia)" label="Chiesa of San Prospero"/>
<link wikidata="Q30889528" start="20436" end="20471" title="Church of the Compagnia della morte" label="Church of the Compagnia della Morte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004573" start="20505" end="20523" title="Palazzo dei Priori" label="Palazzo dei Priori"/>
<link wikidata="Q666214" start="20553" end="20572" title="Collegio del Cambio" label="Collegio del Cambio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5827" start="20705" end="20720" title="Pietro Perugino" label="Pietro Perugino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739127" start="20807" end="20842" title="Galleria Nazionale dell&amp;#x27;Umbria" label="Galleria Nazionale dell&amp;#x27;Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5822" start="20941" end="20962" title="Piero della Francesca" label="Piero della Francesca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664" start="20964" end="20978" title="Beato Angelico" label="Beato Angelico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5827" start="20980" end="20988" title="Perugino" label="Perugino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435815" start="20998" end="21014" title="Fontana Maggiore" label="Fontana Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q364413" start="21084" end="21090" title="Nicola Pisano" label="Nicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q314932" start="21095" end="21110" title="Giovanni Pisano" label="Giovanni Pisano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="21182" end="21189" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q5827" start="21194" end="21202" title="Perugino" label="Perugino"/>
<link wikidata="Q357276" start="21343" end="21350" title="Antonio da Sangallo the Younger" label="Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q737782" start="21355" end="21377" title="Bastiano da Sangallo" label="Aristotile da Sangallo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21452" end="21468" title="Gentile Baglioni" label="Gentile Baglioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105068" start="21507" end="21552" title="Orto Botanico dell&amp;#x27;Università di Perugia" label="Orto Botanico dell&amp;#x27;Università di Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167346" start="21576" end="21592" title="botanical garden" label="botanical garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361292" start="21594" end="21608" title="Palazzo Donini" label="Palazzo Donini"/>
<link wikidata="Q16616971" start="21694" end="21712" title="Torre degli Sciri" label="Sciri&amp;#x27;s tower"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22185" end="22228" title="Torre del Cassero di Porta Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Torre del Cassero di Porta Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253879" start="22534" end="22565" title="Hypogeum of the Volumnus family" label="Hypogeum of the Volumnus family"/>
<link wikidata="Q16591840" start="22627" end="22640" title="Etruscan Well" label="Etruscan Well"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="22752" end="22760" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229173" start="22795" end="22811" title="Cippus perusinus" label="Cippus perusinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892295" start="22821" end="22834" title="Etruscan Arch" label="Etruscan Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q104902186" start="22953" end="22971" title="Centro Direzionale di Fontivegge" label="Centro Direzionale"/>
<link wikidata="Q322953" start="23117" end="23127" title="Aldo Rossi" label="Aldo Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133779" start="23198" end="23215" title="Early Renaissance" label="Early Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="23322" end="23329" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344357" start="23380" end="23390" title="Oddi Altar (Raphael)" label="Oddi Altar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739127" start="23421" end="23456" title="Galleria Nazionale dell&amp;#x27;Umbria" label="Galleria Nazionale dell&amp;#x27;Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728425" start="23521" end="23554" title="Madonna with Child and six Angels (Duccio)" label="Madonna with Child and six Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="23583" end="23594" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4217443" start="23595" end="23605" title="Marian art in the Catholic Church" label="Marian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q15792" start="23609" end="23615" title="Duccio" label="Duccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796746" start="23633" end="23691" title="Art collection of Fondazione Cassa di Risparmio di Perugia" label="Art collection of Fondazione Cassa di Risparmio di Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q666214" start="23725" end="23744" title="Collegio del Cambio" label="Collegio del Cambio"/>
<link wikidata="Q546381" start="24039" end="24059" title="Umbria Jazz Festival" label="Umbria Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q584846" start="24243" end="24276" title="International Journalism Festival" label="International Journalism Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061266" start="24319" end="24332" title="Eurochocolate" label="Eurochocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q20126" start="24465" end="24477" title="Bastia Umbra" label="Bastia Umbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q20046372" start="24486" end="24504" title="Music Fest Perugia" label="Music Fest Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171023" start="24596" end="24614" title="Trebonianus Gallus" label="Trebonianus Gallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662614" start="24642" end="24662" title="Aaron the Bookseller" label="Aaron the Bookseller"/>
<link wikidata="Q439050" start="24713" end="24736" title="Bartolo da Sassoferrato" label="Bartolo da Sassoferrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q504929" start="24768" end="24786" title="Baldo degli Ubaldi" label="Baldo degli Ubaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904231" start="24818" end="24835" title="Biordo Michelotti" label="Biordo Michelotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q896536" start="24863" end="24881" title="Braccio da Montone" label="Braccio da Montone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343880" start="24909" end="24926" title="Matteo da Perugia" label="Matteo da Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q979543" start="24955" end="24972" title="Niccolò Piccinino" label="Niccolò Piccinino"/>
<link wikidata="Q395755" start="25000" end="25018" title="Agostino di Duccio" label="Agostino di Duccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5827" start="25034" end="25042" title="Perugino" label="Perugino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591" start="25066" end="25078" title="Pinturicchio" label="Pinturicchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q381757" start="25132" end="25147" title="Galeazzo Alessi" label="Galeazzo Alessi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234790" start="25173" end="25187" title="Vincenzo Danti" label="Vincenzo Danti"/>
<link wikidata="Q948226" start="25231" end="25244" title="Ignazio Danti" label="Ignazio Danti"/>
<link wikidata="Q571408" start="25480" end="25499" title="Francesco Morlacchi" label="Francesco Morlacchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847388" start="25524" end="25541" title="Gertrude Prosperi" label="Gertrude Prosperi"/>
<link wikidata="Q63485680" start="25592" end="25608" title="Assunta Pieralli" label="Assunta Pieralli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840474" start="25641" end="25655" title="Luisa Spagnoli" label="Luisa Spagnoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227513" start="25684" end="25703" title="Giuseppe Prezzolini" label="Giuseppe Prezzolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365533" start="25726" end="25741" title="Gerardo Dottori" label="Gerardo Dottori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158692" start="25765" end="25781" title="Gabriele Santini" label="Gabriele Santini"/>
<link wikidata="Q517837" start="25818" end="25831" title="Aldo Capitini" label="Aldo Capitini"/>
<link wikidata="Q982945" start="25859" end="25871" title="Sandro Penna" label="Sandro Penna"/>
<link wikidata="Q88782561" start="25935" end="25953" title="Walkiria Terradura" label="Walkiria Terradura"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479188" start="26018" end="26034" title="Francesco Ascani" label="Francesco Ascani"/>
<link wikidata="Q864539" start="26064" end="26082" title="Giovanni Mirabassi" label="Giovanni Mirabassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757721" start="26112" end="26126" title="Marco Taccucci" label="Marco Taccucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q65127319" start="26153" end="26165" title="Lorela Cubaj" label="Lorela Cubaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q16344" start="26211" end="26228" title="AC Perugia Calcio" label="AC Perugia Calcio"/>
<link wikidata="Q607965" start="26315" end="26322" title="Serie C" label="Serie C"/>
<link wikidata="Q94619" start="26358" end="26376" title="Stadio Renato Curi" label="Stadio Renato Curi"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="26488" end="26516" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707" start="26535" end="26545" title="water polo" label="water polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961987" start="26833" end="26857" title="Sir Safety Umbria Volley" label="Sir Safety Umbria Volley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="26912" end="26922" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873310" start="27063" end="27079" title="Luciano de Cecco" label="Luciano de Cecco"/>
<link wikidata="Q172184" start="27094" end="27117" title="Aleksandar Atanasijević" label="Aleksandar Atanasijević"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634633" start="27133" end="27146" title="Wilfredo Leon" label="Wilfredo Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q639030" start="28765" end="28787" title="automated people mover" label="automated people mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q335828" start="28795" end="28804" title="Minimetrò" label="Minimetrò"/>
<link wikidata="Q3970444" start="28932" end="28955" title="Perugia railway station" label="Perugia railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743425" start="29032" end="29057" title="Foligno–Terontola railway" label="Foligno–Terontola railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q800761" start="29076" end="29084" title="Firenze Santa Maria Novella railway station" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q754485" start="29090" end="29094" title="Roma Termini railway station" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q47578" start="29130" end="29145" title="Vittorio Veneto" label="Vittorio Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371018" start="29233" end="29299" title="Perugia San Francesco d&amp;#x27;Assisi – Umbria International Airport" label="Perugia San Francesco d&amp;#x27;Assisi – Umbria International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q108251249" start="29388" end="29399" title="ITA Airways" label="ITA Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q19101" start="29442" end="29464" title="Rome Fiumicino Airport" label="Rome Fiumicino Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="29593" end="29600" title="town twinning" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q271395" start="29610" end="29618" title="Scranton, Pennsylvania" label="Scranton"/>
<link wikidata="Q47465" start="29627" end="29642" title="Aix-en-Provence" label="Aix-en-Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="29653" end="29663" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q184587" start="29688" end="29700" title="Grand Rapids, Michigan" label="Grand Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="29709" end="29716" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="29728" end="29735" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806" start="29744" end="29752" title="Tübingen" label="Tübingen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51596" wikidata="Q138145" url="?curid=51596" title="Inositol trisphosphate">
<text>Inositol trisphosphate or inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate abbreviated InsP3 or Ins3P or IP3 is an inositol phosphate signaling molecule. It is made by hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2), a phospholipid that is located in the plasma membrane, by phospholipase C (PLC).
Together with diacylglycerol (DAG), IP3 is a second messenger molecule used in signal transduction in biological cells. While DAG stays inside the membrane, IP3 is soluble and diffuses through the cell, where it binds to its receptor, which is a calcium channel located in the endoplasmic reticulum. When IP3 binds its receptor, calcium is released into the cytosol, thereby activating various calcium regulated intracellular signals.

==Properties ==

===Chemical formula and molecular weight===
IP3 is an organic molecule with a molecular mass of 420.10 g/mol. Its empirical formula is C6H15O15P3. It is composed of an inositol ring with three phosphate groups bound at the 1, 4, and 5 carbon positions, and three hydroxyl groups bound at positions 2, 3, and 6.

===Chemical properties ===
Phosphate groups can exist in three different forms depending on a solution&#x27;s pH. Phosphorus atoms can bind three oxygen atoms with single bonds and a fourth oxygen atom using a double/dative bond. The pH of the solution, and thus the form of the phosphate group determines its ability to bind to other molecules. The binding of phosphate groups to the inositol ring is accomplished by phosphor-ester binding (see phosphoric acids and phosphates). This bond involves combining a hydroxyl group from the inositol ring and a free phosphate group through a dehydration reaction. Considering that the average physiological pH is approximately 7.4, the main form of the phosphate groups bound to the inositol ring in vivo is PO42−. This gives IP3 a net negative charge, which is important in allowing it to dock to its receptor, through binding of the phosphate groups to positively charged residues on the receptor. IP3 has three hydrogen bond donors in the form of its three hydroxyl groups. The hydroxyl group on the 6th carbon atom in the inositol ring is also involved in IP3 docking.

===Binding to its receptor===

The docking of IP3 to its receptor, which is called the inositol trisphosphate receptor (InsP3R), was first studied using deletion mutagenesis in the early 1990s. Studies focused on the N-terminus side of the IP3 receptor. In 1997 researchers localized the region of the IP3 receptor involved with binding of IP3 to between amino acid residues 226 and 578 in 1997. Considering that IP3 is a negatively charged molecule, positively charged amino acids such as arginine and lysine were believed to be involved. Two arginine residues at position 265 and 511 and one lysine residue at position 508 were found to be key in IP3 docking. Using a modified form of IP3, it was discovered that all three phosphate groups interact with the receptor, but not equally. Phosphates at the 4th and 5th positions interact more extensively than the phosphate at the 1st position and the hydroxyl group at the 6th position of the inositol ring.

==Discovery==
The discovery that a hormone can influence phosphoinositide metabolism was made by Mabel R. Hokin (1924–2003) and her husband Lowell E. Hokin in 1953, when they discovered that radioactive 32P phosphate was incorporated into the phosphatidylinositol of pancreas slices when stimulated with acetylcholine. Up until then phospholipids were believed to be inert structures only used by cells as building blocks for construction of the plasma membrane.

Over the next 20 years, little was discovered about the importance of PIP2 metabolism in terms of cell signaling, until the mid-1970s when Robert H. Michell hypothesized a connection between the catabolism of PIP2 and increases in intracellular calcium (Ca2+) levels. He hypothesized that receptor-activated hydrolysis of PIP2 produced a molecule that caused increases in intracellular calcium mobilization. This idea was researched extensively by Michell and his colleagues, who in 1981 were able to show that PIP2 is hydrolyzed into DAG and IP3 by a then unknown phosphodiesterase. In 1984 it was discovered that IP3 acts as a secondary messenger that is capable of traveling through the cytoplasm to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), where it stimulates the release of calcium into the cytoplasm.

Further research provided valuable information on the IP3 pathway, such as the discovery in 1986 that one of the many roles of the calcium released by IP3 is to work with DAG to activate protein kinase C (PKC). It was discovered in 1989 that phospholipase C (PLC) is the phosphodiesterase responsible for hydrolyzing PIP2 into DAG and IP3. Today the IP3 signaling pathway is well mapped out, and is known to be important in regulating a variety of calcium-dependent cell signaling pathways.

==Signaling pathway==

Increases in the intracellular Ca2+ concentrations are often a result of IP3 activation. When a ligand binds to a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) that is coupled to a Gq heterotrimeric G protein, the α-subunit of Gq can bind to and induce activity in the PLC isozyme PLC-β, which results in the cleavage of PIP2 into IP3 and DAG.

If a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) is involved in activating the pathway, the isozyme PLC-γ has tyrosine residues that can become phosphorylated upon activation of an RTK, and this will activate PLC-γ and allow it to cleave PIP2 into DAG and IP3. This occurs in cells that are capable of responding to growth factors such as insulin, because the growth factors are the ligands responsible for activating the RTK.

IP3 (also abbreviated Ins(1,4,5)P3 is a soluble molecule and is capable of diffusing through the cytoplasm to the ER, or the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) in the case of muscle cells, once it has been produced by the action of PLC. Once at the ER, IP3 is able to bind to the Ins(1,4,5)P3 receptor Ins(1,4,5)P3R which is a ligand-gated Ca2+ channel that is found on the surface of the ER. The binding of IP3 (the ligand in this case) to Ins(1,4,5)P3R triggers the opening of the Ca2+ channel, and thus release of Ca2+ into the cytoplasm. In heart muscle cells this increase in Ca2+ activates the ryanodine receptor-operated channel on the SR, results in further increases in Ca2+ through a process known as calcium-induced calcium release. IP3 may also activate Ca2+ channels on the cell membrane indirectly, by increasing the intracellular Ca2+ concentration.

==Function==

===Human===

IP3&#x27;s main functions are to mobilize Ca2+ from storage organelles and to regulate cell proliferation and other cellular reactions that require free calcium. In smooth muscle cells, for example, an increase in concentration of cytoplasmic Ca2+ results in the contraction of the muscle cell.

In the nervous system, IP3 serves as a second messenger, with the cerebellum containing the highest concentration of IP3 receptors. There is evidence that IP3 receptors play an important role in the induction of plasticity in cerebellar Purkinje cells.

=== Sea urchin eggs ===
The slow block to polyspermy in the sea urchin is mediated by the PIP2 secondary messenger system. Activation of the binding receptors activates PLC, which cleaves PIP2 in the egg plasma membrane, releasing IP3 into the egg cell cytoplasm. IP3 diffuses to the ER, where it opens Ca2+ channels.

==Research==

===Huntington&#x27;s disease===
Huntington&#x27;s disease occurs when the cytosolic protein Huntingtin (Htt) has an additional 35 glutamine residues added to its amino terminal region. This modified form of Htt is called Httexp. Httexp makes Type 1 IP3 receptors more sensitive to IP3, which leads to the release of too much Ca2+ from the ER. The release of Ca2+ from the ER causes an increase in the cytosolic and mitochondrial concentrations of Ca2+. This increase in Ca2+ is thought to be the cause of GABAergic MSN degradation.

=== Alzheimer&#x27;s disease===
Alzheimer&#x27;s disease involves the progressive degeneration of the brain, severely impacting mental faculties. Since the Ca2+ hypothesis of Alzheimer&#x27;s was proposed in 1994, several studies have shown that disruptions in Ca2+ signaling are the primary cause of Alzheimer&#x27;s disease. Familial Alzheimer&#x27;s disease has been strongly linked to mutations in the presenilin 1 (PS1), presenilin 2 (PS2), and amyloid precursor protein (APP) genes. All of the mutated forms of these genes observed to date have been found to cause abnormal Ca2+ signaling in the ER. Mutations in PS1 have been shown to increase IP3-mediated Ca2+ release from the ER in several animal models. Calcium channel blockers have been used to treat Alzheimer&#x27;s disease with some success, and the use of lithium to decrease IP3 turnover has also been suggested as a possible method of treatment.

==See also==

* Adenophostin
* Inositol
* Inositol phosphate
* &quot;myo&quot;-Inositol
* Myo-inositol trispyrophosphate
* Inositol pentakisphosphate
* Inositol hexaphosphate
* Inositol trisphosphate receptor
* ITPR1
* ITPKC
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q138145" start="0" end="22" title="Inositol trisphosphate" label="Inositol trisphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q138145" start="26" end="54" title="Inositol trisphosphate" label="inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q138145" start="67" end="72" title="Inositol trisphosphate" label="InsP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q138145" start="76" end="81" title="Inositol trisphosphate" label="Ins3P"/>
<link wikidata="Q138145" start="85" end="88" title="Inositol trisphosphate" label="IP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878809" start="95" end="113" title="inositol phosphate" label="inositol phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="148" end="158" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083814" start="162" end="199" title="phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate" label="phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q186915" start="210" end="222" title="phospholipid" label="phospholipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="246" end="261" title="plasma membrane" label="plasma membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q420248" start="266" end="281" title="phospholipase C" label="phospholipase C"/>
<link wikidata="Q161466" start="303" end="317" title="diglyceride" label="diacylglycerol"/>
<link wikidata="Q899814" start="334" end="350" title="second messenger" label="second messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q828130" start="368" end="387" title="signal transduction" label="signal transduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="391" end="406" title="cell (biology)" label="biological cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q418917" start="510" end="522" title="Inositol trisphosphate receptor" label="its receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q182854" start="820" end="834" title="molecular mass" label="molecular mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q272477" start="856" end="873" title="empirical formula" label="empirical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q407997" start="910" end="918" title="inositol" label="inositol"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="935" end="944" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="1005" end="1013" title="hydroxyl" label="hydroxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="1164" end="1166" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q15511048" start="1500" end="1531" title="phosphoric acids and phosphates" label="phosphoric acids and phosphates"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="1565" end="1573" title="hydroxyl" label="hydroxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183091" start="1640" end="1660" title="dehydration reaction" label="dehydration reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="1795" end="1802" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="2012" end="2025" title="hydrogen bond" label="hydrogen bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q418917" start="2259" end="2290" title="inositol trisphosphate receptor" label="inositol trisphosphate receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q149299" start="2334" end="2345" title="mutagenesis" label="mutagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q284398" start="2389" end="2399" title="N-terminus" label="N-terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="2527" end="2537" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q173670" start="2662" end="2670" title="arginine" label="arginine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178430" start="2675" end="2681" title="lysine" label="lysine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="3165" end="3172" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="3204" end="3214" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989710" start="3227" end="3241" title="Mabel Hokin" label="Mabel R. Hokin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="3321" end="3332" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273248" start="3373" end="3393" title="phosphatidylinositol" label="phosphatidylinositol"/>
<link wikidata="Q9618" start="3397" end="3405" title="pancreas" label="pancreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q180623" start="3434" end="3447" title="acetylcholine" label="acetylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186915" start="3463" end="3476" title="phospholipids" label="phospholipids"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130714" start="3789" end="3799" title="catabolism" label="catabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571762" start="3825" end="3838" title="intracellular" label="intracellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="3839" end="3846" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q424304" start="4159" end="4176" title="phosphodiesterase" label="phosphodiesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q79899" start="4284" end="4293" title="cytoplasm" label="cytoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q79927" start="4301" end="4322" title="endoplasmic reticulum" label="endoplasmic reticulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q420877" start="4580" end="4596" title="protein kinase C" label="protein kinase C"/>
<link wikidata="Q420248" start="4635" end="4650" title="phospholipase C" label="phospholipase C"/>
<link wikidata="Q193161" start="5004" end="5010" title="ligand" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q38173" start="5022" end="5048" title="G protein-coupled receptor" label="G protein-coupled receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q408561" start="5080" end="5104" title="heterotrimeric G protein" label="heterotrimeric G protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q407801" start="5169" end="5176" title="isozyme" label="isozyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q420511" start="5246" end="5270" title="receptor tyrosine kinase" label="receptor tyrosine kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q188017" start="5338" end="5346" title="tyrosine" label="tyrosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q408378" start="5544" end="5558" title="growth factors" label="growth factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="5567" end="5574" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="5696" end="5703" title="soluble" label="soluble"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104113" start="5731" end="5740" title="diffusing" label="diffusing"/>
<link wikidata="Q14633936" start="5781" end="5803" title="sarcoplasmic reticulum" label="sarcoplasmic reticulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="5824" end="5830" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q416781" start="6249" end="6267" title="ryanodine receptor" label="ryanodine receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q45948" start="6602" end="6611" title="organelle" label="organelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q189101" start="6629" end="6647" title="cell proliferation" label="cell proliferation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208453" start="6707" end="6725" title="smooth muscle cell" label="smooth muscle cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q130983" start="6904" end="6914" title="cerebellum" label="cerebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570272" start="7075" end="7089" title="Purkinje cells" label="Purkinje cells"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7120" end="7144" title="Egg activation#Fast and slow block to polyspermy" label="slow block to polyspermy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83483" start="7152" end="7162" title="sea urchin" label="sea urchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190564" start="7457" end="7482" title="Huntington&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Huntington&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620886" start="7517" end="7527" title="Huntingtin" label="Huntingtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181619" start="7555" end="7564" title="glutamine" label="glutamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="7840" end="7853" title="mitochondrial" label="mitochondrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q210021" start="7930" end="7934" title="gamma-aminobutyric acid" label="GABA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="7990" end="8014" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326566" start="8285" end="8318" title="Early onset Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s" label="Familial Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q18253272" start="8364" end="8376" title="presenilin 1" label="presenilin 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030834" start="8384" end="8396" title="presenilin 2" label="presenilin 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q423510" start="8408" end="8433" title="amyloid precursor protein" label="amyloid precursor protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="8440" end="8445" title="genes" label="genes"/>
<link wikidata="Q421700" start="8673" end="8697" title="Calcium channel blockers" label="Calcium channel blockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q152763" start="8781" end="8788" title="Lithium_(medication)" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682254" start="8890" end="8902" title="Adenophostin" label="Adenophostin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407997" start="8905" end="8913" title="Inositol" label="Inositol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878809" start="8916" end="8934" title="Inositol phosphate" label="Inositol phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407997" start="8937" end="8961" title="myo-Inositol" label="&amp;quot;myo&amp;quot;-Inositol"/>
<link wikidata="Q27251279" start="8964" end="8994" title="Myo-inositol trispyrophosphate" label="Myo-inositol trispyrophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27101851" start="8997" end="9023" title="Inositol pentakisphosphate" label="Inositol pentakisphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q409679" start="9026" end="9048" title="Inositol hexaphosphate" label="Inositol hexaphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q418917" start="9051" end="9082" title="Inositol trisphosphate receptor" label="Inositol trisphosphate receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18028073" start="9085" end="9090" title="ITPR1" label="ITPR1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18046680" start="9093" end="9098" title="ITPKC" label="ITPKC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51599" wikidata="Q361996" url="?curid=51599" title="William Hartnell">
<text>William Henry Hartnell (; 8 January 1908 – 23 April 1975) was an English actor, who is best known for portraying the first incarnation of the Doctor, in the long-running British science-fiction television series &quot;Doctor Who&quot; from 1963 to 1966; he reprised the role in 1972–1973. In film, Hartnell notably appeared in &quot;Brighton Rock&quot; (1949), &quot;The Mouse That Roared&quot; (1959) and &quot;This Sporting Life&quot; (1963). He was associated with military roles, playing Company Sergeant Major Percy Bullimore in the ITV sitcom &quot;The Army Game&quot; (1957, 1961) and Sergeant Grimshaw, the title character in the first &quot;Carry On&quot; film &quot;Carry On Sergeant&quot; (1958).

==Early life==
William Henry Hartnell was born on 8 January 1908 in the slums of the district of St Pancras, London, England, the only child of Lucy Hartnell, an unmarried mother. Hartnell never discovered the identity of his father, whose particulars were left blank on his birth certificate, despite his efforts to trace him. In various interviews, he claimed that he was born in Seaton, Devon, and that his father was a dairy farmer, but later said he was a soldier turned stockbroker.

Hartnell was brought up partly by a foster mother, and also spent many holidays in Devon with his mother&#x27;s family of farmers, from whom he learned to ride horses. Reportedly, Hartnell had a fall and was kicked by a horse. Disinfectant was applied to the open wound to cleanse it. However, the disinfectant was of a type unsuitable for first aid purposes and caused blisters. The result was a more serious wound than what would have otherwise occurred. Hartnell was left with a large scar on his temple, which is visible in some of his stills shots even though it was covered with make-up during filming. He was a second cousin of the fashion designer Norman Hartnell.

Hartnell left school without prospects and dabbled in petty crime. At the age of 16, he met the art collector Hugh Blaker, who later became his unofficial guardian, arranged for him to train as a jockey, and helped him to enter the Italia Conti Academy. Theatre being a passion of Blaker&#x27;s, he paid for Hartnell to receive some &quot;polish&quot; at the Imperial Service College, though Hartnell found the strictures too much and ran away. When Hartnell married, he and his wife continued to live in one of Blaker&#x27;s adjacent properties at Isleworth and their daughter was born there in 1929.

==Career==
===Early career===
Hartnell entered the theatre in 1925 working under Frank Benson as a general stagehand. He appeared in numerous Shakespearian plays, including &quot;The Merchant of Venice&quot;, &quot;Julius Caesar&quot;, &quot;As You Like It&quot;, &quot;Hamlet&quot;, &quot;The Tempest&quot; and &quot;Macbeth&quot; (all 1926). He also appeared in &quot;She Stoops to Conquer&quot;, &quot;The School for Scandal&quot; (both 1926) and &quot;Good Morning, Bill&quot; (1927), before performing in &quot;Miss Elizabeth&#x27;s Prisoner&quot; (1928). This play was written by Robert Neilson Stephens and E. Lyall Swete. It featured the actress Heather McIntyre, whom he married during the following year. His first of more than 60 film appearances was in &quot;Say It With Music&quot; (1932).

Radio work also featured in his career, with his earliest known performance – in a production of &quot;Chinese Moon Party&quot; – being broadcast by the BBC on 11 May 1931.

From the outbreak of the Second World War, Hartnell attempted to volunteer for the RAF. He served in the British Army in the Tank Corps, but he was invalided out after 18 months as the result of a nervous breakdown and returned to acting. In 1942, he was cast as Albert Fosdike in Noël Coward&#x27;s film &quot;In Which We Serve&quot;. He turned up late for his first day of shooting, and Coward berated him in front of the cast and crew for his unprofessionalism, made him personally apologise to everyone and then sacked him. Michael Anderson, who was the first assistant director, took over the part (and was credited as &quot;Mickey Anderson&quot;).

Hartnell continued to play comic characters until he was cast in the robust role of Sergeant Ned Fletcher in &quot;The Way Ahead&quot; (1944). From then on, his career was defined by playing mainly policemen, soldiers and thugs. This typecasting bothered him, for even when he was cast in comedies he found he invariably played the &quot;heavy&quot;. In 1947 he was cast in a major role in the Boulting brothers classic gangster film noir Brighton Rock, playing the tough gang underboss, Dallow. In 1957 he appeared in Hell Drivers as a ruthless and hard-nosed transport yard manager, Cartley. In 1958, he played the sergeant in the first Carry On comedy film, &quot;Carry On Sergeant&quot;. He appeared as serjeant-at-arms of Grand Fenwick Will Buckley, another military character, in the film &quot;The Mouse That Roared&quot; (1959), which starred Peter Sellers, and he played a town councillor in the Boulting brothers&#x27; film &quot;Heavens Above!&quot; (1963), again with Sellers.

His first regular role on television was as Sergeant Major Percy Bullimore in &quot;The Army Game&quot; in 1957. He left after the first season and returned for the final season in 1961. Again, although it was a comedy series, he found himself cast in a &quot;tough guy&quot; role. He also appeared in a supporting role in the film version of &quot;This Sporting Life&quot; (1963), giving a sensitive performance as an ageing rugby league talent scout known as &quot;Dad&quot;.

Hartnell described himself as &quot;a legitimate character actor of the theatre and film&quot;.

===&quot;Doctor Who&quot;===
Hartnell&#x27;s performance in &quot;This Sporting Life&quot; was liked by Verity Lambert, the producer who was setting up a new science-fiction television series for the BBC entitled &quot;Doctor Who&quot;; mainly on the strength of that performance, Lambert offered him the title role. Although Hartnell was initially uncertain about accepting a part in what was pitched to him as a children&#x27;s series, in part due to his success in films, Lambert and director Waris Hussein convinced him to take the part, and it became the character for which he gained the highest profile and is now most remembered. Hartnell later revealed that he took the role because it led him away from the gruff, military parts in which he had become typecast, and, having two grandchildren of his own, he came to relish particularly the attention and affection that playing the character brought him from children. An obituary would state how delighted Hartnell was to get the role of the Doctor at the age of 55 after a career of &quot;playing what he called bastards.&quot; His first episode of &quot;Doctor Who&quot; aired on 23 November 1963.

&quot;Doctor Who&quot; earned Hartnell a regular salary of £315 an episode by 1966 (in the era of 48 weeks per year production on the series), . By comparison, in 1966 his co-stars Anneke Wills and Michael Craze were earning £68 and £52 per episode at the same time, respectively. Throughout his tenure as the Doctor, Hartnell wore a wig when playing the part, as the character had long hair.

Hartnell described his character the Doctor as &quot;a wizard&quot;, and &quot;a cross between the Wizard of Oz and Father Christmas&quot;. According to William Russell, Hartnell deliberately became occasionally tongue-tied and stumbled over words.

According to some of his colleagues on &quot;Doctor Who&quot;, Hartnell could be a difficult person to work with; among the more caustic accounts, Nicholas Courtney and Wills described Hartnell as being racist and antisemitic. Hussein stated that Hartnell was homophobic, but also said &quot;I never allowed him to think of me as anything other than a director&quot;. They enjoyed a good working relationship and Hussein developed a &quot;great affection&quot; for Hartnell; Hussein said Hartnell was upset when Hussein left the show. Hartnell&#x27;s granddaughter, Jessica Carney, wrote that Hartnell was very bigoted and often made xenophobic comments but that &quot;all those loudly expressed opinions were contradicted by his behaviour on a personal level&quot;. Val Speyer said that while Hartnell claimed not to like foreigners, &quot;as one of his greatest friends on the show was half Greek and half Maltese, I didn&#x27;t see how this could figure. However, if he liked someone, they weren&#x27;t a foreigner, they were a friend!&quot;

Hartnell&#x27;s deteriorating health (undiagnosed arteriosclerosis) began to affect his ability to learn his lines, with the problem increasing as his time on the series progressed. In addition, he had a poor relationship with Lambert’s successor John Wiles, who resigned from the role after barely six months. The producer role was then given to Innes Lloyd who, with new story editor Gerry Davis, developed the idea that since the Doctor was an alien, he could transform himself physically, enabling the production to recast the lead role. Hartnell left &quot;Doctor Who&quot; in 1966. Hartnell himself suggested his successor; &quot;There&#x27;s only one man in England who can take over, and that&#x27;s Patrick Troughton.&quot; Hartnell departed the show in the serial &quot;The Tenth Planet&quot; where the First Doctor regenerates into Troughton&#x27;s Second Doctor.

Hartnell reprised the role in the tenth anniversary story &quot;The Three Doctors&quot;, broadcast from December 1972 to January 1973. When Hartnell&#x27;s wife Heather found out about his planned involvement, she informed the show&#x27;s crew that his failing memory and weakening health would prevent him from starring in the special. An agreement was made between the crew and Heather that Hartnell would sit down during the shoot and read his lines from cue cards. His appearance in the story was his final piece of work as an actor due to his declining health.

As a result of the then-standard practice of discarding old recordings in order to make room for newer ones, many of Hartnell&#x27;s video episodes are missing from the archives, although copies may be discovered as other productions&#x27; lost episodes have been since. All of Hartnell&#x27;s episodes exist in audio form.

==Personal life==
Hartnell was married to Heather McIntyre from 9 May 1929 until his death. They had a daughter, Heather Anne, and two grandchildren. After living at 51 Church Street, Isleworth, next door to Hugh Blaker, the Hartnells lived on Thames Ditton Island. Then in the 1960s they moved to a cottage in Mayfield, Sussex. They lived in later life at Sheephurst Lane in Marden, Kent. Heather Hartnell died in 1984.

Asked about his religious beliefs in an interview for &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; in 1966, Hartnell claimed to &quot;have a natural belief there is something or someone great that exists beyond [his] comprehension&quot;, further stating that he did not believe that going to church should be a duty and that he himself preferred to visit church in solitude.

==Later life and death==
Hartnell&#x27;s health had worsened during the early 1970s and, in December 1974, he was admitted to hospital indefinitely. In early 1975, he suffered a series of strokes, brought on by cerebrovascular disease, and he died in his sleep in hospital from heart failure on 23 April 1975, at the age of 67.

==Legacy==
Hartnell&#x27;s granddaughter, Judith &quot;Jessica&quot; Carney, published a biography entitled &quot;Who&#x27;s There? The Life and Career of William Hartnell&quot;, first published in 1996 by Virgin Publishing. To mark the 50th anniversary of &quot;Doctor Who&quot; Carney, with Fantom Publishing, revised and republished the book in 2013.

For the 50th anniversary of &quot;Doctor Who&quot; in 2013, the BBC broadcast &quot;An Adventure in Space and Time&quot;, a dramatisation of the events surrounding the creation of the series, which had David Bradley portraying Hartnell.

A blue plaque marking Hartnell&#x27;s work in film and television was unveiled at Ealing Studios by Carney on 14 October 2018.

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
== Theatre ==
==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q361996" start="0" end="22" title="William Hartnell" label="William Henry Hartnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989412" start="117" end="134" title="First Doctor" label="first incarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34358" start="138" end="148" title="the Doctor" label="the Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q336059" start="178" end="204" title="science fiction on television" label="science-fiction television"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="218" end="228" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q960785" start="333" end="346" title="Brighton Rock (1948 film)" label="Brighton Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333370" start="367" end="388" title="The Mouse That Roared (film)" label="The Mouse That Roared"/>
<link wikidata="Q971412" start="412" end="430" title="This Sporting Life" label="This Sporting Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714312" start="555" end="568" title="The Army Game" label="The Army Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489818" start="676" end="693" title="Carry On Sergeant" label="Carry On Sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065416" start="806" end="824" title="St Pancras, London" label="St Pancras, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235885" start="1091" end="1104" title="Seaton, Devon" label="Seaton, Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q133981" start="1539" end="1548" title="first aid" label="first aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492240" start="1855" end="1870" title="Norman Hartnell" label="Norman Hartnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16025112" start="1983" end="1994" title="Hugh Blaker" label="Hugh Blaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q348134" start="2105" end="2125" title="Italia Conti Academy of Theatre Arts" label="Italia Conti Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006869" start="2232" end="2256" title="Imperial Service College" label="Imperial Service College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344435" start="2557" end="2569" title="Frank Benson (actor)" label="Frank Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q206400" start="2655" end="2677" title="The Merchant of Venice" label="The Merchant of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q215750" start="2691" end="2704" title="Julius Caesar (play)" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q237572" start="2718" end="2732" title="As You Like It" label="As You Like It"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="2746" end="2752" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q86440" start="2766" end="2777" title="The Tempest" label="The Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283" start="2794" end="2801" title="Macbeth" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324782" start="2846" end="2867" title="She Stoops to Conquer" label="She Stoops to Conquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q471118" start="2881" end="2903" title="The School for Scandal" label="The School for Scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347990" start="3062" end="3085" title="Robert Neilson Stephens" label="Robert Neilson Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q25136386" start="3247" end="3264" title="Say It with Music (1932 film)" label="Say It With Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3479" end="3495" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="3537" end="3540" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="3559" end="3571" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="3735" end="3746" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089543" start="3765" end="3782" title="In Which We Serve" label="In Which We Serve"/>
<link wikidata="Q539685" start="3982" end="3998" title="Michael Anderson (director)" label="Michael Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757008" start="4012" end="4036" title="First Assistant Director" label="first assistant director"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203945" start="4224" end="4237" title="The Way Ahead" label="The Way Ahead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181105" start="4503" end="4520" title="Boulting brothers" label="Boulting brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q960785" start="4548" end="4561" title="Brighton Rock (1948 film)" label="Brighton Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263875" start="4628" end="4640" title="Hell Drivers" label="Hell Drivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q948916" start="4748" end="4756" title="Carry On (film series)" label="Carry On"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489818" start="4776" end="4793" title="Carry On Sergeant" label="Carry On Sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611907" start="4816" end="4832" title="serjeant-at-arms" label="serjeant-at-arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040851" start="4836" end="4849" title="Grand Fenwick" label="Grand Fenwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333370" start="4910" end="4931" title="The Mouse That Roared (film)" label="The Mouse That Roared"/>
<link wikidata="Q177984" start="4960" end="4973" title="Peter Sellers" label="Peter Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q708492" start="4996" end="5006" title="councillor" label="councillor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181105" start="5014" end="5031" title="Boulting brothers" label="Boulting brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694926" start="5049" end="5063" title="Heavens Above!" label="Heavens Above!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503675" start="5143" end="5157" title="Sergeant Major" label="Sergeant Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714312" start="5183" end="5196" title="The Army Game" label="The Army Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q971412" start="5448" end="5466" title="This Sporting Life" label="This Sporting Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="5525" end="5537" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656696" start="5779" end="5793" title="Verity Lambert" label="Verity Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5875" end="5878" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="5894" end="5904" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989412" start="5980" end="5990" title="First Doctor" label="title role"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570928" start="6171" end="6184" title="Waris Hussein" label="Waris Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="6437" end="6445" title="Typecasting (acting)" label="typecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768718" start="6767" end="6780" title="An Unearthly Child" label="first episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181111" start="7016" end="7028" title="Anneke Wills" label="Anneke Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275020" start="7033" end="7046" title="Michael Craze" label="Michael Craze"/>
<link wikidata="Q148401" start="7284" end="7290" title="Wizard (fantasy)" label="wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382687" start="7328" end="7340" title="Wizard (Oz)" label="Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580236" start="7345" end="7361" title="Father Christmas" label="Father Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471880" start="7382" end="7397" title="William Russell (English actor)" label="William Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q125689" start="7626" end="7643" title="Nicholas Courtney" label="Nicholas Courtney"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="7682" end="7688" title="Racism" label="racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="7693" end="7704" title="Antisemitism" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="7739" end="7749" title="homophobic" label="homophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="8113" end="8123" title="xenophobic" label="xenophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184559" start="8575" end="8591" title="arteriosclerosis" label="arteriosclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q559430" start="9233" end="9250" title="Patrick Troughton" label="Patrick Troughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138844" start="9305" end="9321" title="The Tenth Planet" label="The Tenth Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156741" start="9351" end="9362" title="Regeneration (Doctor Who)" label="regenerates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063885" start="9385" end="9398" title="Second Doctor" label="Second Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q626989" start="9465" end="9482" title="The Three Doctors (Doctor Who)" label="The Three Doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q23758829" start="9859" end="9868" title="cue cards" label="cue cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799894" start="10120" end="10145" title="Doctor Who missing episodes" label="missing from the archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432955" start="10477" end="10486" title="Isleworth" label="Isleworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q14955742" start="10537" end="10557" title="Thames Ditton Island" label="Thames Ditton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684761" start="10604" end="10612" title="Mayfield and Five Ashes" label="Mayfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758628" start="10669" end="10681" title="Marden, Kent" label="Marden, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="10775" end="10791" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010352" start="11286" end="11309" title="cerebrovascular disease" label="cerebrovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="11353" end="11366" title="congestive heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138589" start="11610" end="11627" title="Virgin Books" label="Virgin Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749729" start="11843" end="11873" title="An Adventure in Space and Time" label="An Adventure in Space and Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q320073" start="11961" end="11974" title="David Bradley (English actor)" label="David Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q72081" start="12079" end="12093" title="Ealing Studios" label="Ealing Studios"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51601" wikidata="Q467601" url="?curid=51601" title="Jon Pertwee">
<text>John Devon Roland Pertwee (; 7 July 1919 – 20 May 1996), known professionally as Jon Pertwee, was an English actor. Born into a theatrical family, he became known as a comedy actor, playing Chief Petty Officer Pertwee (and three other roles) in the BBC Radio sitcom &quot;The Navy Lark&quot; (1959–1977) and appearing in four films in the &quot;Carry On&quot; series (1964–1992).

On television, Pertwee starred as the third incarnation of the Doctor in the long-running science fiction series &quot;Doctor Who&quot; (1970–1974), hosted the game show &quot;Whodunnit?&quot; (1974–1978), and played the title character in &quot;Worzel Gummidge&quot; (1979–1981 and 1987–1989). Towards the end of his life he maintained a close association with &quot;Doctor Who&quot; by appearing at many fan conventions related to the series and giving interviews.

==Biography==
===Early life and education===
Born in Chelsea, London, and, having French Huguenot ancestry, his surname was an Anglicisation of &quot;Perthuis&quot;, the origins of his surname being &quot;de Perthuis de Laillevault&quot;, the family being counts descended from Charlemagne. Jon was the son of screenwriter and actor Roland Pertwee and distant cousin of actor Bill Pertwee. Pertwee&#x27;s mother, Avice Scholtz, separated from his father Roland when Pertwee was young. His father remarried, and his mother found a new partner, Louis Auguste De La Garde, with whom Pertwee did not build a relationship; she died in 1951, leaving Pertwee&#x27;s elder brother Michael as her executor. Avice&#x27;s sister Daphne married Captain Philip Cecil Clowes and became the mother of Pertwee&#x27;s cousin, the writer St John Legh Clowes (1907–1951). Actor Henry Ainley, a close friend of his father, was his godfather. Coincidentally, Ainley&#x27;s son Anthony appeared as the Master – a renegade Time Lord who was The Doctor&#x27;s greatest enemy – alongside Pertwee in the &quot;Doctor Who&quot; anniversary story &quot;The Five Doctors&quot; (1983).

Pertwee was educated at Frensham Heights School, an independent school in Rowledge, near Farnham in Surrey, at Sherborne School in Dorset, and at some other schools from which he was expelled. After school, he applied to the Central School of Speech &amp; Drama, but was denied admittance because of his lisp. He was admitted to the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA), graduating in 1939. He was accused of writing graffiti about the tutors on the lavatory walls.

===Early career===
While still at school, Pertwee worked as a circus performer riding the Wall of Death on a motorcycle with a toothless lion in the sidecar. He then worked in repertory theatre before being contracted with the BBC at 18 as an actor.

During the Second World War, Pertwee spent six years in the Royal Navy. He was a crew member of and was transferred off the ship for officer training shortly before she was sunk by the German battleship &quot;Bismarck&quot;, losing all but three men in May 1941.

Later, he was attached to the top secret Naval Intelligence Division, working alongside future James Bond author Ian Fleming, and reporting directly to Prime Minister Winston Churchill and Deputy Prime Minister Clement Attlee. In an interview conducted in 1994 and published in 2013, he said, &quot;I did all sorts. Teaching commandos how to use escapology equipment, compasses in brass buttons, secret maps in white cotton handkerchiefs, pipes you could smoke that also fired a .22 bullet. All sorts of incredible things.&quot;

In 1942, as a Sub Lieutenant, Pertwee was posted to HMS Valkyrie. Whilst stationed on the Isle of Man he was actively engaged in amateur variety shows appearing in character sketches. It was during this time that Pertwee became one of the founding members of the Service Players, a drama society which remains active to this day.

During his time in the Navy, Pertwee woke up one morning after a drunken night out while in port to find a tattoo of a cobra on his right arm.

After the war, Pertwee worked as a stage comedian, which included performing at the Glasgow Empire Theatre and sharing a bill with Max Wall and Jimmy James. He began to work as a comedy actor on radio, becoming known for being able to do a variety of comedic voices and accents. He featured &quot;Waterlogged Spa&quot;, alongside Eric Barker, and &quot;Puffney Post Office&quot; in which he played a hapless old postman with the catch-phrase &quot;It doesn&#x27;t matter what you do, as long as you tears them up.&quot;

On 15 November 1948, at the Wood Green Empire, he was billed as &quot;The Most Versatile Voice in Radio – Jon (&#x27;Tear &#x27;em Up&#x27;) Pertwee from the Radio Shows &quot;Merry-go-Round&quot; and &quot;Up the Pole&quot;&quot;. From 1959 to 1977, he performed the role of the conniving Chief Petty Officer Pertwee in &quot;The Navy Lark&quot; on BBC Radio. The fictional ship in the series HMS &quot;Troutbridge&quot; almost shared its name with the real HMS &quot;Troubridge&quot; whose commanding officer at one point was a relative of Pertwee&#x27;s, who wrote to the BBC to provide details of comic incidents on the ship which were then used in &quot; The Navy Lark&#x27;s&quot; scripts. After Ronnie Barker left the series Pertwee took on various additional roles in the series. These included a villainous character called the Master, whose voice Pertwee said was an impression of Herbert Beerbohm Tree.

Pertwee did not appear in the 1959 film version of &quot;The Navy Lark&quot;. In his 1996 memoir he attributed this to producer Herbert Wilcox refusing to employ his co-star Dennis Price on the grounds that &quot;he was gay&quot;, a decision Pertwee made clear that he thought &quot;was ridiculous&quot;. Shortly after voicing his support of Price he found out he had been dropped from the film&#x27;s cast and replaced by Ronald Shiner.

He was known as a Danny Kaye look-alike, and his impersonation of Kaye can be seen in the film &quot;Murder at the Windmill&quot; (1949). He played Charlie Sterling in &quot;Will Any Gentleman...?&quot; (1953). Future &quot;Doctor Who&quot; actor William Hartnell was also in the film playing Inspector Martin.

On stage, he played the part of Lycus in the 1963 London production of &quot;A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum&quot; with Frankie Howerd and appeared in the smaller role of Crassus in the 1966 film version. He appeared as Sidney Tait in the comedy film &quot;Ladies Who Do&quot; (1963). In 1966, Pertwee starred alongside Donald Sinden in the original West End production of the long-running comedy &quot;There&#x27;s a Girl in My Soup&quot; and in this period appeared in several &quot;Carry On&quot; films: &quot;Carry On Cleo&quot; (1964), as the soothsayer; &quot;Carry On Cowboy&quot; (1965) as Sheriff Earp; and &quot;Carry On Screaming!&quot; (1966) as Dr. Fettle. (&quot;Carry On Columbus&quot;, with Pertwee in his fourth &quot;Carry On&quot; role, this time as the Duke of Costa Brava and coincidentally opposite Marc Sinden, Donald Sinden&#x27;s son. It was released in 1992). In 1967, he was chosen by &quot;Dad&#x27;s Army&quot; producer David Croft for the role of Captain George Mainwaring, but Pertwee turned it down – possibly because he preferred to extend his role on Broadway in &quot;There&#x27;s a Girl in My Soup&quot;. In a lost interview from 1986, which was later rediscovered and published in 2008, he said did not want his work on the &quot;Carry On&quot; films to overshadow his reputation as a serious actor.

His television career had started off with small parts in children&#x27;s shows featuring Richard Hearne&#x27;s Mr Pastry character. Later he made an appearance in &quot;The Avengers&quot; episode &quot;From Venus With Love&quot; (1967) as Brigadier Whitehead, and later, he guest-starred as a vicar in &quot;The Goodies&#x27;&quot; episode &quot;Wacky Wales&quot; (1975).

===&quot;Doctor Who&quot;===

In 1969, shortly before leaving the series, producer Peter Bryant cast Pertwee as the Third Doctor in &quot;Doctor Who&quot;. Pertwee had asked his agent to apply for the role for him and was surprised to find he was already on the shortlist. He was the second choice for the role; Ron Moody was the first but was unavailable.

In a departure from the Doctor&#x27;s first two incarnations, Pertwee&#x27;s era was influenced by the James Bond film series. He played the character as an active crusader with a penchant for action and fancy clothes, while the character was exiled to Earth by the Time Lords for much of his tenure and serving as the scientific adviser to Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart and UNIT. He played the Doctor for five seasons from early 1970 to mid-1974, a longer stint than either of his predecessors in the role, although he ultimately appeared in fewer episodes than William Hartnell as the BBC had reduced the production schedule.

Pertwee credited his performance as the Doctor with helping him work out exactly who he really was when he was not resorting to comedic disguises or voices. This was because the BBC&#x27;s Head of Drama, Shaun Sutton, had advised him to act the Doctor as himself: in effect, to &quot;play Jon Pertwee&quot;. Pertwee&#x27;s interpretation of the Doctor was described as &quot;a man of action, supremely confident, articulate, yet also warmly reassuring&quot;. This incarnation was credited with being more action-orientated and scientifically minded than early versions of the Doctor. In &quot;The Making of Doctor Who&quot;, Pertwee himself said &quot;Doctor Who is me – or I am Doctor Who. I play him straight from me.&quot;

On 14 April 1971, Pertwee was the subject of Thames Television&#x27;s &quot;This Is Your Life&quot;.

During his tenure as the Doctor, Pertwee appeared in the Amicus horror anthology &quot;The House That Dripped Blood&quot; (1971), which was filmed in the summer of 1970 between his first and second &quot;Doctor Who&quot; seasons. Pertwee played the lead in the last segment of the film as Paul Henderson, an arrogant horror film star who meets his doom thanks to a genuine vampire cloak. In 1973, Pertwee endorsed the Co-op&#x27;s &quot;Baking Your Cake and Eating It&quot;, a recipe book written by Sarah Charles. It has been given the unofficial title of &quot;The Jon Pertwee Recipe Book&quot;.

In early 1974, Pertwee announced he would step down as the Doctor to resume his stage career in &quot;The Bedwinner&quot;, also citing potential typecasting in the role as the reason for leaving, though he later said that the catalyst for his departure was the death of his good friend and co-star Roger Delgado (The Master) and the departures of co-star Katy Manning, producer Barry Letts and scriptwriter Terrance Dicks. Also, according to Elisabeth Sladen in an interview on the DVD release of &quot;Invasion of the Dinosaurs,&quot; Pertwee asked for a substantially increased fee for another year on the series, however, the request was rejected, and he subsequently resigned from the role. Pertwee was also dealing with chronic back pain at the time, and was becoming less interested in the character of the Doctor. His last full-time appearance in the series was in the story &quot;Planet of the Spiders&quot; in June 1974, which finished with Tom Baker replacing him in the role.

Pertwee later reprised the role in the 20th anniversary story &quot;The Five Doctors&quot; and the Children in Need story &quot;Dimensions in Time&quot;, in two radio adventures and on stage in &quot;Doctor Who – The Ultimate Adventure&quot;.

===&quot;Worzel Gummidge&quot;===
After a stint between 1974 and 1978 as the host of the Thames Television murder-mystery game show &quot;Whodunnit?&quot;, Pertwee took the starring role in &quot;Worzel Gummidge&quot;, based on the books written by Barbara Euphan Todd. Produced by ITV franchise contractor Southern Television in the initial run, it was first transmitted on ITV from 1979. Pertwee had first been approached to play the part of Worzel Gummidge in a film to be written by Keith Waterhouse and Willis Hall. When this project fell through, Pertwee encouraged the writers to create a television pilot instead, and via his agent pitched the idea to the BBC, which turned it down, and then Thames Television, which likewise rejected the project. Pertwee later admitted that he &quot;began to lose faith in the project&quot;, until Southern Television&#x27;s Lewis Rudd heard about it and enthusiastically agreed that the company would make the series.

The series saw Pertwee as a scarecrow, as well as using several comedic voices. The show was an immediate hit, with Pertwee describing it as &quot;becoming something of a cult&quot; after only four episodes had been broadcast. Press interest in the series was high, and it ran on the channel until 1981. Keen to continue beyond this, Pertwee campaigned for the series and it was picked up by a New Zealand network, TVNZ, in 1987. &quot;Worzel Gummidge Down Under&quot; aired for the next two years and was screened in the UK on Channel 4. In 1995, Pertwee played the role one last time in a one-off special for ITV, which celebrated 40 years of the channel. Pertwee played the title character in &quot;Worzel Gummidge, the Musical&quot;, book and lyrics by Keith Waterhouse and Willis Hall, music by Denis King, which opened at London&#x27;s Cambridge Theatre in December 1981, co-starring Una Stubbs and Geoffrey Bayldon. Pertwee also recorded an album, &quot;Worzel Gummidge Sings&quot;, as well as a Christmas single.

===Other roles===
Pertwee played the role of The Colonel in the Disney children&#x27;s film &quot;One of Our Dinosaurs Is Missing&quot; (1975). The following year, he voiced and appeared in the television advertisement that promoted the Green Cross Code by use of the mnemonic &quot;SPLINK&quot;. Also in 1976, Pertwee starred with Australian singer Julie Anthony in a West End production of the musical &quot;Irene&quot; (originally 1919, revived Broadway 1973), playing the camp fashion-designer Madame Lucy (originally Liam O&#x27;Dougherty). The production opened at the Adelphi Theatre, London, and enjoyed a run of more than 900 performances: Pertwee features on the cast recording album, produced by Norman Newell for EMI Records (EMC3139). He also voiced the character of &quot;Spotty&quot; in the cartoon series &quot;SuperTed&quot; (1983–86) and, in 1985, starred in &quot;Do You Know The Milkyway?&quot;, a television adaptation of Karl Wittlinger&#x27;s stage play in which Pertwee played Dr. Neuross and another nine characters. In 1995, he also had the key voice of Death and other voice characterisations in the PC and PlayStation renditions of &quot;Discworld&quot;. Also in 1995, he played General Von Kramer in the &quot;Young Indiana Jones Chronicles&quot; episode &quot;Attack of the Hawkmen&quot;.

Writing shortly before his death in 1996, Pertwee stated that while he enjoyed his association with &quot;Doctor Who&quot;, he had perhaps spent too long in the title role. He believed that this led to the &quot;ridiculous situation of people turning me down for parts because, they say, I am too well known as the Doctor.&quot; He observed that after he left the show he only ever worked in a BBC drama on one occasion. This was in the role of &quot;an aging Basque arsonist and pornographer&quot; in an episode of &quot;Virtual Murder&quot; titled &quot;A Torch for Silverado&quot;. He considered this to be one of &quot;the best things I&#x27;ve ever done&quot;

===Later life===
He returned to the role of the Doctor in 1983 for the 20th-anniversary television special &quot;The Five Doctors&quot; and in the 1993 charity special &quot;Dimensions in Time&quot; for Children in Need. He also portrayed the Doctor in the stage play &quot;Doctor Who – The Ultimate Adventure&quot; which toured theatres in the United Kingdom from March to June 1989. During the 1990s, he made a guest appearance in the &quot;Lords and Ladies&quot; episode of the BBC Radio 4 comedy series &quot;Harry Hill&#x27;s Fruit Corner&quot;, playing a Time Lord and also spoofed the role in the Radio 4 comedy &quot;The Skivers&quot;. He also presented the &quot;Doctor Who&quot; video releases &quot;The Troughton Years&quot; (1991), showcasing selected surviving episodes of otherwise lost stories, and &quot;The Pertwee Years&quot; (1992), the latter a look back at his time on the show, with three selected episodes.

In 1993, Pertwee was featured in the unofficial 30th anniversary VHS release entitled &quot;30 Years of Time Travel and Beyond&quot;. When asked in an interview for this documentary if the show should be brought back he simply replied with &quot;No, no&quot;, but believed if it did come back a lot more money would need to be spent on the series, along with a new production team. Pertwee would continue to act in films and television as well as make appearances worldwide in support of &quot;Doctor Who&quot;. Ultimately, Pertwee was successful in seeing the Third Doctor return to the airwaves with two audio productions for BBC Radio, &quot;The Paradise of Death&quot; and &quot;The Ghosts of N-Space&quot;.

In April 1995, he appeared in &quot;Devious&quot;, an amateur video drama set between the second Doctor&#x27;s trial at the end of &quot;The War Games&quot; and before the start of &quot;Spearhead from Space&quot;. It shows an interim Doctor (between second and third), played by Tony Garner, being told he was &quot;never meant to be the Doctor&quot; and that the third will complete him. Pertwee&#x27;s scenes in that role were among the first pieces of the video that were released (on the DVD of &quot;The War Games&quot;). In the same year, he starred in a one-man show called &quot;Who Is Jon Pertwee?&quot;.

Pertwee&#x27;s final film role was in a short film entitled &quot;Cloud Cuckoo&quot; for Scottish Screen, released on 18 June 1994. His last formal television appearance was on Cilla Black&#x27;s &quot;Surprise, Surprise&quot;, broadcast on 21 April 1996, in which he appeared as the Third Doctor. At the time of his death, Pertwee was regularly being seen in the closing moments of a UK TV advert for mobile phone operator Vodafone, dressed in the style of his version of the Doctor. This character walked wordlessly across Pilgrim Street, Liverpool, entering a garage marked &#x27;Doctor on Call&#x27; evidently containing some kind of time machine.

==Personal life==
Pertwee married twice. His first marriage was in 1955, to Jean Marsh, whom he divorced in 1960; later that year he married Ingeborg Rhoesa (born 1935). Together they had two children, both of whom became actors: a daughter, Dariel, in 1961, and a son, Sean, in 1964.

Pertwee wrote two autobiographies: &quot;Moon Boots and Dinner Suits&quot; (published in 1984), which primarily covers his life and career prior to &quot;Doctor Who&quot;, and the posthumously published &quot;Doctor Who: I Am the Doctor – Jon Pertwee’s Final Memoir&quot;, (, published in November 1996 by Virgin Publishing Ltd. under the &quot;Doctor Who Books&quot; imprint and co-written with David J. Howe), which covered his life during and after the series. In 2000, &quot;Jon Pertwee: The Biography&quot; by Bernard Bale () was published by André Deutsch, and it included a few chapters by Pertwee&#x27;s widow Ingeborg.

===Death===
Pertwee continued on the &quot;Doctor Who&quot; convention circuit, and with his voice and television acting, until his death; he died in his sleep from a heart attack in Connecticut on 20 May 1996, at the age of 76. He was survived by Ingeborg and their two children. His immediate successor in the starring role of &quot;Doctor Who&quot;, Tom Baker, paid tribute, saying: &quot;I am very sorry to hear the news. I was a great admirer of such a stylish actor.&quot; Another of his successors in the role, Colin Baker, said: &quot;He was a man of such presence and stature. I can&#x27;t believe he has gone – it is a great shock. Of all of the interpretations of the Doctors his was the most straight in terms of avoiding comedy.&quot; His body was cremated, at Putney Vale crematorium, with a toy Worzel Gummidge affixed to the coffin, following the instructions in his will.

His death came six days after the American broadcast of the &quot;Doctor Who&quot; television film, which used in its opening credits a logo based on that from his era of the television series. The BBC broadcast of the film, on 27 May 1996, featured a dedication to Pertwee at its end.

==Legacy==
His last association with &quot;Doctor Who&quot; was posthumous. With the approval of his widow, Ingeborg, his voice was used as part of the plot of the Big Finish Productions&#x27; 40th Anniversary audio drama, &quot;Zagreus&quot;, appearing as messages from the Doctor&#x27;s TARDIS as it attempted to help the currently corrupted Eighth Doctor (voiced by Paul McGann). Pertwee&#x27;s voice was culled from the fan-produced &quot;Doctor Who&quot; film &quot;Devious&quot;.

Archival footage of Pertwee has been used several times in the revived &quot;Doctor Who&quot;. Footage appears in &quot;The Next Doctor&quot; when the Tenth Doctor shows Jackson Lake an infostamp about himself, and in &quot;The Eleventh Hour&quot; when the Eleventh Doctor rhetorically asks the Atraxi how previous alien invasion attempts were stopped. Footage of Pertwee was used in &quot;The Name of the Doctor&quot; to depict his Doctor interacting with a version of Clara Oswald, in &quot;The Lodger&quot; in a montage of bits from the Doctor&#x27;s past, and in &quot;The Day of the Doctor&quot; to depict the Third Doctor assisting his other incarnations in sending Gallifrey to a pocket universe to protect it from the Daleks.

A star was nicknamed after him in 1986. In 2016, his work was honoured with a blue plaque at the New Wimbledon Theatre, which was arranged by the &quot;Doctor Who&quot; Appreciation Society.

==Discography==

*In 1962, Pertwee released an album entitled &quot;Jon Pertwee Sings Songs For Vulgar Boatmen&quot;.
*In 1966, Pertwee contributed to the children&#x27;s album &quot;Children&#x27;s Favourites&quot; (Music for Pleasure, MFP 1175). Songs sung by him include &quot;The Runaway Train&quot;, &quot;Froggy Went A-Courtin&#x27;&quot;, &quot;My Grandfather&#x27;s Clock&quot;, &quot;Three Little Fishes&quot; and &quot;I Know An Old Lady&quot;. The recordings were produced by Norman Newell, with a synopsis written on the back by Roger St. Pierre. On the front cover is the picture of a glove puppet by Carol Patmore &amp; Rima Reed. At least one of the songs, &quot;The Runaway Train&quot; (b/w &quot;The Ugly Duckling&quot;), was released as a single on Music for Pleasure (catalogue FP 10).
*Also in 1966, Pertwee starred as Fagin in a studio cast recording of songs from the musical &quot;Oliver!&quot; (Music for Pleasure MFP 1073), with Jim Dale and Nicolette Roeg.
*In 1972, he recorded with June Whitfield, &quot;Wonderful Children&#x27;s Songs&quot; on the Contour label (catalogue 2870191)
*In 1972, Pertwee performed a vocal narration over the Doctor Who theme music entitled &quot;Who is the Doctor&quot;, on Purple Records.
*In 1975, Pertwee released an LP entitled &quot;Songs from Hans Andersen and others&quot; on the Contour label (catalogue 2870-425). It featured songs written by Frank Loesser for the 1952 musical film &quot;Hans Christian Andersen&quot; starring Danny Kaye. Pertwee was accompanied on the album by The Malcolm Lockyer Orchestra, with Laura Lee providing additional vocals on four of the 11 tracks and a children&#x27;s choir also contributing.
*In 1976, he starred in the EMI original cast recording (EMC 3139) of the West End musical &quot;Irene&quot;, in which he had enjoyed a long run, playing &#x27;Madame Lucy&#x27; at the Adelphi Theatre, London.
*In 1976, he recorded a promotional flexi-disc for Heinz called &quot;The Noodle Doodle Man&quot;, a song that accompanied a television commercial to which Pertwee contributed the vocal performance.
*In 1980, he released &quot;Worzel&#x27;s Song&quot;, from the album &quot;Worzel Gummidge Sings&quot;. The single reached No.33 on the UK charts in March. A second single was released in 1987 when the series was revived, but this met with less success. Also released in 1984 was a single entitled &quot;Jon Pertwee and Friends Sing the Beatles&quot; which comprised &quot;Yesterday&quot;, featuring a semi-spoken-word performance, and &quot;When I&#x27;m 64&quot;, in the guise of Worzel Gummidge. This record was intended to aid the Liverpool Children&#x27;s Hospital.
*In 1993, an audio release of the radio play &quot;The Paradise of Death&quot; reached No.48 in the album charts.
*In 1984, he featured in the computer game audio tape of &quot;Deus Ex Machina&quot; by Automata UK, released for the ZX Spectrum in 1984, and later on the MSX and Commodore 64.

==Filmography==
===Film===
==Television==
== Theatre ==
===Video games===
==Bibliography==
===As author===
* 

===As contributor===

==References==
==External links==
* Jon Pertwee Biography – British Film Institute</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q467601" start="0" end="25" title="Jon Pertwee" label="John Devon Roland Pertwee"/>
<link wikidata="Q467601" start="81" end="92" title="Jon Pertwee" label="Jon Pertwee"/>
<link wikidata="Q461167" start="190" end="209" title="Chief Petty Officer" label="Chief Petty Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="249" end="258" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753317" start="272" end="285" title="The Navy Lark" label="The Navy Lark"/>
<link wikidata="Q948916" start="345" end="353" title="Carry On (franchise)" label="Carry On"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580478" start="419" end="436" title="Third Doctor" label="third incarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34358" start="440" end="450" title="the Doctor" label="the Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="500" end="510" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997493" start="557" end="567" title="Whodunnit? (British game show)" label="Whodunnit?"/>
<link wikidata="Q13501123" start="627" end="642" title="Worzel Gummidge (TV series)" label="Worzel Gummidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129398" start="787" end="801" title="fan convention" label="fan convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q743535" start="902" end="909" title="Chelsea, London" label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="911" end="917" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="931" end="946" title="Huguenots" label="French Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="1127" end="1138" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360382" start="1182" end="1196" title="Roland Pertwee" label="Roland Pertwee"/>
<link wikidata="Q76871" start="1225" end="1237" title="Bill Pertwee" label="Bill Pertwee"/>
<link wikidata="Q42411148" start="1669" end="1688" title="St John Legh Clowes" label="St John Legh Clowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810625" start="1708" end="1720" title="Henry Ainley" label="Henry Ainley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858592" start="1805" end="1812" title="Anthony Ainley" label="Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357164" start="1825" end="1835" title="The Master (Doctor Who)" label="the Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768713" start="1974" end="1990" title="The Five Doctors" label="The Five Doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502791" start="2030" end="2053" title="Frensham Heights School" label="Frensham Heights School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372218" start="2080" end="2088" title="Rowledge" label="Rowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q643160" start="2095" end="2102" title="Farnham" label="Farnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278254" start="2117" end="2133" title="Sherborne School" label="Sherborne School"/>
<link wikidata="Q981195" start="2231" end="2267" title="Central School of Speech &amp;amp; Drama" label="Central School of Speech &amp;amp; Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q523926" start="2339" end="2368" title="Royal Academy of Dramatic Art" label="Royal Academy of Dramatic Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893282" start="2649" end="2666" title="repertory theatre" label="repertory theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2700" end="2703" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2735" end="2751" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="2784" end="2794" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q150857" start="2909" end="2947" title="German battleship Bismarck" label="German battleship &amp;quot;Bismarck&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q598332" start="3029" end="3056" title="Naval Intelligence Division (United Kingdom)" label="Naval Intelligence Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="3083" end="3093" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q82104" start="3101" end="3112" title="Ian Fleming" label="Ian Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="3155" end="3172" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="3199" end="3213" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q10918728" start="3532" end="3546" title="Sub Lieutenant" label="Sub Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q55613251" start="3570" end="3582" title="HMS Valkyrie (shore establishment)" label="HMS Valkyrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="3608" end="3619" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566801" start="4077" end="4099" title="Glasgow Empire Theatre" label="Glasgow Empire Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795349" start="4124" end="4132" title="Max Wall" label="Max Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200448" start="4137" end="4148" title="Jimmy James (comedian)" label="Jimmy James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294524" start="4323" end="4334" title="Eric Barker" label="Eric Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q461167" start="4804" end="4823" title="Chief Petty Officer" label="Chief Petty Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753317" start="4841" end="4854" title="The Navy Lark" label="The Navy Lark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="4864" end="4873" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5634696" start="4983" end="4993" title="HMS Troubridge (R00)" label="Troubridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q963893" start="5216" end="5229" title="Ronnie Barker" label="Ronnie Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352525" start="5405" end="5426" title="Herbert Beerbohm Tree" label="Herbert Beerbohm Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753318" start="5459" end="5505" title="The Navy Lark (film)" label="1959 film version of &amp;quot;The Navy Lark&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q167521" start="5557" end="5571" title="Herbert Wilcox" label="Herbert Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q934270" start="5603" end="5615" title="Dennis Price" label="Dennis Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338138" start="5852" end="5865" title="Ronald Shiner" label="Ronald Shiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q213425" start="5886" end="5896" title="Danny Kaye" label="Danny Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937720" start="5969" end="5991" title="Murder at the Windmill" label="Murder at the Windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002680" start="6042" end="6064" title="Will Any Gentleman...?" label="Will Any Gentleman...?"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="6092" end="6102" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q361996" start="6115" end="6131" title="William Hartnell" label="William Hartnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q862709" start="6257" end="6303" title="A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum" label="A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q979233" start="6315" end="6329" title="Frankie Howerd" label="Frankie Howerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971276" start="6386" end="6398" title="A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum (film)" label="film version"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469541" start="6452" end="6465" title="Ladies Who Do" label="Ladies Who Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q432316" start="6515" end="6528" title="Donald Sinden" label="Donald Sinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="6545" end="6553" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782633" start="6598" end="6628" title="There&amp;#x27;s a Girl in My Soup (play)" label="There&amp;#x27;s a Girl in My Soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q948916" start="6674" end="6700" title="Carry On (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Carry On&amp;quot; films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674806" start="6708" end="6721" title="Carry On Cleo" label="Carry On Cleo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674812" start="6761" end="6776" title="Carry On Cowboy" label="Carry On Cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674804" start="6817" end="6836" title="Carry On Screaming!" label="Carry On Screaming!"/>
<link wikidata="Q204414" start="6872" end="6889" title="Carry On Columbus" label="Carry On Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755876" start="7016" end="7027" title="Marc Sinden" label="Marc Sinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q659575" start="7113" end="7128" title="Dad&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Dad&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036655" start="7172" end="7197" title="Captain George Mainwaring" label="Captain George Mainwaring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326356" start="7623" end="7637" title="Richard Hearne" label="Richard Hearne"/>
<link wikidata="Q113700" start="7703" end="7715" title="The Avengers (TV series)" label="The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27877419" start="7736" end="7756" title="From Venus with Love (The Avengers)" label="From Venus With Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987329" start="7842" end="7859" title="The Goodies (TV series)" label="The Goodies&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958825" start="7880" end="7891" title="Wacky Wales" label="Wacky Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173024" start="7990" end="8002" title="Peter Bryant" label="Peter Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580478" start="8023" end="8035" title="Third Doctor" label="Third Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="8045" end="8055" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q366910" start="8219" end="8228" title="Ron Moody" label="Ron Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q151472" start="8368" end="8390" title="James Bond in film" label="James Bond film series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156741" start="8531" end="8540" title="Time Lord" label="Time Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096431" start="8606" end="8634" title="Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart" label="Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q902583" start="8639" end="8643" title="UNIT" label="UNIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490981" start="9097" end="9109" title="Shaun Sutton" label="Shaun Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q541667" start="9665" end="9682" title="Thames Television" label="Thames Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249607" start="9696" end="9713" title="This Is Your Life (British TV series)" label="This Is Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q470851" start="9779" end="9785" title="Amicus Productions" label="Amicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q336144" start="9793" end="9802" title="Anthology film" label="anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q324615" start="9809" end="9837" title="The House That Dripped Blood" label="The House That Dripped Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q117202" start="10140" end="10145" title="The Co-operative Group" label="Co-op"/>
<link wikidata="Q560067" start="10619" end="10632" title="Roger Delgado" label="Roger Delgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357164" start="10634" end="10644" title="The Master (Doctor Who)" label="The Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q559156" start="10676" end="10688" title="Katy Manning" label="Katy Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q809062" start="10699" end="10710" title="Barry Letts" label="Barry Letts"/>
<link wikidata="Q351168" start="10728" end="10742" title="Terrance Dicks" label="Terrance Dicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q234539" start="10763" end="10779" title="Elisabeth Sladen" label="Elisabeth Sladen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584908" start="10824" end="10849" title="Invasion of the Dinosaurs" label="Invasion of the Dinosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771464" start="11209" end="11230" title="Planet of the Spiders" label="Planet of the Spiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q358421" start="11271" end="11280" title="Tom Baker" label="Tom Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768713" start="11377" end="11393" title="The Five Doctors" label="The Five Doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595862" start="11408" end="11424" title="Children in Need" label="Children in Need"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028079" start="11437" end="11455" title="Dimensions in Time" label="Dimensions in Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033548" start="11509" end="11544" title="Doctor Who – The Ultimate Adventure" label="Doctor Who – The Ultimate Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997493" start="11691" end="11701" title="Whodunnit? (U.K. TV series)" label="Whodunnit?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217303" start="11726" end="11739" title="Worzel Gummidge" label="starring role"/>
<link wikidata="Q13501123" start="11749" end="11764" title="Worzel Gummidge (TV series)" label="Worzel Gummidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q117345" start="11802" end="11821" title="Barbara Euphan Todd" label="Barbara Euphan Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="11835" end="11838" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570537" start="11860" end="11879" title="Southern Television" label="Southern Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q963015" start="12040" end="12056" title="Keith Waterhouse" label="Keith Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569123" start="12061" end="12072" title="Willis Hall" label="Willis Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344174" start="12187" end="12192" title="Talent agent" label="agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="12217" end="12220" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990797" start="12544" end="12553" title="scarecrow" label="scarecrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186424" start="12931" end="12935" title="TVNZ" label="TVNZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="13044" end="13053" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q963015" start="13273" end="13289" title="Keith Waterhouse" label="Keith Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569123" start="13294" end="13305" title="Willis Hall" label="Willis Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187465" start="13316" end="13326" title="Denis King" label="Denis King"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184313" start="13358" end="13375" title="Cambridge Theatre" label="Cambridge Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319582" start="13406" end="13416" title="Una Stubbs" label="Una Stubbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q563232" start="13421" end="13437" title="Geoffrey Bayldon" label="Geoffrey Bayldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q191224" start="13602" end="13608" title="Walt Disney Pictures" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549606" start="13636" end="13667" title="One of Our Dinosaurs Is Missing" label="One of Our Dinosaurs Is Missing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602459" start="13775" end="13791" title="Green Cross Code" label="Green Cross Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="13806" end="13814" title="mnemonic" label="mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532112" start="13888" end="13901" title="Julie Anthony (singer)" label="Julie Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980668" start="13948" end="13953" title="Irene (musical)" label="Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q355319" start="14113" end="14128" title="Adelphi Theatre" label="Adelphi Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q712478" start="14245" end="14258" title="Norman Newell" label="Norman Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629023" start="14263" end="14274" title="EMI Records" label="EMI Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182006" start="14324" end="14330" title="SuperTed" label="Spotty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182006" start="14365" end="14373" title="SuperTed" label="SuperTed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984009" start="14618" end="14623" title="Death (Discworld)" label="Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228607" start="14704" end="14713" title="Discworld (video game)" label="Discworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q685962" start="14777" end="14807" title="Young Indiana Jones Chronicles" label="Young Indiana Jones Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290267" start="15380" end="15394" title="Virtual Murder (TV series)" label="Virtual Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768713" start="15637" end="15653" title="The Five Doctors" label="The Five Doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028079" start="15698" end="15716" title="Dimensions in Time" label="Dimensions in Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595862" start="15727" end="15743" title="Children in Need" label="Children in Need"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033548" start="15798" end="15833" title="Doctor Who – The Ultimate Adventure" label="Doctor Who – The Ultimate Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="16005" end="16016" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669689" start="16037" end="16067" title="Harry Hill&amp;#x27;s Fruit Corner" label="Harry Hill&amp;#x27;s Fruit Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156741" start="16085" end="16094" title="Time Lord" label="Time Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799894" start="16288" end="16306" title="Doctor Who missing episodes" label="surviving episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026712" start="16320" end="16324" title="Lost television broadcast" label="lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="17083" end="17092" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756063" start="17100" end="17121" title="The Paradise of Death" label="The Paradise of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736349" start="17138" end="17159" title="The Ghosts of N-Space" label="The Ghosts of N-Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792977" start="17204" end="17211" title="Devious (Doctor Who)" label="Devious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792977" start="17305" end="17318" title="The War Games" label="The War Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q286525" start="17961" end="17972" title="Cilla Black" label="Cilla Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962356" start="17986" end="18004" title="Surprise, Surprise (TV series)" label="Surprise, Surprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="18208" end="18216" title="Vodafone" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="18325" end="18334" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q271448" start="18513" end="18523" title="Jean Marsh" label="Jean Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377608" start="18707" end="18711" title="Sean Pertwee" label="Sean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138589" start="19029" end="19046" title="Virgin Publishing" label="Virgin Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15430623" start="19119" end="19132" title="David J. Howe" label="David J. Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q518311" start="19271" end="19284" title="André Deutsch" label="André Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="19519" end="19531" title="heart attack" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="19535" end="19546" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q358421" start="19705" end="19714" title="Tom Baker" label="Tom Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q440963" start="19870" end="19881" title="Colin Baker" label="Colin Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q207315" start="20113" end="20121" title="Cremation" label="cremated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3411058" start="20126" end="20137" title="Putney Vale" label="Putney Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217303" start="20162" end="20177" title="Worzel Gummidge" label="Worzel Gummidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q336240" start="20302" end="20340" title="Doctor Who (film)" label="&amp;quot;Doctor Who&amp;quot; television film"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905688" start="20693" end="20715" title="Big Finish Productions" label="Big Finish Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064477" start="20758" end="20765" title="Zagreus (Doctor Who audio)" label="Zagreus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35684" start="20818" end="20824" title="TARDIS" label="TARDIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q945808" start="20873" end="20886" title="Eighth Doctor" label="Eighth Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q335863" start="20898" end="20909" title="Paul McGann" label="Paul McGann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792977" start="21000" end="21007" title="Devious (Doctor Who)" label="Devious"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008132" start="21136" end="21151" title="The Next Doctor" label="The Next Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656347" start="21167" end="21179" title="Tenth Doctor" label="Tenth Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567868" start="21240" end="21257" title="The Eleventh Hour (Doctor Who)" label="The Eleventh Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667397" start="21273" end="21288" title="Eleventh Doctor" label="Eleventh Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11535738" start="21406" end="21428" title="The Name of the Doctor" label="The Name of the Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765307" start="21486" end="21498" title="Clara Oswald" label="Clara Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053671" start="21509" end="21519" title="The Lodger (Doctor Who)" label="The Lodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5840086" start="21589" end="21610" title="The Day of the Doctor" label="The Day of the Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156741" start="21688" end="21697" title="Gallifrey" label="Gallifrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206456" start="21703" end="21718" title="pocket universe" label="pocket universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q853715" start="21742" end="21748" title="Daleks" label="Daleks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918795" start="21753" end="21781" title="International Star Registry" label="star was nicknamed after him"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="21829" end="21840" title="blue plaque" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012438" start="21848" end="21869" title="New Wimbledon Theatre" label="New Wimbledon Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287440" start="21897" end="21940" title="Doctor Who Appreciation Society" label="&amp;quot;Doctor Who&amp;quot; Appreciation Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941798" start="22160" end="22178" title="Music for Pleasure (record label)" label="Music for Pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505223" start="22254" end="22281" title="Froggy Went A-Courtin&amp;#x27;" label="Froggy Went A-Courtin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538062" start="22295" end="22322" title="My Grandfather&amp;#x27;s Clock" label="My Grandfather&amp;#x27;s Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q712478" start="22430" end="22443" title="Norman Newell" label="Norman Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392000" start="22782" end="22787" title="Fagin" label="Fagin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483458" start="22847" end="22854" title="Oliver!" label="Oliver!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689081" start="22897" end="22905" title="Jim Dale" label="Jim Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361617" start="22953" end="22967" title="June Whitfield" label="June Whitfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287470" start="23109" end="23131" title="Doctor Who theme music" label="Doctor Who theme music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410979" start="23175" end="23189" title="Purple Records" label="Purple Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673" start="23250" end="23263" title="Hans Christian Andersen" label="Hans Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q966018" start="23353" end="23366" title="Frank Loesser" label="Frank Loesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q146141" start="23393" end="23428" title="Hans Christian Andersen (film)" label="&amp;quot;Hans Christian Andersen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q213425" start="23438" end="23448" title="Danny Kaye" label="Danny Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742447" start="23494" end="23509" title="Malcolm Lockyer" label="Malcolm Lockyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980668" start="23733" end="23738" title="Irene (musical)" label="Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q850324" start="23897" end="23902" title="H. J. Heinz Company" label="Heinz"/>
<link wikidata="Q202698" start="24418" end="24427" title="Yesterday (Beatles song)" label="Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141022" start="24487" end="24503" title="When I&amp;#x27;m 64" label="When I&amp;#x27;m 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756063" start="24667" end="24688" title="The Paradise of Death" label="The Paradise of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752913" start="24793" end="24808" title="Deus Ex Machina (video game)" label="Deus Ex Machina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826391" start="24818" end="24829" title="Automata UK" label="Automata UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="24848" end="24859" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51602" wikidata="Q7371210" url="?curid=51602" title="Round the Horne">
<text>Round the Horne is a BBC Radio comedy programme starring Kenneth Horne, first transmitted in four series of weekly episodes from 1965 until 1968. The show was created by Barry Took and Marty Feldman, who wrote the first three series. The fourth was written by Took, Johnnie Mortimer, Brian Cooke and Donald Webster.

Horne&#x27;s supporting cast comprised Kenneth Williams, Hugh Paddick, Betty Marsden and, in the first three series, Bill Pertwee. The announcer was Douglas Smith, who also took part in the sketches. All except the last series featured music by Edwin Braden, played by the band &quot;the Hornblowers&quot;, with a song in the middle of each show performed by the close-harmony singing group the Fraser Hayes Four; in the fourth series, the music was by Max Harris with a smaller group of players than the earlier series.

The show was the successor to &quot;Beyond Our Ken&quot;, which had run from 1958 to 1964 with largely the same cast. By the time the new series began, television had become the dominant broadcasting medium in Britain, and &quot;Round the Horne&quot;, which built up a regular audience of 15 million, was the last radio show to reach so many listeners. Horne was surrounded by larger-than-life characters including the camp pair Julian and Sandy, the disreputable eccentric J.Peasmold Gruntfuttock, and the singer of dubious folk songs, Rambling Syd Rumpo, who all became nationally familiar. The show encountered periodic scrutiny from the BBC management for its double entendres, but consistently received the backing of the director-general of the BBC, Sir Hugh Greene. Horne died suddenly in 1969; the BBC decided that &quot;Round the Horne&quot; could not continue without its star and they cancelled plans for a fifth series that year.

Over the following decades &quot;Round the Horne&quot; has been re-broadcast continually, and all 67 shows have been published on CD. In 2019, in a poll run by &quot;Radio Times&quot;, &quot;Round the Horne&quot; was voted the BBC&#x27;s third-best radio show of any genre, and the best radio comedy series of all.

==History==
===Background===
In 1957 the radio presenter and comedian Kenneth Horne was the compere on the popular Saturday evening comedy and music radio show &quot;Variety Playhouse&quot;. The programme&#x27;s writers were Eric Merriman and Barry Took, and when the series came to an end, they prepared a script for a pilot episode of a new show, &quot;Beyond Our Ken&quot;. The show, in which Horne was joined by Kenneth Williams, Ron Moody, Hugh Paddick and Betty Marsden, was broadcast in October 1957. The series was due to begin in April 1958, but in February Horne suffered a debilitating stroke; he was temporarily paralysed down his left-hand side and lost the power of speech. The BBC postponed the series. After physiotherapy Horne was able to begin recording &quot;Beyond Our Ken&quot; in June, in preparation for the broadcast of the first series between July and November.

&quot;Beyond Our Ken&quot; was written around the imperturbable establishment figure of Horne, while the other performers played a &quot;spectrum of characters never before heard on the radio&quot;, including the exaggeratedly upper class Rodney and Charles (Williams and Paddick), the genteel, dotty pensioners Ambrose and Felicity (Williams and Marsden), the hoarse-voiced cook Fanny Haddock – a parody of the television cook Fanny Cradock (Marsden), the earthy gardening guru Arthur Fallowfield (Williams), the semi-articulate rock and roll singer Ricky Livid (Paddick) and Hankie Flowered, a parody of the comedian Frankie Howerd (Bill Pertwee). The first episode was not well received by a sample audience, but the BBC decided to back Horne and his team, and the initial six-week contract was extended to 21 weeks. Before the series came to an end, a second had been commissioned to run the following year. After the first series Moody was succeeded by Pertwee; Took left after the second series, leaving Merriman to write the remaining programmes on his own.
After the seventh series of &quot;Beyond Our Ken&quot; ended Horne was scheduled to appear in a number of other BBC programmes; Eric Merriman objected, contending that he had made Horne into a star, and that &quot;no other comedy series should be allowed to use him&quot;, according to Horne&#x27;s biographer, Barry Johnston. When the BBC refused to withdraw Horne from the programme &quot;Down with Women&quot;, Merriman resigned from writing &quot;Beyond Our Ken&quot; and the show came to an end. After some pressure from Horne to keep the remainder of the team together, the BBC commissioned &quot;Round the Horne&quot; as a replacement on similar lines. They turned to Took, as one of the original writers of &quot;Beyond Our Ken&quot;, and his new writing partner, Marty Feldman. The name of the programme came from a pun on Horne&#x27;s name, combined with the naval term &quot;round the Horn&quot;, meaning to navigate the waters at the southern tip of South America, Cape Horn. The pair aimed to write what they described as &quot;down-market material in an upmarket way&quot;. The scripts they produced led to a faster-paced programme than &quot;Beyond Our Ken&quot;, including more allusions to contemporary events, including politics and films.

===Format===
&quot;Round the Horne&quot; was based on a revue format, and contained parody and satire. The programme would include an introduction from Horne, who would sometimes give answers to a supposed quiz from the previous week, and then lead into sketches that would include a set-piece based on a film or novel, such as &quot;The Man with the Golden Thunderball&quot;, and &quot;The Three Musketeers&quot;. Martin Dibbs, in his history of the BBC Variety Department, writes that &quot;the show was characterised by incessant innuendo and camp representation to an extent never before tolerated within the BBC.&quot;

As in &quot;Beyond Our Ken&quot;, there was a cast of recurring characters. Took and Feldman developed new characters for Williams, Paddick, Marsden and Pertwee, whose ability to change between personas produced a programme described by the radio historians Andy Foster and Steve Furst as &quot;a cast of thousands played by the same four accomplished actors&quot;. Horne&#x27;s role was described in &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; as providing &quot;the perfect foil to the inspired lunacy happening all around him&quot;. The media analysts Frank Krutnik and Steve Neale consider that as such, Horne&#x27;s role was similar to that of Jack Benny, Fred Allen and Tommy Handley, &quot;as a &#x27;stooge&#x27; rather than a joke-wielder, frequently switching roles between announcer and in-sketch performer&quot;.

===Broadcasts===
====1965–1966: Series 1 and 2====
The first episode of &quot;Round the Horne&quot; was broadcast on the Light Programme on 7 March 1965. It was described in &quot;Radio Times&quot; as &quot;Five characters in search of the authors&quot;. The series consisted of 16 episodes and ran to 20 June 1965. The programme was produced by John Simmonds and included music from the Fraser Hayes Four and the studio orchestra, &quot;the Hornblowers&quot;, conducted by Paul Fenoulhet; from episode six, Fenoulhet was replaced by Edwin Braden. Douglas Smith, an announcer and newsreader on the Home Service and the Third Programme, was used as the programme&#x27;s announcer, but was given a larger role as the series progressed; he ended up advertising spoof products and giving human sound effects in addition to his normal role.

One of the early episodes included a sketch by Horne, a monologue based on &quot;the centenary of the birth of the crumpet&quot;, including a huge crumpet built for Queen Victoria.

As an added novelty he hollowed out the centre and a Gaiety Girl was secreted inside. When the loyal toast was drunk, she leapt out, wearing pink combs and waving a Union Jack – either that or the other way round, I don&#x27;t remember. In any event the whole affair was a great success and, as many people commented afterwards &#x27;it was a smashing bit of crumpet&#x27;.

The sketch angered the strongly-conservative Member of Parliament Sir Cyril Black, who wrote to the BBC to complain. Frank Gillard, the BBC&#x27;s director of radio, wrote to Dennis Morris, the chief of the Light Programme, asking &quot;Round the Horne&quot; to &quot;watch its step, particularly over the next few weeks and keep itself within reasonable bounds&quot;. Instead, Took and Feldman wrote a riposte that Horne read at the end of the following programme, addressed to the &quot;minority of killjoys&quot; who complained:

Let me say to them that our scripts are whiter than white, as is the face of the producer when he reads them. You see, evil is in the eye of the beholder – and we believe you can make anything sound as if it has a double meaning – if you know how. So cheerio, see you next week.

Further complaints about the programme were received and Sir Hugh Greene, the director-general of the BBC, asked to see the scripts before broadcasting. All were returned with the words &quot;I see nothing to object to in this&quot; written on them. The complaints continued from Black, and from Mary Whitehouse – a campaigner against social liberalism – about the cast putting emphasis on certain words. Took replied that &quot;When Laurence Olivier plays Hamlet &quot;he&quot; puts emphasis on certain words – it&#x27;s called acting&quot;.

A second series was commissioned, and ran for thirteen weeks, from Sunday 13 March to 5 June 1966. The programme was recorded in front of a studio audience, and Williams would play up to them with physical humour, causing hilarity in the studio. Simmonds spoke to the cast, telling them that the radio audience were hearing unexplained laughter, and to try to keep the visual pranks to a minimum. At the end of the series Roy Rich, the head of BBC Light Entertainments for radio, spoke to Took, Feldman, Horne and Williams and discussed possible changes to the programme, including the removal of the Fraser Hayes Four, and the possible changing of Pertwee and Marsden. No changes were made before the next series was commissioned.

On 7 October 1966, at the age of 59, Horne suffered a severe heart attack. He was much weakened, and was unfit to work for three months. As a result, he did not appear in the &quot;Round the Horne&quot; Christmas special, which was recorded on 28 November. He returned to work in January 1967 to record the third series.

====1967–1968: Series 3 and 4====
The third series ran for 21 episodes from 5 February to 25 June 1967. After recording the first episode, Williams wrote in his diary that &quot;the script was singularly uninspired I think – no innovations or bright ideas for the beginning of a new series ... For the first time I am beginning to feel that this show is rather dated and tired&quot;. The BBC hierarchy also thought the first show was slightly lacking and Williams was also downbeat after the second recording, writing that &quot;I think the show is quite dead artistically and the format has completely atrophied itself – it is moribund now. I think I will withdraw after this series&quot;. Trying to turn the show around, Took and Feldman wrote out the popular camp Julian and Sandy characters (played by Paddick and Williams) from the third episode, but the cast and Simmonds all insisted they were put back, so the writers duly obliged. After a few weeks the show had settled down and Williams recorded in his diary that the recording &quot;went v. well. Script was v. good indeed and the audience splendid – a great deal of affection there, one felt&quot;.

Feldman became increasingly successful on television, particularly with &quot;At Last the 1948 Show&quot; (1967); he decided to concentrate on writing and performing on the screen and left the series. Took agreed to stay, and he was joined by Johnnie Mortimer, Brian Cooke and – for the first six episodes of the next series – Donald Webster. In September 1967 BBC radio was radically reorganised. The Home Service, Third Programme and Light Programme were abolished and replaced by four new national channels – Radio 1, 2, 3 and 4; &quot;Round the Horne&quot; moved from the Light Programme to Radio 2. The change came with reduced budgets. The Fraser Hayes Four and Eddie Braden and the Hornblowers were replaced with a small instrumental group led by Max Harris, and Pertwee was dropped from the programme. The cost fell from £601 a show in series 3 to £486 in series 4. That year&#x27;s Christmas special was broadcast with the new line-up and writers.

The fourth series began on 25 February 1968 and ran for 16 episodes to 9 June. After the first episode Williams was unimpressed with the new material, and wrote in his diary &quot;Now there are 4 writers on it! It is unbelievable really. Four! For half an hour of old crap with not a memorable line anywhere ... of course one goes on and flogs it gutless and the rubbish gets by&quot;. Without Feldman, Took was enjoying the show less than he had previously. He also felt the humour was becoming more obviously dirty and complained to Williams that &quot;We might as well write a series called &quot;Get Your Cock Out&quot;&quot;.

Horne died of a heart attack on 14 February 1969, while hosting the annual Guild of Television Producers&#x27; and Directors&#x27; Awards at the Dorchester hotel in London. An award had gone to Took and Feldman for their television series &quot;Marty&quot;, and Horne had just urged viewers to tune into the fifth series of &quot;Round the Horne&quot; – which was due to start on 16 March – when he fell from the podium. By 24 February 1969 it had been decided that &quot;Round the Horne&quot; could not continue without its star. As a result, the scripts for series five – which Horne had jokingly suggested should be subtitled &quot;The First All-Nude Radio Show&quot; – were hastily adapted into a new series for Williams called &quot;Stop Messing About&quot;, which ran for two series before it was dropped from the schedule in 1970.

==Main regular characters==
===Kenneth Horne===
The persona adopted by the writers for Horne was not greatly different from his real-life one, and largely the same as that of his &quot;Beyond Our Ken&quot; character: the urbane, unflappable, tolerant but sometimes surprised central figure, around whom the other characters revolved. &quot;The Times&quot; called Horne the &quot;master of the scandalous double-meaning delivered with shining innocence&quot;, and in &quot;Round the Horne&quot; he combined the role of straight man to the flamboyant Julian and Sandy, Rambling Syd Rumpo and J.Peasmold Gruntfuttock with that of genial host of the show. Feldman called him &quot;the best straight man I had ever seen&quot;, who nonetheless had &quot;a lot of funny lines&quot;; Jonathan Rigby, who played Horne in a stage show, &quot;Round the Horne ... Revisited&quot;, thought him &quot;a stand-up comedian with a posh accent ... part of his genius was that he was able to be himself&quot;.

Horne introduced some programmes by reading out the answers to last week&#x27;s (non-existent) questions:
:The answer to question one: complete the first lines of the following songs – &quot;If I Were a Blackbird I&#x27;d ...&quot; The answer is I&#x27;d Whistle and Sing, and I positively will not accept any other suggestion. The second song was &quot;There&#x27;s a Rainbow Round My ...&quot; Now we got an amazing number of replies to this. We haven&#x27;t had so many since we asked you to complete &quot;Over My Shoulder Goes ...&quot; Really, it makes it very difficult for us to keep up the high reputation for sophisticated comedy we&#x27;ve never had.
At other times he would give a short lecture on justly forgotten figures from history, such as Robert Capability Lackwind, allegedly the inventor of Toad in the Hole, or Nemesis Fothergill, known to ornithologists – and the police – as the Birdman of Potter&#x27;s Bar. In many episodes his opening slot was announcing the day&#x27;s forthcoming events, such as International free style gnome fingering at the five-minute Hippo Wash Brompton Oratory, Swan Upping at Downham and Swan Downing at Upham, and the two-man Rabbi bob sled championship down the escalators at Leicester Square tube station. He would close the programmes by commenting on the final sketch, or announcing a competition to complete a limerick with two fecund opening lines (&quot;A young market gardener from Bude, Developed a cactus quite lewd ...&quot;) or with a public service announcement such as this police message:
:If any passer-by in Lisle Street last Saturday night witnessed a middle-aged man stagger out of the Peeperama strip club and get knocked down by a passing cyclist, would you please keep quiet about it as my wife thinks I was in Folkestone. Goodbye. See you next week.

===Douglas Smith===
At the start of the first series of &quot;Round the Horne&quot; Douglas Smith took the traditional role of a BBC announcer on comedy shows, introducing the programme and its component parts and reading the credits at the end. As the show developed, the writers gave him more to do. In the second series Smith continually interrupts the programme to promote &quot;Dobbiroids Magic Rejuvenators&quot; (from &quot;the makers of Dobbins Medical Cummerbunds for horses&quot;) and Dobbimist horse deodorant for UFO (&quot;under fetlock odour&quot;). In the third and fourth series he is included in the movie spoofs, playing a range of roles including a rumbling volcano:

:Horne: ... And see there – dominating the island, the sacred volcano of Gonga – played by Douglas Smith with a hole in his head and steam coming out of his ears.
:Paddick: What an awesome sight – snow mantling his mighty summit and lava oozing down his sides.
:Smith: That&#x27;s porridge, actually. I had a hurried breakfast this morning.
:Horne: Shut up, Smith, you&#x27;re a volcano. You just loom over us and rumble ominously.
:Smith: Yes, I told you. I had a hurried breakfast.
:Horne: Shut up, Smith.
:Smith: Rumble rumble.
:Horne: That&#x27;s better.

His other roles include a telephone box, an inflatable rubber boat, a drophead Bentley and a cow:

:Smith: Moo Moo – Splosh!
:Horne: &quot;Splosh?&quot;
:Smith: I kicked over the milk pail.

By the fourth series Smith has risen to the heights of playing the World (&quot;You&#x27;ve just gone through my Khyber Pass travelling on a camel&quot;), and in one programme he gets a solo singing spot, barracked by Paddick and Williams (&quot;Letting an announcer sing! It&#x27;s a disgrace!&quot;) performing &quot;Nobody Loves a Fairy When she&#x27;s Forty&quot;.

===Beatrice, Lady Counterblast, &quot;née&quot; Clissold===
The first of the new characters was an elderly ex-Gaiety Girl (played by Marsden) known as Bea Clissold in her theatrical heyday, when she was &quot;the pure brass of the music hall&quot;, and subsequently an aristocratic widow. She has been much married and much divorced, and has retired to live in seclusion at Chattering Parva, waited on and complained about by her octogenarian butler, Spasm (Williams). Horne interviews her each week in the early programmes, when she reminisces about her life and husbands. In a commentary on the show&#x27;s characters published in 1974 Took wrote, &quot;Her anecdotes of past marriages combine the lurid with the turgid as the narrative flashes back on leaden wings to the turn of the century and the exploits of the young Bea Clissold&quot;. She appeared in the first programme of the series, and was a major feature of its early episodes. After she ceased to be one of the central characters she continually popped up with her catch phrase, &quot;Many times, many, many times&quot;, originally referring to the number of times she was married, and later an all-purpose innuendo.

===Julian and Sandy===
The camp pair Julian and Sandy (played by Paddick and Williams) made their debuts in the fourth programme of the first series and rapidly established themselves as a permanent fixture throughout the run of &quot;Round the Horne&quot;. They are out of work actors whom Horne encounters each week in new temporary jobs. The writers&#x27; original idea was that the characters should be elderly and dignified Shakespearean actors filling in as domestic cleaners while &quot;resting&quot; (i.e. unemployed), but the producer, John Simmonds, thought they seemed rather sad, and at his suggestion Took and Feldman turned the characters into chorus boys. In a typical sketch Horne looks in at a new establishment, usually in Chelsea, with a title such as &quot;Bona Tours&quot;, &quot;Bona Books&quot;, &quot;Bona Antiques&quot; or &quot;Bona Caterers&quot;, and is greeted with, &quot;Oh hello, I&#x27;m Julian and this is my friend Sandy&quot;. The latter adds, using the gay and theatrical slang, palare, &quot;How bona to vada your dolly old eek again&quot;, or &quot;What brings you trolling in here?&quot; Having first appeared as house cleaners, they are later shown working in a variety of implausible jobs. Took summed them up: &quot;From working as part time domestics while &#x27;resting&#x27; they progressed to running almost every trendy activity going from fox-hunting in Carnaby Street to the gents&#x27; outfitting department of MI5&quot;.

The use of palare enabled the writers to give Julian and Sandy some double entendres that survived BBC censorship because the authorities either did not know or did not admit to knowing their gay meaning. In one episode, Sandy tells Horne that Julian is a brilliant pianist: &quot;a miracle of dexterity at the cottage upright&quot;, which to those familiar with gay slang could either refer to pianistic excellence or to – illegal – sexual activity in a public lavatory. At the time of the first three series, gay male sex was a criminal offence in Britain. Julian and Sandy became nationally popular characters and are widely credited with contributing a little to the public acceptance of homosexuality that led to the gradual repeal of the anti-gay laws, beginning in 1967.

===J. Peasmold Gruntfuttock===
A week after the debut of Julian and Sandy came the first appearance of J. Peasmold Gruntfuttock, first broadcast on 5 April 1965. Played by Williams, Gruntfuttock is described by the writers as &quot;the walking slum&quot;. In his first appearance he is a job applicant at the BBC, inspired by voices in his head, and keen to get on close terms with one of the female presenters. In later programmes he is first the king and then dictator of Peasmoldia, a small enclave in the East End, and subsequently Brother Gruntfuttock, member of an obscure religious community. He writes in regularly with incorrect and sometimes physically implausible answers to last week&#x27;s questions:
:Finally, we had &quot;I get a kick out of ...&quot;. Well, Mr Gruntfuttock of Hoxton, I think we &quot;all&quot; know what you get a kick out of. And on looking at the list you sent me it&#x27;s my considered opinion that you are running a severe risk of doing yourself a permanent injury.
In the fourth series he is a persistent caller of the spoof phone-in, the &quot;Round the Horne&quot; Forum of the Air, airing his peculiar personal obsessions in between bouts of heavy breathing. He was Feldman&#x27;s favourite &quot;Round the Horne&quot; character; the two authors wrote of Gruntfuttock, &quot;He married beneath him – which gives you some idea what his wife Buttercup (Betty Marsden) must be like. All in all not a couple one would wish to meet on a dark night or indeed at any time.&quot;

===Charles and Fiona===
Charles and Fiona are supposedly characters played by an extremely theatrical actor and actress: &quot;ageing juvenile Binkie Huckaback&quot; (Paddick) and Dame Celia Molestrangler (Marsden). The two, originally based on the theatre stars Alfred Lunt and Lynn Fontanne, were introduced in the eighth programme of the first series, and quickly became a fixture. They appeared in parodies of &quot;stiff-upper-lip&quot; dramas by Noël Coward and others; their fictitious plays had titles such as &quot;Present Encounter&quot; and &quot;Bitter Laughter&quot;. Their agonised love affairs are punctuated by brittle, staccato dialogue, in which they talk of their emotions in tortuous sentences:
:Fiona: All I could think of back here was you out there thinking of me back here thinking of you out there – back here. Needing you, wanting you, wanting to need you, needing to want you.
:Charles: I don&#x27;t have the words for it.
:Fiona: I know.
:Charles: I know you know.
:Fiona: I know you know I know.
:Charles: Yes, I know.
Their sketches customarily end with an unexpected twist, such as the revelation that they are living in a telephone box, or are dining at the Ritz in the nude, or trysting in a refrigerator. Barry Took wrote that they were his own favourite &quot;Round the Horne&quot; characters. During the second series they were dropped in favour of a new feature, &quot;The Seamus Android Show&quot; (see below) but were quickly brought back.

===Chou En Ginsberg and Lotus Blossom===
In the ninth show of the first series Chou En Ginsberg (Williams) appeared for the first time. He is a parody of the stereotypical far-Eastern villain Fu Manchu. The first part of his name was borrowed from Chou En-Lai, the then Chinese premier; for comic contrast the writers wanted an incongruous second name and experimented with &quot;Chou En Murphy&quot; and &quot;Chou En McWhirter&quot; before settling on &quot;Ginsberg&quot;. He always announces himself as &quot;Dr Chou En Ginsberg, MA (Failed)&quot;. He appears regularly in the James Bond parodies, &quot;Kenneth Horne, Master Spy&quot;, plotting a fiendish international crime, luring Horne into his clutches but then being outwitted.

Chou was joined in the next show by his concubine, Lotus Blossom (Paddick) who is, in the words of her master, common as muck. A drawing of the two by William Hewison in Took and Feldman&#x27;s 1974 book &quot;Round the Horne&quot; shows a diminutive Chou alongside a large, looming and graceless Lotus Blossom bulging out of her cheongsam. Her attempts to entertain Special Agent Horne with her songs and dances cause him more distress than Chou&#x27;s threats of death.

===Rambling Syd Rumpo===
First heard in the tenth show of the first series, and a fixture thereafter, Rambling Syd (Williams) is an itinerant folk singer. The writers describe him as &quot;one of the last of the breed of wandering minstrels who are fast dying out – thank heavens&quot;. Often misappropriating the tunes of genuine folk songs, Rambling Syd&#x27;s lyrics consist of dubious-sounding nonsense words such as these, from the &quot;Runcorn Splod Cobbler&#x27;s Song&quot;:
:I sing as I cobble and hammer my splod
:Tho&#x27; my trumice glows hot and my trade be odd
:I sit as I gorble and pillock my splee
:For a cobbler&#x27;s life is the life for me.
Or, to the tune of &quot;Foggy Dew&quot;:
:When I was a young man
:I nadgered my splod
:As I nurked at the wogglers&#x27; trade.
:When suddenly I thought
:While trussing up my groats,
:I&#x27;d whirdle with a fair young maid.
Took said of the character that his &quot;bogus ethnic patter and totally meaningless songs&quot; created the illusion of &quot;something terribly naughty going on&quot; – but that any naughtiness was in fact in the listener&#x27;s mind.

===Daphne Whitethigh===
The character was loosely based on the television cook Fanny Cradock. Described by Took and Feldman as &quot;fashion reporter, TV cook, agony aunt, pain in the neck&quot;, Daphne Whitethigh (Marsden) is a hoarse-voiced pundit, &quot;whose advice on the placing of the bosom or the way to prepare Hippo in its shell is an absolute must for all those trendy moderns who want to look and feel frightful&quot;. Among her helpful cooking tips are that although rhinoceros is not very appetising you do get &quot;marvellous&quot; crackling; her recipes for yak include yak à l&#x27;orange, yak in its jacket, and coupe yak. She advises followers of female fashion that bosoms are still out, but may be on the way back (Horne says he will keep a light burning in the window) and her other useful pointers include how to use cold cream to remove those baboon claw marks from one&#x27;s hip, and how to avoid crow&#x27;s feet round the eyes: refrain from sleeping in trees.

===Seamus Android===

Described by Took as &quot;an unskilled television labourer whose gift of the blarney and wistful Irish charm could empty any theatre in three minutes&quot;, Seamus Android is a parody of the broadcaster Eamonn Andrews, whose weekly television chat show was broadcast live on Sunday evenings. Took and Feldman had appeared on Andrews&#x27;s show and been astonished by &quot;the &quot;non-sequiturs&quot; and other nonsense he came out with&quot;. Seamus Android was the only regular character played by Pertwee, who was otherwise cast as what Took called &quot;the odds and ends&quot; – the minor characters and straight parts. Android&#x27;s interviewees include the much married actress Zsa-Zsa Poltergeist, the Hollywood producer Daryll F. Klaphanger, and the star of &quot;The Ipswich File&quot;, Michael Bane; promised appearances by such as Lord Ghenghiz Wilkinson, the dancing cloakroom attendant, Nemesis Poston, the juggling monk, and Anthony Wormwood-Nibblo, the Hoxton cat thief and heiress fail to materialise. As Pertwee was not in the cast for the last series, Android was dropped.

===Dentures===
Played by Paddick, this is the only regular &quot;Round the Horne&quot; character who had in all essentials already appeared in &quot;Beyond Our Ken&quot;, where he was named Stanley Birkinshaw. In &quot;Round the Horne&quot; he has no regular name, and appears in various capacities. He is a man with ill-fitting false teeth; his diction distorts all sibilants, and sprays saliva in all directions. Dentures often opens the show in the style of a toastmaster (&quot;My lordsh, ladiesh and gentlemen,&quot; etc). In the second series he appears as &quot;The Great Omipaloni, the world&#x27;s fastest illusionist – and also the dampest&quot;. In the third series he is Buffalo Sidney Goosecreature, adversary of the Palone Ranger, and in the fourth he is Angus McSpray (&quot;Rishe againsht the Shasshenachsh&quot;) to Williams&#x27;s Bonnie Prince Charlie.

===Julie Coolibah===
The invention of Mortimer and Cooke, Julie Coolibah (Marsden) appears in the fourth season. She is an Australian visiting London, deeply suspicious of British men (&quot;I know you Pommies are sex mad&quot;). Every time she talks to Horne she interprets his innocent remarks as sexual overtures:
:Horne: Good to have you back.
:Julie: What do you mean by that?
:Horne: Nothing, just extending the hand of friendship.
:Julie: Yeah? With what purpose in mind, might I ask?
When Julie manages to find work in London she has constant difficulties coping with the men. As a bus conductress she is outraged when a passenger gives her fourpence and asks &quot;How far can I go for that?&quot; She tells Horne, &quot;I cracked him with my cash-bag and put him off&quot;.

==Critical reception==
&quot;Round the Horne&quot; is described by Foster and Furst as &quot;one of the seminal comedies to come out of the BBC&quot;. The programme continued the comedy vein of &quot;The Goon Show&quot; and provided an influential link, through &quot;I&#x27;m Sorry, I&#x27;ll Read That Again&quot;, to the work of the Monty Python writers and performers; at one point Monty Python was given the working title &quot;Barry Took&#x27;s Flying Circus&quot; by the BBC. &quot;Round the Horne&quot; helped change the way the BBC dealt with broadcasting humour: &quot;The ebullience of the ... comedy – not to mention the filth of the innuendos – swept away decades of insipid and paternalistic inhibition at the BBC&quot;, according to Richard Morrison, the chief arts correspondent of &quot;The Times&quot;.

Six years after the last series was first broadcast, &quot;The Daily Mirror&quot; called &quot;Round the Horne&quot; &quot;the last great radio show&quot;. In 2002 &quot;The Spectator&quot; described it as &quot;one of the great radio successes&quot;; the following year William Cook wrote in &quot;The Guardian&quot; that the show &quot;boasted a wonderful writing team&quot; and &quot;bestrode the airwaves like a colossus, reaching an audience of 15 million – the sort of ratings most current comedies can only dream about.&quot; In 2005 &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; referred to it as &quot;One of the best-loved shows of all time.&quot; &quot;Punch&quot; commented that the series was probably the last comedy show on radio to have a huge following. According to Took, &quot;Round the Horne&quot; was broadcast when radio was considered to be on the wane when compared to television; such was the show&#x27;s popularity, many thought radio would continue to be a leading form of entertainment.

Although &quot;Round the Horne&quot; attracted some adverse comments from Black, Whitehouse and others of similar views, the show was well received by the press. In 1967 &quot;The Times&quot; called it &quot;half an hour of the purest impure entertainment&quot;, and as the third series came to an end the paper called for a Christmas special and a further series in the new year. &quot;No-one, but no-one at all has yet presented those elegant queens, those touchily vulnerable bona-boys, those fashion fetichists so deftly, so pointedly, and, in the final accounting, so purely&quot;. In 1969 the paper commented that the show was &quot;a success with lovers of the sophisticated pun&quot; as well as appealing to &quot;those who like a good belly laugh&quot;, with &quot;obvious jokes ... mixed with clever word juggling&quot;.

In 1995, looking back at British radio comedy, &quot;The Guardian&quot; placed &quot;Round the Horne&quot; first in its list of the five greatest shows. In 2019, in a poll run by &quot;Radio Times&quot;, &quot;Round the Horne&quot; was voted the third best radio show of any kind, and the best comedy.

==Legacy==
===Recordings===

Recordings of all the episodes have been issued on CD by the BBC in its &quot;Audiobooks&quot; publications (2002):
* Series 1: 
* Series 2: 
* Series 3: 
* Series 4: 
In 2005, to mark the 40th anniversary of the show, the BBC published a boxed set containing all episodes, on 35 CDs, with an accompanying 3-hour, 3-disc set &quot;Round The Horne: The Complete and Utter History&quot;, written and narrated by Took: 

By 2006 over half a million copies of tapes and CDs of &quot;Round the Horne&quot; had been sold by the BBC. Editions of &quot;Round the Horne&quot; are regularly broadcast on the digital radio service BBC Radio 4 Extra.

===Scripts===
Some scripts from all four series have been published. Those printed in two different books listed below are not always identical. Some print the scripts as written and others as finally broadcast. The scripts have been published in five books:
* 
* 


====Series 1====
* Programme 1: Took and Coward, 2000
* Programme 4: Took and Feldman, 1974
* Programme 5: Took, 1989; and Took and Coward, 2000
* Programme 7: Took and Coward, 2000
* Programme 12: Took, 1989
* Programme 13: Took, 1989
* Programme 14: Took and Coward, 2000
* Programme 16: Took, 1998

====Series 2====
* Programme 1: Took and Feldman, 1974; and Took and Coward, 2000
* Programme 2: Took, 1998
* Programme 3: Took, 1989
* Programme 4: Took, 1989; and Took and Coward, 2000
* Programme 5: Took and Coward, 2000
* Programme 6: Took and Coward, 2000
* Programme 8: Took and Feldman, 1974
* Programme 9: Took, 1989
* Programme 10: Took, 1989
* Programme 12: Took and Feldman, 1974
* Programme 13: Took, 1989; and Took and Coward, 2000
* 1966 Christmas show: Took and Coward, 2000
====Series 3====
* Programme 1: Took, 1989
* Programme 4: Took, 1989; and Took and Coward, 2000
* Programme 6: Took, 1989
* Programme 7: Took and Feldman, 1974
* Programme 10: Took, 1989; and Took and Coward, 2000
* Programme 11: Took and Feldman, 1974
* Programme 12: Took, 1989
* Programme 13: Took and Coward, 2000
* Programme 14: Took, 1989
* Programme 16: Took and Coward, 2000
* Programme 17: Took, 1998
* Programme 19: Took and Coward, 2000
* Programme 20: Took and Feldman, 1974

====Series 4====
* Programme 4: Took and Coward, 2000
* Programme 5: Took and Coward, 2000
* Programme 8: Took and Coward, 2000
* Programme 12: Took and Coward, 2000
* Programme 14: Took, 1998
* Programme 15: Took and Coward, 2000
&quot;The Bona Book of Julian and Sandy&quot; by Took and Feldman was published in 1976 and dedicated, &quot;For David Attenborough, who ought to know better&quot;. It contains the scripts of thirteen Julian and Sandy sketches:
* Bona Books (from series 2, programme 2)
* Bona Prods (from series 3, programme 10)
* Bona Bijou Tourettes (from series 3, programme 12)
* La Casserole de Bona Gourmet (from series 3, programme 15)
* Bona Hunt (from series 3, programme 14)
* Fabe Homes and Bona Gardens (from series 1, programme 10)
* Bona Tattoos (from series 2, programme 3)

* The Ballet Bona (from series 2, programme 9)
* Bona Grapplers (from series 2, programme 10)
* Bona Law (from series 3, programme 2)
* Bona Pets (from series 2, programme 13)
* Bona Palare (from series 4, programme 13)
* Bona Performers (from series 2, programme 13)

:Source: &quot;The Bona Book of Julian and Sandy&quot;.

===Spin off===
Three weeks after the fourth series of &quot;Round the Horne&quot; finished, the first episode of &quot;Horne A&#x27;Plenty&quot; was broadcast on the ITV channel. In a sketch show format, and with Took as script editor (and later producer), this was an attempt to translate the spirit of &quot;Round the Horne&quot; to television, although with different actors supporting Horne: Graham Stark, for example, substituted for Williams and Sheila Steafel for Marsden. The first six-part series ran from 22 June to 27 July 1968, the second from 27 November to 1 January 1969.

===Adaptations===
====&quot;Round the Horne ... Revisited&quot;====
A stage version, &quot;Round the Horne ... Revisited&quot;, was adapted from the original radio scripts by Brian Cooke, the last surviving writer of the series, and directed by Michael Kingsbury. It was first produced in October 2003 at the White Bear, a fringe theatre in south London, and opened in the West End at The Venue, Leicester Square in January 2004, running for more than a year. It featured Jonathan Rigby as Horne, Robin Sebastian as Williams, Nigel Harrison as Paddick, Kate Brown as Marsden and Charles Armstrong as Smith. A scene from the show featured in the 2004 Royal Variety Performance at the London Coliseum. Following the success of the London production, a second cast was assembled to tour the provinces. Stephen Critchlow played Horne, with Stephen Matthews, David Rumelle, Felicity Duncan and Oliver Beamish as Williams, Paddick, Marsden and Smith. The original show ran in London until December 2004, when it was replaced by a Christmas edition with an unchanged cast. A third edition, &quot;Round the Horne Revisited 2&quot;, rounded off the London run from February to April 2005, and then made a provincial tour.

The original version of the stage play was filmed by the BBC; the television director was Nick Wood. The programme was first transmitted on BBC Four on 13 June 2004 and was repeated ten times on Four or BBC Two over the next four years.

====Other stage versions====
In 2008 Barry Took&#x27;s former wife, Lyn, and the director Richard Baron prepared a new stage adaptation, &quot;Round the Horne – Unseen and Uncut&quot;, which drew entirely on Took and Feldman material from series one to three. It toured in 2008 and 2009. The cast included, from the 2004 show, Rigby as Horne, Sebastian as Williams and Harrison as Paddick (later succeeded by David Delve), with Pertwee&#x27;s characters – all omitted from the 2004 show – restored, played by Michael Shaw; Stephen Boswell played Smith. Unlike the 2004 production, it had a six-strong cast, augmented by a group of vocalists and musicians in the roles of the Hornblowers and the Fraser Hayes Four.

In 2015, to mark 50 years since the radio series began, Apollo Theatre Company produced a stage adaptation, &quot;Round the Horne: The 50th Anniversary Tour&quot;, compiled from the original scripts and directed by Tim Astley. The cast comprised Julian Howard McDowell (Horne), Colin Elmer (Williams), Jonathan Hansler (Paddick), Eve Winters (Marsden) and Nick Wymer (Smith).

===Documentaries===
A 45-minute BBC radio documentary, &quot;Round and Round the Horne&quot;, was broadcast on 18 September 1976. It was presented by Frank Bough and included interviews with Williams and Took. A 60-minute radio documentary, &quot;Horne A&#x27; Plenty,&quot; was broadcast on 14 February 1994. It was presented by Leslie Phillips and included new interviews with Marsden and Took and archive material featuring Horne. A three-hour radio special, &quot;Horne of Plenty&quot;, was broadcast on 5 March 2005 for the 40th anniversary of the show. It was presented by Jonathan James-Moore and included interviews with Ron Moody, Pertwee, Merriman&#x27;s son Andy, Cooke, Lyn Took, and extracts from Williams&#x27;s diary read &quot;in character&quot; by David Benson. The special included the first and final episodes of &quot;Beyond Our Ken&quot; and &quot;Round the Horne&quot; in their entirety.

===Contribution to British vocabulary===
&quot;Round the Horne&quot; is cited as a source in 38 entries in &quot;The Oxford English Dictionary&quot;. Rambling Syd is quoted in the entry for &quot;nadger&quot;: &quot;In plural. The testicles. &#x27;Now my dearios, I&#x27;ll tether my nadgers to a grouting pole for the old grey mare is grunging in the meadow&#x27; – from a comedy monologue by the character &#x27;Rambling Syd Rumpo&#x27; whose material is characterized by the use of nonsense words with a general air of sexual innuendo; the meaning is intentionally vague.&quot; Rambling Syd&#x27;s surname is also cited: &quot;rumpo&quot;, &quot;n. Brit. slang. = rumpy-pumpy n. Perhaps influenced by the name of &#x27;Rambling Syd Rumpo&#x27;, a character (played by Kenneth Williams) in the British radio series &quot;Round the Horne&quot; (1965–9 ), whose songs, although largely consisting of nonsense words, often had an air of sexual innuendo.&quot;

Julian and Sandy are cited among the sources for a range of palare words, including &quot;bona&quot; (Good, excellent; attractive), &quot;naff&quot; (Unfashionable, vulgar; lacking in style, inept; worthless, faulty), &quot;nante&quot; (Nothing), &quot;omee&quot; (Man – spelled &quot;omi&quot; by Took and Feldman) and &quot;palone&quot; (A young woman. Also: an effeminate man).

==Notes and references==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Sources===
====Books====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

====Episodes====
* 

====Journals====

====Magazines====

====Newspapers====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

====Websites====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="21" end="30" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354147" start="57" end="70" title="Kenneth Horne" label="Kenneth Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864842" start="170" end="180" title="Barry Took" label="Barry Took"/>
<link wikidata="Q332670" start="185" end="198" title="Marty Feldman" label="Marty Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182836" start="266" end="282" title="Johnnie Mortimer" label="Johnnie Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924874" start="284" end="295" title="Brian Cooke" label="Brian Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093792" start="356" end="372" title="Kenneth Williams" label="Kenneth Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932217" start="374" end="386" title="Hugh Paddick" label="Hugh Paddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q850381" start="388" end="401" title="Betty Marsden" label="Betty Marsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q76871" start="434" end="446" title="Bill Pertwee" label="Bill Pertwee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301982" start="466" end="479" title="Douglas Smith (broadcaster)" label="Douglas Smith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="680" end="693" title="Close and open harmony#Vocal music" label="close-harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493607" start="712" end="729" title="Fraser Hayes Four" label="Fraser Hayes Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794834" start="770" end="780" title="Max Harris (composer)" label="Max Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858458" start="875" end="889" title="Beyond Our Ken" label="Beyond Our Ken"/>
<link wikidata="Q857784" start="1258" end="1262" title="Camp (style)" label="camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307709" start="1268" end="1284" title="Julian and Sandy" label="Julian and Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289249" start="1376" end="1394" title="Rambling Syd Rumpo" label="Rambling Syd Rumpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030511" start="1503" end="1518" title="double entendre" label="double entendre"/>
<link wikidata="Q48181" start="1566" end="1593" title="director-general of the BBC" label="director-general of the BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q877463" start="1595" end="1610" title="Hugh Greene" label="Sir Hugh Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461827" start="1948" end="1959" title="Radio Times" label="Radio Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354147" start="2168" end="2181" title="Kenneth Horne" label="Kenneth Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605803" start="2264" end="2281" title="Variety Playhouse (BBC)" label="Variety Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056342" start="2323" end="2336" title="Eric Merriman" label="Eric Merriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864842" start="2341" end="2351" title="Barry Took" label="Barry Took"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858458" start="2453" end="2467" title="Beyond Our Ken" label="Beyond Our Ken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093792" start="2514" end="2530" title="Kenneth Williams" label="Kenneth Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q366910" start="2532" end="2541" title="Ron Moody" label="Ron Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932217" start="2543" end="2555" title="Hugh Paddick" label="Hugh Paddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q850381" start="2560" end="2573" title="Betty Marsden" label="Betty Marsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="2695" end="2701" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q675662" start="3415" end="3428" title="Fanny Cradock" label="Fanny Cradock"/>
<link wikidata="Q979233" start="3606" end="3620" title="Frankie Howerd" label="Frankie Howerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q76871" start="3622" end="3634" title="Bill Pertwee" label="Bill Pertwee"/>
<link wikidata="Q332670" start="4824" end="4837" title="Marty Feldman" label="Marty Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4078" start="5029" end="5038" title="Cape Horn" label="Cape Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="5367" end="5372" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612605" start="6210" end="6221" title="Steve Furst" label="Steve Furst"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="6343" end="6362" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q148732" start="6573" end="6583" title="Jack Benny" label="Jack Benny"/>
<link wikidata="Q967454" start="6585" end="6595" title="Fred Allen" label="Fred Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354134" start="6600" end="6613" title="Tommy Handley" label="Tommy Handley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347264" start="6871" end="6886" title="Light Programme" label="Light Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461827" start="6930" end="6941" title="Radio Times" label="Radio Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493607" start="7138" end="7155" title="Fraser Hayes Four" label="Fraser Hayes Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301982" start="7298" end="7311" title="Douglas Smith (broadcaster)" label="Douglas Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631716" start="7348" end="7360" title="BBC Home Service" label="Home Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834990" start="7369" end="7384" title="BBC Third Programme" label="Third Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q261197" start="7643" end="7652" title="monologue" label="monologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="7752" end="7766" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="8189" end="8209" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200646" start="8210" end="8225" title="Cyril Black" label="Sir Cyril Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486856" start="8261" end="8274" title="Frank Gillard" label="Frank Gillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q877463" start="9014" end="9029" title="Hugh Greene" label="Sir Hugh Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q48181" start="9035" end="9062" title="director-general of the BBC" label="director-general of the BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397931" start="9253" end="9268" title="Mary Whitehouse" label="Mary Whitehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="9292" end="9309" title="social liberalism" label="social liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16749769" start="9923" end="9931" title="Roy Rich" label="Roy Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q857784" start="11318" end="11322" title="Camp (style)" label="camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307709" start="11323" end="11339" title="Julian and Sandy" label="Julian and Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q752945" start="11796" end="11817" title="At Last the 1948 Show" label="At Last the 1948 Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182836" start="11961" end="11977" title="Johnnie Mortimer" label="Johnnie Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924874" start="11979" end="11990" title="Brian Cooke" label="Brian Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631716" start="12120" end="12132" title="BBC Home Service" label="Home Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834990" start="12134" end="12149" title="BBC Third Programme" label="Third Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="12236" end="12237" title="BBC Radio 1" label="1"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="12239" end="12240" title="BBC Radio 2" label="2"/>
<link wikidata="Q749608" start="12242" end="12243" title="BBC Radio 3" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="12248" end="12249" title="BBC Radio 4" label="4"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="13383" end="13445" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="Guild of Television Producers&amp;#x27; and Directors&amp;#x27; Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749941" start="13449" end="13463" title="the Dorchester" label="the Dorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777345" start="13553" end="13558" title="Marty (TV series)" label="Marty"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="14487" end="14496" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274239" start="14923" end="14937" title="Jonathan Rigby" label="Jonathan Rigby"/>
<link wikidata="Q740764" start="15950" end="15966" title="Toad in the hole" label="Toad in the Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q946858" start="16252" end="16263" title="Swan Upping" label="Swan Upping"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16717" end="16729" title="Soho#Sex industry" label="Lisle Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q55989" start="18283" end="18291" title="drophead" label="drophead"/>
<link wikidata="Q27224" start="18292" end="18299" title="Bentley" label="Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517001" start="18884" end="18895" title="Gaiety Girls" label="Gaiety Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q743535" start="20699" end="20706" title="Chelsea, London" label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359130" start="20974" end="20980" title="polari" label="palare"/>
<link wikidata="Q38778" start="21361" end="21375" title="Carnaby Street" label="Carnaby Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="21420" end="21423" title="MI5" label="MI5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030511" start="21500" end="21515" title="double entendre" label="double entendre"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="22720" end="22728" title="East End of London" label="East End"/>
<link wikidata="Q794159" start="23276" end="23284" title="phone-in" label="phone-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246683" start="23990" end="24001" title="Alfred Lunt" label="Alfred Lunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q242484" start="24006" end="24019" title="Lynn Fontanne" label="Lynn Fontanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616407" start="24147" end="24162" title="stiff upper lip" label="stiff-upper-lip"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="24179" end="24190" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25164" end="25173" title="#Seamus Android" label="see below"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357701" start="25399" end="25408" title="Fu Manchu" label="Fu Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="25455" end="25466" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Chou En-Lai"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="25788" end="25798" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q836934" start="26277" end="26286" title="cheongsam" label="cheongsam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732296" start="27102" end="27123" title="Foggy Dew (English song)" label="&amp;quot;Foggy Dew&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778021" start="28764" end="28778" title="Eamonn Andrews" label="Eamonn Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q143567" start="29987" end="29998" title="Dentures" label="false teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q168718" start="31516" end="31529" title="The Goon Show" label="The Goon Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966774" start="31584" end="31625" title="I&amp;#x27;m Sorry, I&amp;#x27;ll Read That Again" label="I&amp;#x27;m Sorry, I&amp;#x27;ll Read That Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="31652" end="31664" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732893" start="32064" end="32080" title="Richard Morrison (music critic)" label="Richard Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="32197" end="32213" title="The Daily Mirror" label="The Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790750" start="32308" end="32321" title="The Spectator" label="The Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="32685" end="32701" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="32785" end="32790" title="Punch (magazine)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="34022" end="34034" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q795579" start="34921" end="34938" title="BBC Radio 4 Extra" label="BBC Radio 4 Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q183337" start="36832" end="36850" title="David Attenborough" label="David Attenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q674608" start="37785" end="37788" title="ITV (TV channel)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q961768" start="38015" end="38027" title="Graham Stark" label="Graham Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493149" start="38071" end="38085" title="Sheila Steafel" label="Sheila Steafel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994467" start="38516" end="38526" title="White Bear Theatre" label="White Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="38580" end="38588" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q14993771" start="38592" end="38601" title="Leicester Square Theatre" label="The Venue"/>
<link wikidata="Q848912" start="38603" end="38619" title="Leicester Square" label="Leicester Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274239" start="38679" end="38693" title="Jonathan Rigby" label="Jonathan Rigby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352771" start="38704" end="38719" title="Robin Sebastian" label="Robin Sebastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300629" start="38857" end="38882" title="Royal Variety Performance" label="Royal Variety Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868965" start="38890" end="38905" title="London Coliseum" label="London Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203452" start="39006" end="39023" title="Stephen Critchlow" label="Stephen Critchlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q787211" start="39561" end="39569" title="BBC Four" label="BBC Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="39624" end="39631" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q23762034" start="40676" end="40692" title="Jonathan Hansler" label="Jonathan Hansler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11859910" start="40901" end="40912" title="Frank Bough" label="Frank Bough"/>
<link wikidata="Q710142" start="41081" end="41096" title="Leslie Phillips" label="Leslie Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273478" start="41330" end="41350" title="Jonathan James-Moore" label="Jonathan James-Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q366910" start="41380" end="41389" title="Ron Moody" label="Ron Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231318" start="41516" end="41528" title="David Benson" label="David Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="41775" end="41804" title="The Oxford English Dictionary" label="The Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359130" start="42682" end="42688" title="palare" label="palare"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="51603" wikidata="Q559430" url="?curid=51603" title="Patrick Troughton">
<text>Patrick George Troughton (; 25 March 1920 – 28 March 1987) was an English actor best known for his roles in television and film. He played the second incarnation of the Doctor in the long-running British science-fiction television series &quot;Doctor Who&quot; from 1966 to 1969; he reprised the role from 1972 to 1973 and in 1983 and 1985. His other work includes appearances in several fantasy, science fiction and horror productions including &quot;The Omen&quot; (1976) and &quot;The Box of Delights&quot; (1984).

==Early life==
Troughton was born on 25 March 1920 in Mill Hill, Middlesex, England, to Alec George Troughton (1887–1953), a solicitor, and Dorothy Evelyn Offord (1886–1979), who married in 1914 in Edmonton. Patrick had an elder brother, Alec Robert (1915–1994), and a younger sister, Mary Edith (1923–2005). Troughton attended Mill Hill School and continued to live in Mill Hill for most of his life. While at Mill Hill School, he acted in a production of J. B. Priestley&#x27;s &quot;Bees on the Boat Deck&quot; in March 1937.

Troughton studied at the Embassy School of Acting at Swiss Cottage, being tutored by Eileen Thorndike. He was later awarded an acting scholarship at the Leighton Rallius Studios at the John Drew Memorial Theatre on Long Island, New York, in the United States.

When the Second World War broke out, he abandoned his studies in the U.S. and returned to Great Britain to enlist. During the passage across the North Atlantic Ocean, the ship carrying him struck a sea mine off the coast of Britain, from which he escaped in a lifeboat as the vessel foundered. On arrival back in England, whilst waiting to join the Armed Forces, he briefly worked with the Tonbridge Repertory Company.

In 1940, Troughton enlisted with the Royal Navy, receiving a commission with the Royal Navy Volunteer Reserve in November 1941. He was deployed on East Coast Convoy duty from February to August 1941, and then with Coastal Forces&#x27; Motor Gun Boats based at Great Yarmouth from November 1942 to 1945, operating in the North Sea and English Channel. During his service with the MGBs, he was on one occasion involved in an action against Kriegsmarine E-boats which resulted in one of the enemy craft being destroyed by ramming, whilst Troughton&#x27;s boat and another destroyed two more with their gunfire. His decorations included the 1939–45 Star, the Atlantic Star, and he was mentioned in dispatches &quot;for outstanding courage, leadership and skill in many daring attacks on enemy shipping in hostile waters&quot;. He used to wear a tea cosy on his head in cold weather in the North Sea.

==Career==
===Early career===
After demobilisation, Troughton returned to the theatre. He worked with the Amersham Repertory Company, the Bristol Old Vic Company and the Pilgrim Players at the Mercury Theatre, Notting Hill Gate. He made his television debut in 1947. In 1948, Troughton made his cinema debut with small roles in Olivier&#x27;s &quot;Hamlet&quot;, the Joseph L. Mankiewicz directed &quot;Escape&quot; (one of the stars of which was William Hartnell), and a minor role as a pirate in Disney&#x27;s &quot;Treasure Island&quot; (1950), appearing only during the attack on the heroes&#x27; hut. Television, though, was his favourite medium. In 1953, he became the first actor to play the folk hero Robin Hood on television, starring in six half-hour episodes broadcast from 17 March to 21 April on the BBC, and titled simply &quot;Robin Hood&quot;. Troughton would also make several appearances in &quot;The Adventures of Robin Hood&quot; starring Richard Greene. He appeared as the murderer Tyrrell in Olivier&#x27;s film of &quot;Richard III&quot; (1955). He was also Olivier&#x27;s stand-in on the film and appears in many long shots as Richard.

Troughton&#x27;s other notable film and television roles included Kettle in &quot;Chance of a Lifetime&quot; (1950), Sir Andrew Ffoulkes in &quot;The Scarlet Pimpernel&quot; (1955), Vickers in the episode entitled &quot;Strange Partners&quot; in &quot;The Invisible Man&quot; (1958, the series also featured one of his future &quot;Doctor Who&quot; co-stars, Deborah Watling, as Sally), Phineus in &quot;Jason and the Argonauts&quot; (1963), &quot;Paul of Tarsus&quot; (BBC 1960, title role), &quot;Dr. Finlay&#x27;s Casebook&quot; (BBC 1962, semi-regular), and Quilp in &quot;The Old Curiosity Shop&quot; (1962–63). He voiced Winston Smith in a 1965 BBC Home Service radio adaptation of &quot;Nineteen Eighty-Four&quot;. Prior to &quot;Doctor Who&quot; he appeared in numerous TV shows, including &quot;The Count of Monte Cristo&quot;, &quot;Ivanhoe&quot;, &quot;Dial 999&quot;, &quot;Danger Man&quot;, &quot;Maigret&quot;, &quot;Compact&quot;, &quot;The Third Man&quot;, &quot;Crane&quot;, &quot;Detective&quot;, &quot;Sherlock Holmes&quot;, &quot;No Hiding Place&quot;, &quot;The Saint&quot;, &quot;Armchair Theatre&quot;, &quot;The Wednesday Play&quot;, &quot;Z-Cars&quot;, &quot;Adam Adamant Lives!&quot; and &quot;Softly, Softly&quot;.

Troughton was offered the part of Johnny Ringo in the &quot;Doctor Who&quot; story &quot;The Gunfighters&quot; but turned it down.

===&quot;Doctor Who&quot;===
In 1966, &quot;Doctor Who&quot; producer Innes Lloyd looked for a replacement for William Hartnell in the series&#x27; lead role. The continued survival of the show depended on audiences accepting another actor in the role, despite the bold decision that the replacement would not be a Hartnell lookalike or soundalike. Lloyd later stated that Hartnell had approved of the choice, saying, &quot;There&#x27;s only one man in England who can take over, and that&#x27;s Patrick Troughton&quot;. Lloyd chose Troughton because of his extensive and versatile experience as a character actor. After he was cast, Troughton considered various ways to approach the role, to differentiate his portrayal from Hartnell&#x27;s amiable-yet-tetchy patriarch. Troughton&#x27;s early thoughts about how he might play the Doctor included a &quot;tough sea captain&quot;, and a piratical figure in blackface and turban. &quot;Doctor Who&quot; creator Sydney Newman suggested that the Doctor could be a &quot;cosmic hobo&quot; in the mould of Charlie Chaplin, and this was the interpretation eventually chosen. Troughton was the first Doctor to have his face appear in the opening titles of the show. In one serial, &quot;The Enemy of the World&quot;, Troughton played two parts: as the protagonist (The Doctor) and the antagonist (Salamander).

During his time on the series, Troughton tended to shun publicity and rarely gave interviews. He told one interviewer, &quot;I think acting is magic. If I tell you all about myself it will spoil it&quot;. Years later, he told another interviewer that his greatest concern was that too much publicity would limit his opportunities as a character actor after he left the role.

In a rare interview with Ernest Thompson from &quot;Radio Times&quot;, Troughton revealed that he &quot;always liked dressing up, and would have been happy as a school teacher as children keep one young&quot;. Troughton was popular with both the production team and his co-stars. Producer Lloyd credited Troughton with a &quot;leading actor&#x27;s temperament. He was a father figure to the whole company and hence could embrace it and sweep it along with him&quot;. Troughton also gained a reputation on set as a practical joker.

Many of the early episodes in which Troughton appeared were among those discarded by the BBC. Troughton found &quot;Doctor Who&quot;″s schedule (at the time, 40 to 44 episodes per year) gruelling, and decided to leave the series in 1969, after three years in the role. This decision was also motivated in part by fear of being typecast.

Troughton returned to &quot;Doctor Who&quot; three times after formally leaving the programme. The first of these occasions was in &quot;The Three Doctors&quot;, the 1972–73 serial opening the programme&#x27;s 10th series. In 1983, Troughton overcame some reluctance to reprise his role and agreed to appear in the 20th-anniversary special &quot;The Five Doctors&quot; at the request of series producer John Nathan-Turner. He also agreed to attend &quot;Doctor Who&quot; conventions, including the show&#x27;s 20th anniversary celebrations at Longleat in 1983. He also appeared around the world with Nathan-Turner. Troughton enjoyed the return to the programme so much that he readily agreed to appear one more time as the Second Doctor, with Colin Baker&#x27;s Sixth Doctor in &quot;The Two Doctors&quot; (1985). Reportedly, he also advised Fifth Doctor actor Peter Davison to limit his time in the role to three series to avoid typecasting and the younger actor followed this advice.

In 2013, the BBC commissioned a docudrama about the early days of &quot;Doctor Who&quot;, as part of the programme&#x27;s fiftieth-anniversary celebrations. Troughton appears as a character in the production, called &quot;An Adventure in Space and Time&quot;, portrayed by actor Reece Shearsmith.

In 2014&#x27;s &quot;Robot of Sherwood&quot;, a still image of Troughton from 1953 appears among the future depictions of Robin Hood displayed by the Twelfth Doctor to the outlaw.

===Later career===

After Troughton left &quot;Doctor Who&quot; in 1969, he appeared in various films and television roles. Film roles included Clove in &quot;Scars of Dracula&quot; (1970), a bodysnatcher in &quot;Frankenstein and the Monster from Hell&quot; (1973), Father Brennan in &quot;The Omen&quot; (1976) and Melanthius in &quot;Sinbad and the Eye of the Tiger&quot; (1977). Television roles included the recurring role of Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk, in five of the six episodes of &quot;The Six Wives of Henry VIII&quot; (1970) (for which he commenced rehearsals just one week after completing his final studio recording on &quot;Doctor Who&quot;), the villainous Nasca in Thames Television&#x27;s Aztec-themed drama &quot;The Feathered Serpent&quot; (1976–78), a guest-starring spot in the comedy series &quot;The Goodies&quot; in the episode &quot;The Baddies&quot;, as well as episodes of &quot;Paul Temple&quot;, &quot;Dr. Finlay&#x27;s Casebook&quot;, &quot;Doomwatch&quot;, &quot;The Persuaders!&quot;, &quot;A Family at War&quot;, &quot;Coronation Street&quot;, &quot;Softly, Softly: Task Force&quot;, &quot;Colditz&quot;, &quot;Play for Today&quot;, &quot;Z-Cars&quot;, &quot;Special Branch&quot;, &quot;Sutherland&#x27;s Law&quot;, &quot;The Sweeney&quot;, &quot;Jason King&quot;, &quot;Survivors&quot;, &quot;Crown Court&quot;, &quot;Angels&quot;, &quot;Warship&quot;, &quot;Van der Valk&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;The Onedin Line&quot;, &quot;All Creatures Great and Small&quot;, &quot;Only When I Laugh&quot; (Series 2 Episode 9), &quot;Nanny&quot; and &quot;Minder&quot; (in a March 1984 episode titled &quot;Windows&quot;, Season 4 Episode 9). He also portrayed Cole Hawlings in a BBC Television dramatisation of the John Masefield children&#x27;s book &quot;The Box of Delights&quot; (1984). In the same year he also appeared in a &quot;Two Ronnies&quot; Christmas Special playing a judge.

Troughton&#x27;s health was never completely robust due to heavy drinking and smoking (he had quit smoking in the 1960s, but the damage had already been done). Later in his life he refused to accept his doctor&#x27;s advice after he had developed a serious heart condition through overwork and stress. He suffered two major heart attacks, one in 1979 and the other in 1984, both of which prevented him from working for several months afterwards. Following each of these attacks, his doctor&#x27;s warnings were again ignored, as Troughton committed himself to a heavy TV and film schedule.

He featured in the 1974 11-part radio adaptation of Evelyn Waugh&#x27;s &quot;Sword of Honour&quot;. In 1986, he was a regular in the first series of the LWT sitcom &quot;The Two of Us&quot;, and guested in an episode of &quot;Super Gran&quot; in May 1987, which was the last role he filmed. His final television appearance was in the autumn of the same year in &quot;Knights of God&quot;, which had been filmed two years earlier. Troughton also appeared in the first episode of Central Independent Television&#x27;s &quot;Inspector Morse&quot;, entitled &quot;The Dead of Jericho&quot;, which was originally transmitted on ITV on 6 January 1987.

==Personal life==
Troughton married his first wife, Margaret Dunlop, at the Union Church at Mill Hill on 3 September 1943.

Troughton started living a double life when, just after the birth of his third child in 1955, he chose to leave Dunlop and their three children (then aged eight, five, and a few months) to live with girlfriend Ethel Margaret &quot;Bunny&quot; Nuens, with whom he also went on to have three children. Troughton maintained a deception of having stayed with his original family that was so successful that his own mother died unaware of the separation in 1979, 24 years after Troughton had left Dunlop. Because of the disastrous drama Troughton caused during his divorce from Dunlop, his first daughter, Joanna, vowed never to speak to her father again. Their differences remained unresolved at the time of his death in 1987. While Troughton never married Nuens, in 1976 he did marry Shelagh Holdup and acquired two stepchildren.

Troughton&#x27;s six children are:
* Joanna Troughton (born 1947, to Troughton and Dunlop), author and illustrator of children&#x27;s books
* David Troughton (born 1950, to Troughton and Dunlop), actor
* Michael Troughton (born 1955, to Troughton and Dunlop), actor
* Jane Troughton (born 1956, to Troughton and Nuens)
* Peter Troughton (born 1957, to Troughton and Nuens)
* Mark Troughton (born 1959, to Troughton and Nuens)

Troughton&#x27;s grandchildren include:
* Sam Troughton (son of David Troughton), an actor, known for &quot;Robin Hood&quot;.
* Jim Troughton (son of David Troughton), played professional cricket for England and Warwickshire
* William Troughton (son of David Troughton), an actor who plays Tom Archer in &quot;The Archers&quot;
* Harry Melling (son of Joanna Troughton), an actor, known for Dudley Dursley

==Death==
On 27 March 1987, two days after his 67th birthday, Troughton was a guest at the Magnum Opus Con II science fiction convention in Columbus, Georgia, United States.
Although he had been warned by his doctors before leaving the United Kingdom not to exert himself because of his heart condition, he appeared to be in good spirits and participated vigorously in the day&#x27;s panels, and was looking forward to a belated birthday celebration which was planned for that evening, as well as screenings of all of his surviving complete &quot;Doctor Who&quot; stories, including &quot;The Dominators&quot;, which he was particularly eager to see again. Troughton suffered a third and final heart attack at 7:25 am on 28 March, just after ordering breakfast from the hotel. According to the paramedics who attended the scene, he died instantly.

Troughton was certified dead at the Medical Center (now Piedmont Columbus Regional) in Columbus, Georgia. After a local cremation, his ashes were flown back to England. During the passage to England, the ashes were mislaid temporarily. This delayed his funeral by a few weeks. His widow, Shelagh, later scattered them beneath a newly planted tree in Bushy Park, a favourite place of Troughton&#x27;s near to his family home in Teddington.

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
=== Theatre ===
===Video games===
==References==
==Further reading==
* Roderick Braithwaite. &quot;&#x27;Strikingly Alive&#x27;, The History of the Mill Hill School Foundation 1807–2007&quot;; published Phillimore &amp; Co. 
* Haining, Peter &amp; British Broadcasting Corporation 1984, Doctor Who : the key to time : a year-by-year record, W.H. Allen, London. 
* Howe, David J., Mark Stammers and Stephen James Walker. &quot;Doctor Who: The Sixties&quot;. London: Virgin Publishing, 1993. .
* Troughton, Patrick. Interview with Terry Phillips. KTEH, San Jose, California. 1985.
* Troughton, Michael &quot;Patrick Troughton, by his son Michael Troughton&quot;; published by https://www.michaeltroughton.co.uk
* Vahimagi, Tise. &quot;British Television: An Illustrated Guide&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press / British Film Institute. 1994. .

==External links==
* Patrick Troughton Special Anniversary Edition
* Into The Unknown – Patrick Troughton article at Kasterborous.com
* Patrick Troughton Biography – British Film Institute</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q559430" start="0" end="24" title="Patrick Troughton" label="Patrick George Troughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063885" start="143" end="161" title="Second Doctor" label="second incarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34358" start="165" end="175" title="The Doctor (Doctor Who)" label="the Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q336059" start="204" end="230" title="science-fiction television" label="science-fiction television"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="244" end="254" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q836298" start="452" end="460" title="The Omen" label="The Omen"/>
<link wikidata="Q26174652" start="484" end="503" title="The Box of Delights (TV series)" label="The Box of Delights"/>
<link wikidata="Q149688" start="573" end="582" title="Mill Hill" label="Mill Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="584" end="593" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997321" start="717" end="725" title="Edmonton, London" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858340" start="847" end="863" title="Mill Hill School" label="Mill Hill School"/>
<link wikidata="Q443528" start="976" end="991" title="J. B. Priestley" label="J. B. Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15216553" start="1074" end="1098" title="Embassy Theatre (London)" label="Embassy School of Acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q149590" start="1102" end="1115" title="Swiss Cottage" label="Swiss Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809218" start="1234" end="1243" title="John Drew (actor)" label="John Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="1264" end="1275" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="1277" end="1285" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1319" end="1335" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="1455" end="1475" title="North Atlantic Ocean" label="North Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="1508" end="1516" title="sea mine" label="sea mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q936183" start="1700" end="1709" title="Tonbridge" label="Tonbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893282" start="1710" end="1719" title="Repertory" label="Repertory"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="1767" end="1777" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778989" start="1811" end="1839" title="Royal Navy Volunteer Reserve" label="Royal Navy Volunteer Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138290" start="1944" end="1958" title="Coastal Forces" label="Coastal Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403637" start="1965" end="1979" title="Motor Gun Boat" label="Motor Gun Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q237253" start="1990" end="2004" title="Great Yarmouth" label="Great Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="2050" end="2059" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="2064" end="2079" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="2168" end="2180" title="Kriegsmarine" label="Kriegsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11215470" start="2181" end="2188" title="E-boats" label="E-boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309070" start="2367" end="2379" title="1939–45 Star" label="1939–45 Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757888" start="2385" end="2398" title="Atlantic Star" label="Atlantic Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809982" start="2411" end="2434" title="mentioned in dispatches" label="mentioned in dispatches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067066" start="2571" end="2579" title="tea cosy" label="tea cosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q470188" start="2733" end="2741" title="Amersham" label="Amersham"/>
<link wikidata="Q917960" start="2765" end="2780" title="Bristol Old Vic" label="Bristol Old Vic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818655" start="2820" end="2854" title="Mercury Theatre, Notting Hill Gate" label="Mercury Theatre, Notting Hill Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27178" start="2976" end="2982" title="Hamlet (1948 film)" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q51583" start="2994" end="3014" title="Joseph L. Mankiewicz" label="Joseph L. Mankiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2194153" start="3030" end="3036" title="Escape (1948 film)" label="Escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q361996" start="3074" end="3090" title="William Hartnell" label="William Hartnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q383854" start="3145" end="3160" title="Treasure Island (1950 film)" label="Treasure Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q84164296" start="3326" end="3335" title="folk hero" label="folk hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="3336" end="3346" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="3440" end="3443" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352490" start="3469" end="3479" title="Robin Hood (1953 TV series)" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210870" start="3542" end="3570" title="The Adventures of Robin Hood (TV series)" label="The Adventures of Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309447" start="3586" end="3600" title="Richard Greene" label="Richard Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968853" start="3670" end="3681" title="Richard III (1955 film)" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070753" start="3870" end="3890" title="Chance of a Lifetime (1950 film)" label="Chance of a Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985609" start="3934" end="3955" title="The Scarlet Pimpernel (television series)" label="The Scarlet Pimpernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062833" start="4040" end="4057" title="The Invisible Man (1958 TV series)" label="The Invisible Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102271" start="4147" end="4162" title="Deborah Watling" label="Deborah Watling"/>
<link wikidata="Q641065" start="4175" end="4182" title="Phineus" label="Phineus"/>
<link wikidata="Q785555" start="4192" end="4215" title="Jason and the Argonauts (1963 film)" label="Jason and the Argonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="4236" end="4250" title="Paul of Tarsus" label="Paul of Tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304089" start="4287" end="4313" title="Dr. Finlay&amp;#x27;s Casebook" label="Dr. Finlay&amp;#x27;s Casebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700616" start="4365" end="4387" title="The Old Curiosity Shop" label="The Old Curiosity Shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11428966" start="4415" end="4428" title="Winston Smith (Nineteen Eighty-Four)" label="Winston Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631716" start="4439" end="4455" title="BBC Home Service" label="BBC Home Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="4482" end="4502" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="Nineteen Eighty-Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="4525" end="4535" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727760" start="4592" end="4617" title="The Count of Monte Cristo (1956 TV series)" label="The Count of Monte Cristo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331697" start="4631" end="4638" title="Ivanhoe (1958 TV series)" label="Ivanhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247647" start="4674" end="4684" title="Danger Man" label="Danger Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436377" start="4698" end="4705" title="Maigret (1960 TV series)" label="Maigret"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155265" start="4719" end="4726" title="Compact (TV series)" label="Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q30597453" start="4740" end="4753" title="The Third Man (TV series)" label="The Third Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181990" start="4767" end="4772" title="Crane (TV series)" label="Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481944" start="4809" end="4824" title="Sherlock Holmes (1965 TV series)" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044288" start="4838" end="4853" title="No Hiding Place" label="No Hiding Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248868" start="4867" end="4876" title="The Saint (TV series)" label="The Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248609" start="4890" end="4906" title="Armchair Theatre" label="Armchair Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774096" start="4920" end="4938" title="The Wednesday Play" label="The Wednesday Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q180347" start="4952" end="4958" title="Z-Cars" label="Z-Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678620" start="4972" end="4991" title="Adam Adamant Lives!" label="Adam Adamant Lives!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290845" start="5008" end="5022" title="Softly, Softly (TV series)" label="Softly, Softly"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="5091" end="5101" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085972" start="5120" end="5135" title="The Gunfighters (Doctor Who)" label="The Gunfighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951052" start="5233" end="5244" title="Innes Lloyd" label="Innes Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q361996" start="5274" end="5290" title="William Hartnell" label="William Hartnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q948329" start="5761" end="5776" title="character actor" label="character actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q171692" start="5924" end="5933" title="patriarch" label="patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280214" start="6123" end="6136" title="Sydney Newman" label="Sydney Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="6214" end="6229" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469044" start="6393" end="6415" title="The Enemy of the World" label="The Enemy of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461827" start="6945" end="6956" title="Radio Times" label="Radio Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799894" start="7491" end="7517" title="Doctor Who missing episodes" label="those discarded by the BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="7752" end="7760" title="typecast" label="typecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q626989" start="7900" end="7917" title="The Three Doctors (Doctor Who)" label="The Three Doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768713" start="8109" end="8125" title="The Five Doctors" label="The Five Doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q8262098" start="8166" end="8184" title="John Nathan-Turner" label="John Nathan-Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958056" start="8234" end="8245" title="Science fiction convention" label="conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726158" start="8306" end="8314" title="Longleat" label="Longleat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063885" start="8486" end="8499" title="Second Doctor" label="Second Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q440963" start="8506" end="8517" title="Colin Baker" label="Colin Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560858" start="8525" end="8537" title="Sixth Doctor" label="Sixth Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308787" start="8547" end="8562" title="The Two Doctors" label="The Two Doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509701" start="8605" end="8617" title="Fifth Doctor" label="Fifth Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q358427" start="8624" end="8637" title="Peter Davison" label="Peter Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="8693" end="8704" title="typecasting" label="typecasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q622370" start="8782" end="8791" title="docudrama" label="docudrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749729" start="8972" end="9002" title="An Adventure in Space and Time" label="An Adventure in Space and Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306585" start="9029" end="9045" title="Reece Shearsmith" label="Reece Shearsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q17566356" start="9069" end="9086" title="Robot of Sherwood" label="Robot of Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q14460218" start="9198" end="9212" title="Twelfth Doctor" label="Twelfth Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q764545" start="9388" end="9404" title="Scars of Dracula" label="Scars of Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444741" start="9443" end="9481" title="Frankenstein and the Monster from Hell" label="Frankenstein and the Monster from Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q836298" start="9520" end="9528" title="The Omen" label="The Omen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638262" start="9566" end="9597" title="Sinbad and the Eye of the Tiger" label="Sinbad and the Eye of the Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q503816" start="9660" end="9694" title="Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk" label="Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248039" start="9733" end="9760" title="The Six Wives of Henry VIII (BBC TV series)" label="The Six Wives of Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q541667" start="9919" end="9936" title="Thames Television" label="Thames Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992092" start="9969" end="9990" title="The Feathered Serpent (TV series)" label="The Feathered Serpent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987329" start="10057" end="10068" title="The Goodies (TV series)" label="The Goodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820517" start="10096" end="10107" title="The Baddies (Goodies episode)" label="The Baddies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153955" start="10144" end="10155" title="Paul Temple (TV series)" label="Paul Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304089" start="10169" end="10195" title="Dr. Finlay&amp;#x27;s Casebook" label="Dr. Finlay&amp;#x27;s Casebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297138" start="10209" end="10218" title="Doomwatch" label="Doomwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q389578" start="10232" end="10247" title="The Persuaders!" label="The Persuaders!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363984" start="10261" end="10276" title="A Family at War" label="A Family at War"/>
<link wikidata="Q945030" start="10290" end="10307" title="Coronation Street" label="Coronation Street"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10321" end="10347" title="Softly, Softly: Task Force" label="Softly, Softly: Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879693" start="10361" end="10368" title="Colditz (1972 TV series)" label="Colditz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562040" start="10382" end="10396" title="Play for Today" label="Play for Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q180347" start="10410" end="10416" title="Z-Cars" label="Z-Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461872" start="10430" end="10444" title="Special Branch (TV series)" label="Special Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978321" start="10458" end="10479" title="Sutherland&amp;#x27;s Law" label="Sutherland&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q257679" start="10493" end="10504" title="The Sweeney" label="The Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506823" start="10518" end="10528" title="Jason King (TV series)" label="Jason King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226179" start="10542" end="10551" title="Survivors (1975 TV series)" label="Survivors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3698723" start="10565" end="10576" title="Crown Court (TV series)" label="Crown Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849529" start="10590" end="10596" title="Angels (TV series)" label="Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q151370" start="10610" end="10617" title="Warship (1973 TV series)" label="Warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269958" start="10631" end="10643" title="Van der Valk" label="Van der Valk"/>
<link wikidata="Q748615" start="10671" end="10686" title="The Onedin Line" label="The Onedin Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192946" start="10700" end="10729" title="All Creatures Great and Small (1978 TV series)" label="All Creatures Great and Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515301" start="10743" end="10760" title="Only When I Laugh (TV series)" label="Only When I Laugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963918" start="10795" end="10800" title="Nanny (TV series)" label="Nanny"/>
<link wikidata="Q632653" start="10817" end="10823" title="Minder (TV series)" label="Minder"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="10941" end="10955" title="BBC Television" label="BBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q471413" start="10977" end="10991" title="John Masefield" label="John Masefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q26174652" start="11019" end="11038" title="The Box of Delights (TV series)" label="The Box of Delights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325878" start="11098" end="11109" title="Two Ronnies" label="Two Ronnies"/>
<link wikidata="Q107002" start="11795" end="11807" title="Evelyn Waugh" label="Evelyn Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679276" start="11821" end="11836" title="Sword of Honour" label="Sword of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076979" start="11897" end="11900" title="LWT" label="LWT"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030041" start="11914" end="11927" title="The Two of Us (1986 TV series)" label="The Two of Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q847177" start="11970" end="11980" title="Super Gran" label="Super Gran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236558" start="12111" end="12125" title="Knights of God" label="Knights of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q10444865" start="12222" end="12252" title="Central Independent Television" label="Central Independent Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685847" start="12266" end="12281" title="Inspector Morse (TV series)" label="Inspector Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="12367" end="12370" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240511" start="13485" end="13500" title="David Troughton" label="David Troughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834961" start="13547" end="13564" title="Michael Troughton" label="Michael Troughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041680" start="13812" end="13825" title="Sam Troughton" label="Sam Troughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q40028" start="13878" end="13888" title="Robin Hood (2006 TV series)" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525964" start="13898" end="13911" title="Jim Troughton" label="Jim Troughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="13958" end="13965" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725705" start="13982" end="13994" title="Warwickshire County Cricket Club" label="Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q106242253" start="13997" end="14014" title="William Troughton" label="William Troughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q386813" start="14080" end="14091" title="The Archers" label="The Archers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671042" start="14100" end="14113" title="Harry Melling (actor)" label="Harry Melling"/>
<link wikidata="Q208255" start="14161" end="14175" title="Dudley Dursley" label="Dudley Dursley"/>
<link wikidata="Q21015803" start="14268" end="14283" title="Magnum Opus Con" label="Magnum Opus Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958056" start="14287" end="14313" title="science fiction convention" label="science fiction convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q239870" start="14317" end="14334" title="Columbus, Georgia" label="Columbus, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469000" start="14766" end="14780" title="The Dominators" label="The Dominators"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="14871" end="14883" title="heart attack" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q239870" start="15113" end="15130" title="Columbus, Georgia" label="Columbus, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017532" start="15376" end="15386" title="Bushy Park" label="Bushy Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281721" start="15453" end="15463" title="Teddington" label="Teddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q15430623" start="15875" end="15889" title="David J. Howe" label="Howe, David J."/>
<link wikidata="Q3138589" start="15976" end="15993" title="Virgin Publishing" label="Virgin Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6336174" start="16056" end="16060" title="KQEH" label="KTEH"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="16062" end="16082" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="16292" end="16298" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="16300" end="16323" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="16326" end="16348" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
