<doc id="53353" wikidata="Q2027162" url="?curid=53353" title="Gateway Arch">
<text>The Gateway Arch is a monument in St. Louis, Missouri, United States. Clad in stainless steel and built in the form of a weighted catenary arch, it is the world&#x27;s tallest arch and Missouri&#x27;s tallest accessible structure. Some sources consider it the tallest human-made monument in the Western Hemisphere. Built as a monument to the westward expansion of the United States and officially dedicated to &quot;the American people&quot;, the Arch, commonly referred to as &quot;The Gateway to the West&quot;, is a National Historic Landmark in Gateway Arch National Park and has become a popular tourist destination, as well as an internationally recognized symbol of St. Louis.

The Arch was designed by the Finnish-American architect Eero Saarinen in 1947, and construction began on February 12, 1963 and was completed on October 28, 1965, at an overall cost of $13 million (equivalent to $ in ). The monument opened to the public on June 10, 1967. 
It is located at the 1764 site of the founding of St. Louis on the west bank of the Mississippi River.

==Historical background==
===Inception and funding (1933–1935)===
Around late 1933, civic leader Luther Ely Smith, returning to St. Louis from the George Rogers Clark National Historical Park in Vincennes, Indiana, saw the St. Louis riverfront area and envisioned that building a memorial there would both revive the riverfront and stimulate the economy. He communicated his idea to mayor Bernard Dickmann, who on December 15, 1933, raised it in a meeting with city leaders. They sanctioned the proposal, and the nonprofit Jefferson National Expansion Memorial Association (JNEMA—pronounced &quot;Jenny May&quot;) was formed. Smith was appointed chairman and Dickmann vice chairman. The association&#x27;s goal was to create:

Many locals did not approve of depleting public funds for the cause. Smith&#x27;s daughter SaLees related that when &quot;people would tell him we needed more practical things&quot;, he would respond that &quot;spiritual things&quot; were equally important.

The association expected that $30 million would be needed to undertake the construction of such a monument (about $ in dollars). It called upon the federal government to foot three-quarters of the bill ($22.5 million).
The suggestion to renew the riverfront was not original, as previous projects were attempted but lacked popularity. The Jefferson memorial idea emerged amid the economic disarray of the Great Depression and promised new jobs. The project was expected to create 5,000 jobs for three to four years. Committee members began to raise public awareness by organizing fundraisers and writing pamphlets. They also engaged Congress by planning budgets and preparing bills, in addition to researching ownership of the land they had chosen, &quot;approximately one-half mile in length  ... from Third Street east to the present elevated railroad.&quot; In January 1934, Senator Bennett Champ Clark and Representative John Cochran introduced to Congress an appropriation bill seeking $30 million for the memorial, but the bill failed to garner support due to the large amount of money solicited. In March of the same year, joint resolutions proposed the establishment of a federal commission to develop the memorial. Although the proposal aimed for only authorization, the bill incurred opposition because people suspected that JNEMA would later seek appropriation. On March 28 the Senate bill was reported out, and on April 5 it was turned over to the House Library Committee, which later reported favorably on the bills. On June 8, both the Senate and House bills were passed. On June 15, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed the bill into law, instituting the United States Territorial Expansion Memorial Commission. The commission comprised 15 members, chosen by Roosevelt, the House, the Senate, and JNEMA. It first convened on December 19 in St. Louis, where members examined the project and its planned location.

Meanwhile, in December, the JNEMA discussed organizing an architectural competition to determine the design of the monument. Local architect Louis LaBeaume had drawn up competition guidelines by January 1935. On April 13, 1935, the commission certified JNEMA&#x27;s project proposals, including memorial perimeters, the &quot;historical significance&quot; of the memorial, the competition, and the $30 million budget. Between February and April, the Missouri State Legislature passed an act allowing the use of bonds to facilitate the project. On April 15, then Governor Guy B. Park signed it into law. Dickmann and Smith applied for funding from two New Deal agencies—the Public Works Administration (headed by Harold Ickes) and the Works Progress Administration (headed by Harry Hopkins). On August 7, both Ickes and Hopkins assented to the funding requests, each promising $10 million, and said that the National Park Service (NPS) would manage the memorial. A local bond issue election granting $7.5 million (about $ in dollars) for the memorial&#x27;s development was held on September 10 and passed.

On December 21, President Roosevelt signed Executive Order 7253 to approve the memorial, allocating the 82-acre area as the first National Historic Site. The order also appropriated $3.3 million through the WPA and $3.45 million through the PWA ($6.75 million in total). The motivation of the project was two-fold—commemorating westward expansion and creating jobs. Some taxpayers began to file suits to block the construction of the monument, which they called a &quot;boondoggle&quot;.

===Initial planning (1936–1939)===
Using the 1935 grant of $6.75 million and $2.25 million in city bonds, the NPS acquired the historic buildings within the historic site—through condemnation rather than purchase—and demolished them. By September 1938, condemnation was complete. The condemnation was subject to many legal disputes which culminated on January 27, 1939, when the United States Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that condemnation was valid. A total of $6.2 million was distributed to land owners on June 14. Demolition commenced on October 9, 1939, when Dickmann extracted three bricks from a vacant warehouse.

Led by Paul Peters, adversaries of the memorial delivered to Congress a leaflet titled &quot;Public Necessity or Just Plain Pork&quot;. The JNEMA&#x27;s lawyer, Bon Geaslin, believed that the flyers did not taint the project, but motivated members of Congress to find out more about the same. Although Representative John Cochran wanted to ask Congress to approve more funds, Geaslin believed the association should &quot;keep a low profile, maintaining its current position during this session of Congress&quot;. He advised the association to &quot;get a good strong editorial in one of the papers to the effect that a small group of tenants ... is soliciting funds [to fight] the proposed improvement, and stating that these efforts do not represent the consensus of opinion in St. Louis ... , and pointing out that such obstructions should be condemned&quot;.

Congress&#x27;s reduction in spending made it impossible for the allocated funds to be obtained. NPS responded that the city would reduce its contribution if the federal government did. It also asserted that the funds were sanctioned by an executive order, but superintendent John Nagle pointed out that what &quot;one Executive Order does, another can undo&quot;. In March 1936, Representative Cochran commented during a House meeting that he &quot;would not vote for any measure providing for building the memorial or allotting funds to it&quot;. Geaslin found Cochran&#x27;s statements to be a greater hindrance to the project than Paul Peters&#x27; opposition, for Congress might have Cochran&#x27;s opinions as representative of public opinion.

Peters and other opponents asked Roosevelt to rescind Executive Order 7253 and to redirect the money to the American Red Cross. Smith impugned their motives, accusing them of being &quot;opposed to anything that is ever advanced in behalf of the city.&quot; In February 1936, an editorial written by Paul W. Ward in &quot;The Nation&quot; denounced the project. Smith was infuriated, fearing the impact of attacks from a prestigious magazine, and wanted &quot;to jump on it strong with hammer and tongs&quot;. William Allen White, a renowned newspaper editor, advised Smith not to fret.

Because the Mississippi River played an essential role in establishing St. Louis&#x27;s identity as the gateway to the west, it was felt that a memorial commemorating it should be near the river. Railroad tracks that had been constructed in the 1930s on the levee obstructed views of the riverfront from the memorial site. When Ickes declared that the railway must be removed before he would allocate funds for the memorial, President of the St. Louis Board of Public Service Baxter Brown suggested that &quot;a new tunnel ... conceal the relocated tracks and re-grading of the site to elevate it over the tunnel. These modifications would eliminate the elevated and surface tracks and open up the views to the river.&quot; Although rejected by NPS architect Charles Peterson, Brown&#x27;s proposal formed the basis for the ultimate settlement.

By May 1942, demolition was complete. The Old Cathedral and the Old Rock House, because of their historical significance, were the only buildings retained within the historic site. The Old Rock House was later dismantled in 1959 with the intention of reassembling it at a new location, but pieces of the building went missing. Part of the house has been reconstructed in the basement of the Old Courthouse.

===Design competition (1945–1948)===
In November 1944, Smith discussed with Newton Drury, the National Park Service Director, the design of the memorial, asserting that the memorial should be &quot;transcending in spiritual and aesthetic values&quot;, best represented by &quot;one central feature: a single shaft, a building, an arch, or something else that would symbolize American culture and civilization.&quot;

The idea of an architectural competition to determine the design of the memorial was favored at the JNEMA&#x27;s inaugural meeting. They planned to award cash for the best design. In January 1945, the JNEMA officially announced a two-stage design competition that would cost $225,000 to organize. Smith and the JNEMA struggled to raise the funds, garnering only a third of the required total by June 1945. Then mayor Aloys Kaufmann feared that the lack of public support would lead officials to abandon hope in the project. The passage of a year brought little success, and Smith frantically underwrote the remaining $40,000 in May 1946. By June, Smith found others to assume portions of his underwriting, with $17,000 remaining under his sponsorship. In February 1947, the underwriters were compensated, and the fund stood at over $231,199.

Local architect Louis LaBeaume prepared a set of specifications for the design, and architect George Howe was chosen to coordinate the competition. On May 30, 1947, the contest officially opened. The seven-member jury that would judge the designs comprised Charles Nagel Jr., Richard Neutra, Roland Wank, William Wurster, LaBeaume, Fiske Kimball, and S. Herbert Hare. The competition comprised two stages—the first to narrow down the designers to five and the second to single out one architect and his design. The design intended to include:

Saarinen&#x27;s team included himself as designer, J. Henderson Barr as associate designer, and Dan Kiley as landscape architect, as well as Lily Swann Saarinen as sculptor and Alexander Girard as painter. In the first stage of the competition, Carl Milles advised Saarinen to change the bases of each leg to triangles instead of squares. Saarinen said that he &quot;worked at first with mathematical shapes, but finally adjusted it according to the eye.&quot; At submission, Saarinen&#x27;s plans laid out the arch at tall and wide from center to center of the triangle bases.

On September 1, 1947, submissions for the first stage were received by the jury. The submissions were labeled by numbers only, and the names of the designers were kept anonymous. Upon four days of deliberation, the jury narrowed down the 172 submissions, which included Saarinen&#x27;s father Eliel, to five finalists, and announced the corresponding numbers to the media on September 27. Eero Saarinen&#x27;s design (#144) was among the finalists, and comments written on it included &quot;relevant, beautiful, perhaps inspired would be the right word&quot; (Roland Wank) and &quot;an abstract form peculiarly happy in its symbolism&quot; (Charles Nagel). Hare questioned the feasibility of the design but appreciated the thoughtfulness behind it. Local St. Louis architect Harris Armstrong was also one of the finalists. The secretary who sent out the telegrams informing finalists of their advancement mistakenly sent one to Eliel rather than Eero. The family celebrated with champagne, and two hours later, a competition representative called to correct the mistake. Eliel &quot;&#x27;broke out a second bottle of champagne&#x27; to toast his son.&quot; They proceeded to the second stage, and each was given a $10,069 prize (about $ in dollars). Saarinen changed the height of the arch from 580 feet to and wrote that the arch symbolized &quot;the gateway to the West, the national expansion, and whatnot.&quot; He wanted the landscape surrounding the arch to &quot;be so densely covered with trees that it will be a forest-like park, a green retreat from the tension of the downtown city,&quot; according to &quot;The New York Times&quot; architectural critic Aline Bernstein Louchheim. The deadline for the second stage arrived on February 10, 1948, and on February 18, the jury chose Saarinen&#x27;s design unanimously, praising its &quot;profoundly evocative and truly monumental expression.&quot; The following day, during a formal dinner at Statler Hotel that the finalists and the media attended, Wurster pronounced Saarinen the winner of the competition and awarded the checks—$40,000 to his team and $50,000 to Saarinen. The competition was the first major architectural design that Saarinen developed unaided by his father.

On May 25, the United States Territorial Expansion Memorial Commission endorsed the design. Later, in June, the NPS approved the proposal. Representative H. R. Gross, however, opposed the allocation of federal funds for the arch&#x27;s development.

The design drew varied responses. In a February 29, 1948, &quot;The New York Times&quot; article, Louchheim praised the arch&#x27;s design as &quot;a modern monument, fitting, beautiful and impressive.&quot; Some local residents likened it to a &quot;stupendous hairpin and a stainless steel hitching post.&quot; The most aggressive criticism emerged from Gilmore D. Clarke, whose February 26, 1948, letter compared Saarinen&#x27;s arch to an arch imagined by fascist Benito Mussolini, rendering the arch a fascist symbol. This allegation of plagiarism ignited fierce debates among architects about its validity. Douglas Haskell from New York wrote that &quot;The use of a common form is not plagiarism ... [T]his particular accusation amounts to the filthiest smear that has been attempted by a man highly placed in the architectural profession in our generation.&quot; Wurster and the jury refuted the charges, arguing that &quot;the arch form was not inherently fascist but was indeed part of the entire history of architecture.&quot; Saarinen considered the opposition absurd, asserting, &quot;It&#x27;s just preposterous to think that a basic form, based on a completely natural figure, should have any ideological connection.&quot;

By January 1951, Saarinen created 21 &quot;drawings, including profiles of the Arch, scale drawings of the museums and restaurants, various parking proposals, the effect of the levee-tunnel railroad plan on the Arch footings, the Arch foundations, the Third Street Expressway, and the internal and external structure of the Arch.&quot; Fred Severud made calculations for the arch&#x27;s structure.

===Railroad agreement (1949–1958)===

Several proposals were offered for moving the railroad tracks, including:
* Bates-Ross. Tracks would cross the memorial site diagonally in a tunnel.
* Bowen. Similar to Bates-Ross proposal.
* Hill-Tunnel. Supported by Saarinen and NPS engineer Julian Spotts, it would route the tracks in a tunnel below Second and First Streets. Saarinen further said that if the tracks passed between the memorial and the river, he would withdraw his participation.
* LaBeaume-Terminal. Opposed by Saarinen and the NPS, it would lay &quot;three tracks on a contained fill along the lines of the elevated tracks.&quot;
* Levee-Tunnel. Proposed by Frank J. McDevitt, president of the St. Louis Board of Public Service, it would lower the tracks into a tunnel concealed by walls and landscaping.

On July 7, 1949, in Mayor Joseph Darst&#x27;s office, city officials chose the Levee-Tunnel plan, rousing JNEMA members who held that the decision had been pressed through when Smith was away on vacation. Darst notified Secretary of the Interior Julius Krug of the city&#x27;s selection. Krug planned to meet with Smith and JNEMA but canceled the meeting and resigned on November 11. His successor, Oscar L. Chapman, rescheduled the meeting for December 5 in Washington with delegates from the city government, JNEMA, railroad officials, and Federal government. A day after the conference, they ratified a memorandum of understanding about the plan: &quot;The five tracks on the levee would be replaced by three tracks, one owned by the Missouri Pacific Railroad (MPR) and two by the Terminal Railroad Association of St. Louis (TRRA) proceeding through a tunnel not longer than 3,000 feet. The tunnel would be approximately fifty feet west of the current elevated line.&quot; It would also have an overhead clearance of , lower than the regular requirement of . Chapman approved the document on December 22, 1949, and JNEMA garnered the approval of the Missouri Public Service Commission on August 7, 1952.

Efforts to appropriate congressional funds began in January 1950 but were delayed until 1953 by the Korean War&#x27;s depletion of federal funds.

In August 1953, Secretary of the Interior Fred A. Seaton declared that the Department of the Interior and the railroads should finalize the agreement on the new route. In October, NPS and the TRRA decided that the TRRA would employ a surveyor endorsed by Spotts &quot;to survey, design, estimate, and report on&quot; the expenses of shifting the tracks. They chose Alfred Benesch and Associates, which released its final report on May 3, 1957. The firm estimated that the two proposals would cost more than expected: more than $11 million and $14 million, respectively. NPS director Conrad Wirth enjoined Saarinen to make small modifications to the design. In October, Saarinen redrafted the plans, suggesting:

On November 29, involved interests signed another memorandum of understanding approving Saarinen&#x27;s rework; implementing it would cost about $5.053 million. On March 10, 1959, mayor Raymond Tucker proposed that they drop &quot;the tunnel idea in favor of open cuts roofed with concrete slabs,&quot; which would cost $2.684 million, $1.5 million less than the cost of the approved plan. On May 12, 1958, Tucker, TRRA president Armstrong Chinn, and Missouri Pacific Railroad president Russell Dearmont entered a written agreement: &quot;The TRRA would place $500,000 in escrow for the project, and the city [would] sell $980,000 of the 1935 bonds to match the Federal contribution.&quot; Director Wirth and Secretary Seaton approved the plan on June 2.

In July 1953, Representative Leonor Sullivan introduced H.R. 6549, a bill authorizing the allocation of no more than $5 million to build the arch. After much negotiation, both houses of Congress approved the bill in May 1954, and on May 18, 1954, President Dwight D. Eisenhower signed the bill into law as Public Law 361. Congress could not afford to appropriate the funds in 1955, so association president William Crowdus resorted to asking the Rockefeller and Ford Foundations for $10 million. The foundations denied the request because their function as private foundations did not include funding national memorials. In 1956, Congress appropriated $2.64 million to be used to move the railroad tracks. The remainder of the authorized appropriation was requested via six congressional bills, introduced on July 1, 1958, that revised Public Law 361 to encompass the cost of the entire memorial, increasing federal funds by $12.25 million. A month later the Department of the Interior and the Bureau of the Budget endorsed the bill, and both houses of Congress unanimously passed the bill. Eisenhower signed it into law on September 7. The NPS held off on appropriating the additional funds, as it planned to use the already-appropriated funds to initiate the railroad work.

===Final preparations (1959–1968)===

Saarinen and city functionaries collaborated to zone buildings near the arch. In April 1959, real estate developer Lewis Kitchen decided to construct two 40-level edifices across from the arch. In July, after the plan was condemned for its potential obstruction of the arch, Kitchen discussed the issue with officials. A decision was delayed for several months because Saarinen had yet to designate the arch&#x27;s height, projected between . By October, Mayor Tucker and Director Wirth resolved to restrict the height of buildings opposite the arch to (about 27 levels), and the city stated that plans for buildings opposite the arch would require its endorsement. Kitchen then decreased the height of his buildings, while Saarinen increased that of the arch.

Moving the railroad tracks was the first stage of the project. On May 6, 1959, after an official conference, the Public Service Commission called for ventilation to accompany the tunnel&#x27;s construction, which entailed &quot;placing 3,000 feet of dual tracks into a tunnel 105 feet west of the elevated railroad, along with filling, grading, and trestle work.&quot; Eight bids for the work were reviewed on June 8 in the Old Courthouse, and the MacDonald Construction Co. of St. Louis won with a bid of $2,426,115, less than NPS&#x27;s estimate of the cost. At 10:30 a.m. on June 23, 1959, the groundbreaking ceremony occurred; Tucker spaded the first portion of earth. Wirth and Dickmann delivered speeches.

The NPS acquired the $500,000 in escrow and transferred it to MacDonald to begin building the new tracks. In August, demolition of the Old Rock House was complete, with workers beginning to excavate the tunnel. In November, they began shaping the tunnel&#x27;s walls with concrete. Twenty-nine percent of the construction was completed by March and 95% by November. On November 17, trains began to use the new tracks. June 1962 was the projected date of fruition.

On May 16, 1959, the Senate appropriations subcommittee received from St. Louis legislators a request for $2.4911 million, of which it granted only $133,000. Wirth recommended that they reseek the funds in January 1960.

On March 10, 1959, Regional Director Howard Baker received $888,000 as the city&#x27;s first subsidy for the project. On December 1, 1961, $23,003,150 in total had been authorized, with $19,657,483 already appropriated—$3,345,667 remained not yet appropriated.

==Construction==
The bidding date, originally December 20, 1961, was postponed to January 22, 1962, to clarify the details of the arch construction. About 50 companies that had requested the construction requirements received bidding invitations. Extending from $11,923,163 to $12,765,078, all four bids exceeded the engineer estimate of $8,067,000. Wirth had a committee led by George Hartzog determine the validity of the bids in light of the government&#x27;s conditions. Following a meeting with the bidders, the committee affirmed the bids&#x27; reasonableness, and Wirth awarded the lowest bidder, MacDonald Construction Co. of St. Louis, the contract for the construction of the arch and the visitor center. On March 14, 1962, he signed the contract and received from Tucker $2.5 million, the city&#x27;s subsidy for the phase. MacDonald reduced its bid $500,000 to $11,442,418. The Pittsburgh-Des Moines Steel Company served as the subcontractor for the shell of the arch.

In 1959 and 1960, ground was broken, and in 1961, the foundation of the structure was laid. Construction of the arch itself began on February 12, 1963, as the first steel triangle on the south leg was eased into place. These steel triangles, which narrowed as they rose to the top, were raised into place by a group of cranes and derricks. The arch was assembled of 142 prefabricated stainless steel sections. Once in place, each section had its double-walled skin filled with concrete, prestressed with 252 tension bars. In order to keep the partially completed legs steady, a scissors truss was placed between them at , later removed as the derricks were taken down. The whole endeavor was expected to be completed by fall 1964, in observance of St. Louis&#x27;s bicentennial.

Contractor MacDonald Construction Co. arranged a tower for spectators and provided recorded accounts of the undertaking. In 1963, a million people went to observe the progress, and by 1964, local radio stations began to broadcast when large slabs of steel were to be raised into place. &quot;St. Louis Post-Dispatch&quot; photographer Art Witman documented the construction for the newspaper&#x27;s Sunday supplement &quot;Pictures&quot;, his longest and most noted assignment. He visited the construction site frequently from 1963 to 1967 recording of every stage of progress. With assistant Renyold Ferguson, he crawled along the catwalks with the construction workers up to 190m above the ground. He was the only news photographer on permanent assignment at the construction, with complete access. He primarily worked with slide film but also used the only Panox camera in St. Louis to create panoramic photographs covering 140 degrees. Witman&#x27;s pictures of the construction are now housed in the State Historical Society of Missouri.

The project manager of MacDonald Construction Co., Stan Wolf, said that a 62-story building was easier to build than the arch: &quot;In a building, everything is straight up, one thing on top of another. In this arch, everything is curved.&quot;

===Delays and lawsuits===

Although an actuarial firm predicted thirteen workers would die while building the arch, no workers were killed during the monument&#x27;s construction. However, construction of the arch was still often delayed by safety checks, funding uncertainties, and legal disputes.

Civil rights activists regarded the construction of the arch as a token of racial discrimination. On July 14, 1964, during the workers&#x27; lunchtime, civil rights protesters Percy Green and Richard Daly, both members of Congress of Racial Equality, climbed up the north leg of the arch to &quot;expose the fact that federal funds were being used to build a national monument that was racially discriminating against black contractors and skilled black workers.&quot; As the pair disregarded demands to get off, protesters on the ground demanded that at least 10% of the skilled jobs belong to African Americans. Four hours later, Green and Daly dismounted from the arch to charges of &quot;trespassing, peace disturbance, and resisting arrest.&quot; This incident &quot;inter alia&quot; spurred the United States Department of Justice to file the first pattern or practice case against AFL–CIO under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, on February 4, 1966, but the department later called off the charges. The 1966 lawsuit was an attempt by the Office of Federal Contract Compliance (OFCC) to desegregate building-trade unions nationwide. Many technical building unions had little or no African-American representation into the mid-1960s. During Lyndon Johnson&#x27;s presidency, the federal government recognized the need for more integration in all levels of society and started enforcing equal employment opportunity through federally funded job contracts.

In 1964, the Pittsburgh-Des Moines Steel Company of Warren, Pennsylvania, sued MacDonald for $665,317 for tax concerns. In 1965, NPS requested that Pittsburgh-Des Moines Steel remove the prominent letters &quot;P-D-M&quot; (its initials) from a creeper derrick used for construction, contending that it was promotional and violated federal law with regards to advertising on national monuments. Although Pittsburgh-Des Moines Steel initially refused to pursue what it considered a precarious venture, the company relented after discovering that leaving the initials would cost $225,000 and after that, $42,000 per month, and the NPS dropped its lawsuit.

On October 26, 1965, the International Association of Ironworkers delayed work to ascertain that the arch was safe. After NPS director Kenneth Chapman gave his word that conditions were &quot;perfectly safe,&quot; construction resumed on October 27. After the discovery of 16 defects, the tram was also delayed from running. The Bi-State Development Agency assessed that it suffered losses of $2,000 for each day the trains were stagnant.

On January 7, 1966, members of AFL–CIO deserted their work on the visitor center, refusing to work with plumbers affiliated with Congress of Industrial Unions (CIU), which represented black plumbers. A representative of AFL–CIO said, &quot;This policy has nothing to do with race. Our experience is that these CIU members have in the past worked for substandard wages.&quot; CIU applied to the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) for an injunction that required the AFL–CIO laborers to return to work. On February 7, Judge John Keating Regan ruled that AFL–CIO workers had participated in a secondary boycott. By February 11, AFL–CIO resumed work on the arch, and an AFL–CIO contractor declared that ten African Americans were apprenticed for arch labor. The standstill in work lasted a month.

===Topping out and dedication===

President Lyndon B. Johnson and Mayor Alfonso J. Cervantes decided on a date for the topping-out ceremony, but the arch had not been completed by then. The ceremony date was reset to October 17, 1965; workers strained to meet the deadline, taking double shifts, but by October 17, the arch was still not complete. The chairman of the ceremony anticipated the ceremony to be held on October 30, a Saturday, to allow 1,500 schoolchildren, whose signatures were to be placed in a time capsule, to attend. Ultimately, PDM set the ceremony date to October 28.

The time capsule, containing the signatures of 762,000 students and others, was welded into the keystone before the final piece was set in place. On October 28, the arch was topped out as then Vice President Hubert Humphrey observed from a helicopter. A Catholic priest and a rabbi prayed over the keystone, a , triangular section. It was slated to be inserted at 10:00 a.m. local time but was done 30 minutes early because thermal expansion had constricted the gap at the top by . To mitigate this, workers used fire hoses to spray water on the surface of the south leg to cool it down and make it contract. The keystone was inserted in 13 minutes with only remaining. For the next section, a hydraulic jack had to pry apart the legs . The last section was left only . By noon, the keystone was secured. Some filmmakers, in hope that the two legs would not meet, had chronicled every phase of construction.

The Gateway Arch was expected to open to the public by 1964, but in 1967 the public relations agency stopped forecasting the opening date. The arch&#x27;s visitor center opened on June 10, 1967, and the tram began operating on July 24.

The arch was dedicated by Humphrey on May 25, 1968. He declared that the arch was &quot;a soaring curve in the sky that links the rich heritage of yesterday with the richer future of tomorrow&quot; and brings a &quot;new purpose&quot; and a &quot;new sense of urgency to wipe out every slum.&quot; &quot;Whatever is shoddy, whatever is ugly, whatever is waste, whatever is false, will be measured and condemned&quot; in comparison to the Gateway Arch. About 250,000 people were expected to attend, but rain canceled the outdoor activities. The ceremony had to be transferred into the visitor center. After the dedication, Humphrey crouched beneath an exit as he waited for the rain to subside so he could walk to his vehicle.

===After completion===
The project did not provide 5,000 jobs as expected—as of June 1964, workers numbered fewer than 100. The project did, however, incentivize other riverfront restoration efforts, totaling $150 million. Building projects included a 50,000-seat sports stadium, a 30-story hotel, several office towers, four parking garages, and an apartment complex. The idea of a Disneyland amusement park that included &quot;synthetic riverboat attractions&quot; was considered but later abandoned. The developers hoped to use the arch as a commercial catalyst, attracting visitors who would use their services. One estimate found that since the 1960s, the arch has incited almost $503 million worth of construction.

In June 1976, the memorial was finalized by federal allocations—&quot;the statue of Thomas Jefferson was unveiled, the Museum of Westward Expansion was previewed, a theater under the Arch was dedicated in honor of Mayor Raymond Tucker and the catenary-like curving staircases from the Arch down to the levee were built.&quot;

==Characteristics==

===Physical characteristics===

Both the width and height of the arch are . The arch is the tallest memorial in the United States and the tallest stainless steel monument in the world.

The cross-sections of the arch&#x27;s legs are equilateral triangles, narrowing from per side at the bases to per side at the top. Each wall consists of a stainless steel skin covering a sandwich of two carbon-steel walls with reinforced concrete in the middle from ground level to , with carbon steel to the peak. The arch is hollow to accommodate a unique tram system that takes visitors to an observation deck at the top.

The structural load is supported by a stressed-skin design. Each leg is embedded in of concrete thick and deep. of the foundation is in bedrock. The arch is resistant to earthquakes and is designed to sway up to in either direction, while withstanding winds up to . The structure weighs , of which concrete composes ; structural steel interior, ; and the 6.3mm thick grade 304 stainless steel panels that cover the exterior of the arch, . This amount of stainless steel is the most used in any one project in history.

===Mathematical elements===

The geometric form of the structure was set by mathematical equations provided to Saarinen by the German-American engineer Hannskarl Bandel. Bruce Detmers and other architects expressed the geometric form in blueprints with this equation:

formula_1,

with the constants

formula_2

formula_3

where &quot;fc&quot; = is the maximum height of centroid, &quot;Qb&quot; = is the maximum cross sectional area of arch at base, &quot;Qt&quot; = is the minimum cross sectional area of arch at top, and &quot;L&quot; = is the half width of centroid at the base. The triangular cross sectional area varies linearly with the vertical height of its centroid.

This hyperbolic cosine function describes the shape of a catenary. A chain that supports only its own weight forms a catenary; the chain is purely in tension. Likewise, an inverted catenary arch that supports only its own weight is purely in compression, with no shear. The catenary arch is the stablest of all arches since the thrust passes through the legs and is absorbed in the foundations, instead of forcing the legs apart. The Gateway Arch itself is not a common catenary, but a more general curve of the form &quot;y&quot;=&quot;A&quot;cosh (&quot;Bx&quot;). This makes it an &quot;inverted weighted catenary.&quot; Saarinen chose a weighted catenary over a normal catenary curve because it looked less pointed and less steep. In 1959, he caused some confusion about the actual shape of the arch when he wrote, &quot;This arch is not a true parabola, as is often stated. Instead it is a catenary curve—the curve of a hanging chain—a curve in which the forces of thrust are continuously kept within the center of the legs of the arch.&quot; William V. Thayer, a professor of mathematics at St. Louis Community College, later wrote to the &quot;St. Louis Post-Dispatch&quot; calling attention to the fact that the structure was a weighted catenary.

===Lighting===
The first proposal to illuminate the arch at night was announced on May 18, 1966, but the plan never came to fruition. In July 1998, funding for an arch lighting system was approved by St. Louis&#x27;s Gateway Foundation, which agreed to take responsibility for the cost of the equipment, its installation, and its upkeep. In January 1999, MSNBC arranged a temporary lighting system for the arch so the monument could be used as the background for a visit by Pope John Paul II. Since November 2001, the arch has been bathed in white light between 10 p.m. and 1 a.m. via a system of floodlights. Designed by Randy Burkett, it comprises 44 lighting fixtures situated in four pits just below ground level.

On October 5, 2004, the U.S. Senate, at the pressing of both of Missouri&#x27;s US Senators, Jim Talent and Kit Bond, approved a bill permitting the illumination in pink of the arch in honor of breast cancer awareness month. Both Estee Lauder and May Department Store Co. had championed the cause. One employee said that the arch would be a &quot;beacon  ... for the importance of prevention and finding a cure.&quot; While the National Park Service took issue with the plan due to the precedent it would set for prospective uses of the arch, it yielded due to a realization that it and Congress were &quot;on the same team&quot; and because the illumination was legally obligatory; on October 25, the plan was carried out. The previous time the arch was illuminated for promotional purposes was on September 12, 1995, under the management of local companies Fleishman-Hillard and Technical Productions when a rainbow spectrum was shone on the arch to publicize the debut of Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus&#x27; &quot;Wizard of Oz on Ice&quot; at the Kiel Center.

==Public access==

In April 1965, three million tourists were expected to visit the arch annually after completion; 619,763 tourists visited the top of the arch in its first year open. On January 15, 1969, a visitor from Nashville, Tennessee, became the one-millionth person to reach the observation area; the ten-millionth person ascended to the top on August 24, 1979. In 1974, the arch was ranked fourth on a list of &quot;most-visited man-made attraction[s]&quot;. In 2010, the Gateway Arch had over four million visitors, of which around one million traveled to the top. In 2022, an estimated 1.62 million people visited the Arch.

On December 8, 2009, sponsored by nonprofit CityArchRiver2015, the international design competition &quot;Framing a Modern Masterpiece: The City + The Arch + The River 2015&quot; commenced. It aimed to &quot;design a plan to improve the riverfront park landscape, ease access for pedestrians across Memorial Drive and expand onto the East St. Louis riverfront,&quot; as well as to attract visitors. The contest consisted of three stages—portfolio assessment (narrowed down to 8–10 teams), team interviews (narrowed down to 4–5 teams), and review of design proposals. The competition received 49 applicants, which were narrowed down to five in the first two stages. On August 17, 2010, the designs of the five finalists were revealed to the public and exhibited at the theater below the arch. On August 26, the finalists made their cases to an eight-member jury, and on September 21, the winner was revealed—Michael Van Valkenburgh Associates. The initiative&#x27;s plans include updating Kiener Plaza and the Old Courthouse, connecting the city to the Arch grounds with a park over Interstate 70, a re-imagined museum and improved accessibility. The budget for the project is $380 million and was set to be completed in 2018.

Ground broke on the &quot;Park over the Highway&quot; project, the first component of the CityArchRiver project, on August 2, 2013. This project features a landscaped structure over Interstate 70 and rerouted surface traffic that had previously formed a moat separating the Gateway Arch from the Old Courthouse. This project was completed in December 2014.

===Visitor center===

The underground visitor center for the arch was designed as part of the National Park Service&#x27;s Mission 66 program. The center is located directly below the arch, between its legs. Although construction on the visitor center began at the same time as construction for the arch itself, it did not conclude until 1976 because of insufficient funding; however, the center opened with several exhibits on June 10, 1967. Access to the visitor center is provided through ramps adjacent to each leg of the arch.

The center houses offices, mechanical rooms, and waiting areas for the arch trams, as well as its main attractions: the Museum of Westward Expansion and two theaters displaying films about the arch. The older theater opened in May 1972; the newer theater, called the Odyssey Theatre, was constructed in the 1990s and features a four-story-tall screen. Its construction required the expansion of the underground complex, and workers had to excavate solid rock while keeping the disruption to a minimum so the museum could remain open. The museum houses several hundred exhibits about the United States&#x27; westward expansion in the 19th century and opened on August 10, 1977.

As part of the CityArchRiver project, the visitor center and museum underwent a $176 million expansion and renovation that was completed in July 2018. The renovation includes a 46,000-square-foot underground addition featuring interactive story galleries, video walls, a fountain and a cafe.

===Observation area===

Near the top of the Arch, passengers exit the tram compartment and climb a slight grade to enter the observation area. This arched deck, which is over long and wide, can hold up to about 160 people, equivalent to the number of people from four trams. Sixteen windows per side, each measuring , offer views up to to the east across the Mississippi River and southern Illinois with its prominent Mississippian culture mounds at Cahokia Mounds and to the west over the city of St. Louis and St. Louis County beyond.

====Modes of ascent====

There are three modes of transportation up the arch: two sets of 1,076-step emergency stairs (one per leg), a 12-passenger elevator to the height, and a tram in each leg.

Each tram is a chain of eight cylindrical, five-seat compartments with glass doors. As each tram has a capacity of 40 passengers and there are two trams, 80 passengers can be transported at one time, with trams departing from the ground every 10 minutes. The compartments (capsules) rotate like Ferris-wheel cars as they ascend and descend the arch on rails. This fashion of movement gave rise to the idea of the tram as &quot;half-Ferris wheel and half-elevator.&quot; The trip to the top takes four minutes, and the trip down takes three minutes.
Because of a lack of funds in March 1962, the NPS did not accept bids for the arch&#x27;s internal train system and considered discarding the idea. In May 1962, the Bi-State Development Agency proposed that it issue revenue bonds to obtain the required funds. The Department of the Interior and Bi-State entered into an agreement where Bi-State would construct and operate the tram. Bi-State would have to raise $1,977,750 for the construction of the tram system. It by setting a $1 riding fee to the top.

Bi-State put in $3.3 million revenue bonds and has operated the tram system since. The tram in the north leg entered operation in June 1967, but visitors were forced to endure three-hour-long waits until April 21, 1976, when a reservation system was put in place. The south tram was completed by March 1968. Commemorative pins were awarded to the first 100,000 passengers. As of 2007, the trams have traveled , conveying more than 25 million passengers.

====Incidents====

On July 8, 1970, a six-year-old boy, his mother, and two of her friends were trapped in a tram in the arch&#x27;s south leg after the monument closed. According to the boy&#x27;s mother, the group went up the arch around 9:30 p.m. CDT, but when the tram reached the de-boarding area, its doors did not open. The tram then reportedly traveled up to a storage area above the ground, and the power was switched off. One person was able to pry open the tram door and the four managed to reach a security guard for help after being trapped for about 45 minutes.

On July 21, 2007, a broken cable forced the south tram to be shut down, leaving only the north tram in service until repairs were completed in March 2008. Around 200 tourists were stuck inside the arch for about three hours because the severed cable contacted a high-voltage rail, causing a fuse to blow. The north tram was temporarily affected by the power outage as well, but some passengers were able to exit the arch through the emergency stairs and elevator. It was about two hours until all the tram riders safely descended, while those in the observation area at the time of the outage had to wait an additional hour before being able to travel back down. An arch official said the visitors, most of whom stayed calm during the ordeal, were not in any danger and were later given refunds. The incident occurred while visitors in the arch were watching a fireworks display, and no one was seriously injured in the event. However, two people received medical treatment; one person needed oxygen and the other was diabetic. Almost immediately after the tram returned to service in 2008, however, it was closed again for new repairs after an electrical switch broke. The incident, which occurred on March 14, was billed as a &quot;bad coincidence.&quot;
On the morning of February 9, 2011, a National Park Service worker was injured while performing repairs on the south tram. The 55-year-old was working on the tram&#x27;s electrical system when he was trapped between it and the arch wall for around 30 seconds, until being saved by other workers. Emergency officials treated the injured NPS employee at the arch&#x27;s top before taking him to Saint Louis University Hospital in a serious condition.

On March 24, 2011, around one hundred visitors were stranded in the observation area for 45 minutes after the doors of the south tram refused to close. The tourists were safely brought down the arch in the north tram, which had been closed that week so officials could upgrade it with a new computer system. The National Park Service later attributed the malfunction to a computer glitch associated with the new system, which had already been implemented with the south tram. No one was hurt in the occurrence.

Around 2:15 p.m. local time on June 16, 2011, the arch&#x27;s north tram stalled due to a power outage. The tram became stuck about from the observation deck, and passengers eventually were told to climb the stairs to the observation area. It took National Park Service workers about one hour to manually pull the tram to the top, and the 40 trapped passengers were able to return down on the south tram, which had previously not been operating that day because there was not an abundance of visitors. An additional 120 people were at the observation deck at the time of the outage and also exited via the south tram. During the outage, visitors were stuck in the tram with neither lighting nor air conditioning. No one was seriously injured in the incident, but one visitor lost consciousness after suffering a panic attack, and a park ranger was taken away with minor injuries. The cause of the outage was not immediately known.

===Stunts and accidents===

On June 16, 1965, the Federal Aviation Administration cautioned that aviators who flew through the arch would be fined and their licenses revoked. At least ten pilots have disobeyed this order, beginning on June 22, 1966.

In 1973, Nikki Caplan was granted an FAA exception to fly a hot air balloon between the arch&#x27;s legs as part of the Great Forest Park Balloon Race. During the flight, on which the St. Louis park director was a passenger, the balloon hit the arch and plummeted 70 feet before recovering.

In 1976, a U.S. Army exhibition skydiving team was permitted to fly through the arch as part of Fourth of July festivities, and since then, numerous skydiving exhibition teams have legally jumped onto the Arch grounds, after having flown their parachutes through the legs of the Arch.

The arch has been a target of various stunt performers, and while such feats are generally forbidden, several people have parachuted to or from the arch regardless. In June 1980, the National Park Service declined a request by television producers to have a performer jump from the arch; a similar appeal by stuntman Dan Koko was also turned away in February 1986. Koko, who was a stunt double for &quot;Superman&quot;, wanted to perform the leap during Fourth of July celebrations.

1980 accident

On November 22, 1980, at about 8:45 a.m. CST, 33-year-old Kenneth Swyers of Overland, Missouri, parachuted onto the top of the arch. His plan was to release his main parachute and then jump off the arch using his reserve parachute to perform a base jump. After landing the wind blew him to the side, and he slid down the north leg to his death. The accident was witnessed by several people, including Swyers&#x27; wife, also a parachutist. She said her husband &quot;was not a hot dog, daredevil skydiver&quot; and that he had prepared for the jump two weeks in advance. Swyers, who had made over 1,600 jumps before the incident, was reported by one witness to have &quot;landed very well&quot; on the top of the arch, but &quot;had no footing.&quot; Swyers was reportedly blown to the top of the arch by the wind and was unable to save himself when his reserve parachute failed to deploy. The Federal Aviation Administration said the jump was unauthorized and investigated the pilot involved in the incident.

On December 27, 1980, St. Louis television station KTVI reported receiving calls from supposed witnesses of another stunt landing. The alleged parachutist, who claimed to be a retired professional stuntman, was said to be wearing a Santa Claus costume when he jumped off an airplane around 8:00 a.m. CST, parachuted onto the arch, grasped the monument&#x27;s beacon, and used the same parachute to glide down unharmed. KTVI said it was told the feat was done as an act of homage to Swyers, and &quot;apparently was a combination of a dare, a drunk, and a tribute.&quot; On the day after the alleged incident, authorities declared the jump a hoax. A spokesperson for the St. Louis Metropolitan Police Department said no calls were received about the jump until after it was broadcast on the news, and the Federal Aviation Administration said the two calls it had received were very similar. One caller also left an out-of-service phone number, while the other never followed up with investigators. Arch officials said they did not witness any such jump, and photos provided by the alleged parachutist were unclear.

1992 stunt
On September 14, 1992, 25-year-old John C. Vincent climbed to the top of the Gateway Arch using suction cups and proceeded to parachute back to the ground. He was later charged with two misdemeanors: climbing a national monument and parachuting in a national park. Federal prosecutor Stephen Higgins called the act a &quot;great stunt&quot; but said it was &quot;something the Park Service doesn&#x27;t take lightly.&quot; Vincent, a construction worker and diver from Harvey, Louisiana, said he did it &quot;just for the excitement, just for the thrill,&quot; and had previously parachuted off the World Trade Center in May 1991. He said that scaling the arch &quot;wasn&#x27;t that hard&quot; and that he had considered a jump off the monument for a few months. In an interview, Vincent said he visited the arch&#x27;s observation area a month before the stunt, to see if he could use a maintenance hatch for accessing the monument&#x27;s peak. Due to the heavy security, he instead decided to climb up the arch&#x27;s exterior using suction cups, which he had used before to scale shorter buildings. Dressed in black, Vincent began crawling up the arch around 3:30 a.m. CST on September 14 and arrived undetected at the top around 5:45 a.m., taking an additional 75 minutes to rest and take photos before finally jumping. During this time, he was seen by two traffic reporters inside the One Metropolitan Square skyscraper.

Vincent was also spotted mid-air by Deryl Stone, a Chief Ranger for the National Park Service. Stone reported seeing Vincent grab his parachute after landing and run to a nearby car, which quickly drove away. However, authorities were able to detain two men on the ground who had been videotaping the jump. Stone said 37-year-old Ronald Carroll and 27-year-old Robert Weinzetl, both St. Louis residents, were found with a wireless communication headset and a video camera, as well as a still camera with a telephoto lens. The two were also charged with two misdemeanors: disorderly conduct and commercial photography in a national park. Vincent later turned himself in and initially pleaded not guilty to the charges against him. However, he eventually accepted a guilty plea deal in which he testified against Carroll and Weinzetl, revealing that the two consented to record the jump during a meeting of all three on the day before his stunt occurred. Federal magistrate judge David D. Noce ruled on January 28, 1993, that Carroll had been involved in a conspiracy and was guilty of both misdemeanor charges; the charges against Weinzetl were dropped by federal prosecutors. In his decision, Noce stated, &quot;There are places in our country where the sufficiently skilled can savor the exhilaration and personal satisfaction of accomplishing courageous and intrepid acts, of reaching dreamed-of heights and for coursing dangerous adventures,&quot; but added that other places are designed for &quot;the exhilaration of mere observation and for the appreciation of the imaginings and the works of others. The St. Louis Arch and the grounds of the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial are in the latter category.&quot;

After his guilty plea, Vincent was sentenced to a $1,000 fine, 25 hours of community service, and a year&#x27;s probation. In December 1992, Vincent was sentenced to ninety days in jail for violating his probation.

===Security===
Two years after the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, a little over $1 million was granted to institute a counterterrorism program. Park officials were trained to note the activity of tourists, and inconspicuous electronic detection devices were installed. After the September 11 attacks in 2001, security efforts became more prominent and security checkpoints moved to the entrance of the visitor center. At the checkpoints, visitors are screened by magnetometers and x-ray equipment, devices which have been in place since 1997.

The Arch also became one of several U.S. monuments placed under restricted airspace during 2002 Fourth of July celebrations. In 2003, , , movable Jersey barriers were installed to impede terrorist attacks on the arch. Later that year, it was announced that these walls were to be replaced by concrete posts encased in metal to be more harmonious with the steel color of the arch. The movable bollards can be manipulated from the park&#x27;s dispatch center, which has also been upgraded.

In 2006, arch officials hired a &quot;physical security specialist,&quot; replacing a law enforcement officer. The responsibilities of the specialist include risk assessment, testing the park&#x27;s security system, increasing security awareness of other employees, and working with other government agencies to improve the arch&#x27;s security procedures.

==Symbolism and culture==
Built as a monument to the westward expansion of the United States, the arch typifies &quot;the pioneer spirit of the men and women who won the West, and those of a latter day to strive on other frontiers.&quot; The arch has become the iconic image of St. Louis, appearing in many parts of city culture. In 1968, three years after the monument&#x27;s opening, the St. Louis phone directory contained 65 corporations with &quot;Gateway&quot; in their title and 17 with &quot;Arch&quot;. Arches also appeared over gas stations and drive-in restaurants. In the 1970s, a local sports team adopted the name &quot;Fighting Arches&quot;; St. Louis Community College would later (when consolidating all athletic programs under a single banner) name its sports teams &quot;Archers&quot;. Robert S. Chandler, an NPS superintendent, said, &quot;Most [visitors] are awed by the size and scale of the Arch, but they don&#x27;t understand what it&#x27;s all about ... Too many people see it as just a symbol of the city of St. Louis.&quot;

The arch has also appeared as a symbol of the State of Missouri. On November 22, 2002, at the Missouri State Capitol, Lori Hauser Holden, wife of then Governor Bob Holden, uncovered the winning design for a Missouri coin design competition as part of the Fifty States Commemorative Coin Program. Designed by watercolorist Paul Jackson, the coin portrays &quot;three members of the Lewis and Clark expedition paddling a boat on the Missouri River upon returning to St. Louis&quot; with the arch as the backdrop. Holden said that the arch was &quot;a symbol for the entire state ... Four million visitors each year see the Arch. [The coin] will help make it even more loved worldwide.&quot;
 A special license plate designed by Arnold Worldwide featured the arch, labeled with &quot;.&quot; Profits earned from selling the plates would fund the museum and other educational components of the arch.
Louchheim wrote that although the arch &quot;has a simplicity which should guarantee timeliness&quot;, it is entirely modern as well because of the innovative design and its scientific considerations. In &quot;The Dallas Morning News&quot;, architectural critic David Dillon opined that the arch exists not as a functional edifice but as a symbol of &quot;boundless American optimism&quot;. He articulates the arch&#x27;s multiple &quot;moods&quot;—&quot;reflective in sunlight, soft and pewterish in mist; crisp as a line drawing one moment, chimerical the next&quot;—as a way the arch has &quot;paid for itself many times over in wonder&quot;.

Some have questioned whether St. Louis really was—as Saarinen said—the &quot;Gateway to the West&quot;. Kansas City-born &quot;deadline poet&quot; Calvin Trillin wrote,
I know you&#x27;re thinking that there are considerable differences between T.S. Eliot and me. Yes, it is true that he was from St. Louis, which started calling itself the Gateway to the West after Eero Saarinen&#x27;s Gateway Arch was erected, and I&#x27;m from Kansas City, where people think of St. Louis not as the Gateway to the West but as the Exit from the East.

With renovations in the 2010s of the visitor center, the message of the arch has been more inclusive in its historic perspective, highlighting the impact of colonialism and particularly Manifest Destiny of American frontierism on the environment, land and people of First Americans, as well as Native Mexicans. Furthermore exhibiting the urban history of the site and the struggle of its people, as well as of its construction workers for more rights, during the civil rights movement era.

Its futuristic style has been seen as a symbol for the automobile age and the surrounding automobile centric urban and interstate infrastructure, promising a technological future of a new accessible frontier. This outlook has seen continuation, lending the Gateway Arch&#x27;s iconic shape and meaning to the name and logo of the future Lunar Gateway, with its purpose as a gateway to the Moon and Mars.

===Awards and recognitions===
In 1966, the arch was given a Special Award for Excellence from the American Institute of Steel Construction for being &quot;an outstanding achievement in technology and aesthetics.&quot; On February 9, 1967, the arch received the Outstanding Civil Engineering Achievement Award of 1967 from the American Society of Civil Engineers. The arch was once among &quot;Travel + Leisure&quot;″s unofficial rankings for the most-visited attraction in the world, after Lenin&#x27;s Tomb, Disney World, Disneyland, and the Eiffel Tower. On February 22, 1990, the arch received the American Institute of Architects&#x27; (AIA) Twenty-Five Year Award for its &quot;enduring significance that has withstood the test of time.&quot; It was declared &quot;a symbolic bridge between East and West, past and future, engineering and art&quot; that &quot;embodies the boundless optimism of a growing nation.&quot; In 2007, the arch was ranked fourteenth on the AIA&#x27;s &quot;America&#x27;s Favorite Architecture&quot; list.

===Cultural references===
* Dutch composer Peter Schat wrote a 1997 work, &quot;Arch Music for St. Louis&quot;, Op. 44. for the St. Louis Symphony Orchestra. It premiered on January 8, 1999, at the Powell Symphony Hall. Since Schat did not ascend the arch due to his fear of heights, he used his creativity to depict in music someone riding a tram to the top of the arch.
* Paul Muldoon&#x27;s poem, &quot;The Stoic&quot;, is set under the Gateway Arch. The work, &quot;an elegy for a miscarried foetus&quot;, describes Muldoon&#x27;s ordeal standing under the Gateway Arch after his wife telephoned and informed him that the baby they were expecting had been miscarried.
* Percy Jackson encounters Echidna and the Chimera in the Gateway Arch in &quot;The Lightning Thief&quot; and its television adaptation, after he, Grover Underwood, and Annabeth Chase visit the Arch during their trip to California to recover the Master Bolt. Percy faces the Chimera, jumps over 200 meters (600 ft.)out of the Arch, and falls into the Mississippi River. 
* A damaged Gateway Arch is prominently featured in &quot;Defiance&quot;, a science fiction television series. The apex is used as a radio station studio, with the arch itself acting as the station&#x27;s antenna.

==Maintenance==

The first act of vandalism was committed in June 1968: the vandals etched their names on various parts of the arch. In all, $10,000 was spent that year to repair damage from vandalism. The arch was first targeted by graffiti artists on March 5, 1969.

In 2010, signs of corrosion were reported at the upper regions of the stainless steel surface. Carbon steel in the north leg has been rusting, possibly a result of water accumulation, a side effect of leaky welds in an environment that often causes rain to enter the skin of the structure. Maintenance workers use mops and a temporary setup of water containers to ease the problem. According to NPS documents, the corrosion and rust pose no safety concerns.

A more comprehensive study of the corrosion had been suggested as early as 2006 by architectural specialists studying the Arch, and reiterated in a 2010 Historic Structure Report. In September 2010, the NPS granted Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. a contract for a structural study that would &quot;gather data about the condition of the Arch to enable experts to develop and implement the right long-term solutions.&quot;

Stain samples were taken from the west face of the Arch on October 21, 2014, to determine the best way to clean it. The cleaning will cost about $340,000.

In 1984, structural engineer Tibor Szegezdy told &quot;Smithsonian Magazine&quot; that the Arch could stand &quot;considerably less than a thousand years&quot; before collapsing in a wind storm.

== Brickline Greenway ==
The Brickline Greenway Project is a major public-private partnership that aims to connect Forest Park and the Washington University in St. Louis Danforth Campus to the Gateway Arch grounds. Among the partners leading this project are Great Rivers Greenway, the Arch to Park Collaborative, St. Louis City, and Washington University in St. Louis. The Brickline Greenway was known as the Chouteau Greenway prior to March 10, 2020.

== See also ==

* Architecture of St. Louis
* Fair Saint Louis
* List of tallest buildings in St. Louis
* List of National Historic Landmarks in Missouri
* National Register of Historic Places listings in St. Louis, Missouri
* Zhivopisny Bridge

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==

* Alt URL
* Baglione, Chiara (June 2015), &quot;Eero Saarinen - Gateway to the West, 1947–1965&quot;, &quot;Casabella&quot;, 850, June 2015, 4-27, 94-95 [English text].
* Alt URL
* 


==External links==
* 
* St. Louis Gateway Arch Grounds Project
* 360 Degree Panorama of the Gateway Arch Taken from Malcolm W. Martin Memorial Park , East St. Louis, IL</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2027162" start="4" end="16" title="Gateway Arch" label="Gateway Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989906" start="22" end="30" title="monument" label="monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="34" end="53" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="78" end="93" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25305253" start="121" end="138" title="weighted catenary" label="weighted catenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406613" start="139" end="143" title="Catenary arch" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="176" end="180" title="arch" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642285" start="185" end="229" title="List of tallest buildings in Missouri" label="Missouri&amp;#x27;s tallest accessible structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="295" end="313" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q787170" start="342" end="381" title="westward expansion of the United States" label="westward expansion of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="519" end="545" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q45234" start="549" end="575" title="Gateway Arch National Park" label="Gateway Arch National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="673" end="682" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072663" start="714" end="730" title="Finnish-American" label="Finnish-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q167073" start="741" end="754" title="Eero Saarinen" label="Eero Saarinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="1041" end="1058" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877830" start="1158" end="1174" title="Luther Ely Smith" label="Luther Ely Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544010" start="1208" end="1252" title="George Rogers Clark National Historical Park" label="George Rogers Clark National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q585857" start="1256" end="1274" title="Vincennes, Indiana" label="Vincennes, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893111" start="1450" end="1466" title="Bernard Dickmann" label="Bernard Dickmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2452" end="2468" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q817847" start="2933" end="2952" title="Bennett Champ Clark" label="Bennett Champ Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700567" start="2972" end="2984" title="John J. Cochran" label="John Cochran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591172" start="3011" end="3029" title="appropriation bill" label="appropriation bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475062" start="3177" end="3193" title="joint resolution" label="joint resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="3655" end="3676" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q94356236" start="4118" end="4132" title="Louis LaBeaume" label="Louis LaBeaume"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879566" start="4427" end="4453" title="Missouri General Assembly" label="Missouri State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="4488" end="4492" title="bond (finance)" label="bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q886943" start="4539" end="4547" title="List of Governors of Missouri" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370981" start="4548" end="4559" title="Guy Brasfield Park" label="Guy B. Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735200" start="4628" end="4645" title="New Deal agency" label="New Deal agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177134" start="4650" end="4677" title="Public Works Administration" label="Public Works Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400386" start="4689" end="4701" title="Harold L. Ickes" label="Harold Ickes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="4711" end="4740" title="Works Progress Administration" label="Works Progress Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q450615" start="4752" end="4765" title="Harry Hopkins" label="Harry Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="4884" end="4905" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338798" start="5127" end="5142" title="Executive order (United States)" label="Executive Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258086" start="5214" end="5236" title="National Historic Sites (United States)" label="National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="5435" end="5448" title="Job creation program" label="creating jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943596" start="5554" end="5564" title="boondoggle (project)" label="boondoggle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5752" end="5764" title="Eminent domain#Condemnation" label="condemnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="5952" end="5990" title="United States courts of appeals" label="United States Circuit Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q470110" start="7920" end="7938" title="American Red Cross" label="American Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="8134" end="8144" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577838" start="8322" end="8341" title="William Allen White" label="William Allen White"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="8658" end="8663" title="levee" label="levee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077154" start="9159" end="9175" title="Charles E. Peterson" label="Charles Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942378" start="9288" end="9301" title="Basilica of St. Louis, King of France" label="Old Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020144" start="9730" end="9742" title="Newton B. Drury" label="Newton Drury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9748" end="9778" title="National Park Service#Directors" label="National Park Service Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734679" start="10488" end="10502" title="Aloys P. Kaufmann" label="Aloys Kaufmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898080" start="10663" end="10673" title="Underwriting" label="underwrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q94356236" start="10930" end="10944" title="Louis LaBeaume" label="Louis LaBeaume"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138720" start="11008" end="11019" title="George Howe (architect)" label="George Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081200" start="11171" end="11188" title="Charles Nagel (architect)" label="Charles Nagel Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q84312" start="11190" end="11204" title="Richard Neutra" label="Richard Neutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360483" start="11206" end="11217" title="Roland Wank" label="Roland Wank"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020605" start="11219" end="11234" title="William Wurster" label="William Wurster"/>
<link wikidata="Q973327" start="11246" end="11259" title="Fiske Kimball" label="Fiske Kimball"/>
<link wikidata="Q355946" start="11554" end="11563" title="Dan Kiley" label="Dan Kiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547710" start="11599" end="11618" title="Lilian Swann Saarinen" label="Lily Swann Saarinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718960" start="11635" end="11651" title="Alexander Girard" label="Alexander Girard"/>
<link wikidata="Q48548" start="11703" end="11714" title="Carl Milles" label="Carl Milles"/>
<link wikidata="Q312028" start="12330" end="12335" title="Eliel Saarinen" label="Eliel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664778" start="12812" end="12828" title="Harris Armstrong" label="Harris Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="13657" end="13675" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312444" start="13989" end="14002" title="Hotel Statler (St. Louis, Missouri)" label="Statler Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562618" start="14431" end="14442" title="H. R. Gross" label="H. R. Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q456131" start="14883" end="14900" title="Gilmore David Clarke" label="Gilmore D. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="14995" end="15011" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301577" start="15140" end="15155" title="Douglas Haskell" label="Douglas Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496243" start="16102" end="16114" title="Fred Severud" label="Fred Severud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282486" start="17007" end="17019" title="Joseph Darst" label="Joseph Darst"/>
<link wikidata="Q464472" start="17227" end="17238" title="Julius Krug" label="Julius Krug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297519" start="17380" end="17396" title="Oscar L. Chapman" label="Oscar L. Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053964" start="17587" end="17614" title="memorandum of understanding" label="memorandum of understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245875" start="17718" end="17743" title="Missouri Pacific Railroad" label="Missouri Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702680" start="17765" end="17807" title="Terminal Railroad Association of St. Louis" label="Terminal Railroad Association of St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15155863" start="18134" end="18168" title="Missouri Public Service Commission" label="Missouri Public Service Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="18289" end="18299" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q371052" start="18378" end="18392" title="Fred Andrew Seaton" label="Fred A. Seaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162556" start="18919" end="18931" title="Conrad L. Wirth" label="Conrad Wirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299198" start="19234" end="19248" title="Raymond Tucker" label="Raymond Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q514368" start="19833" end="19848" title="Leonor Sullivan" label="Leonor Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="20061" end="20081" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="20250" end="20261" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313036" start="20266" end="20281" title="Ford Foundation" label="Ford Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246202" start="20361" end="20379" title="private foundation (United States)" label="private foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q284392" start="20798" end="20818" title="Office of Management and Budget" label="Bureau of the Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="21167" end="21171" title="zoning" label="zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068633" start="22478" end="22492" title="groundbreaking" label="groundbreaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891230" start="23080" end="23114" title="United States Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies" label="Senate appropriations subcommittee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536552" start="23921" end="23935" title="George B. Hartzog Jr." label="George Hartzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199215" start="24432" end="24467" title="Pittsburgh-Des Moines Steel Company" label="Pittsburgh-Des Moines Steel Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068633" start="24542" end="24559" title="Groundbreaking" label="ground was broken"/>
<link wikidata="Q686514" start="24854" end="24861" title="derrick" label="derrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086008" start="24894" end="24907" title="prefabrication" label="prefabricated"/>
<link wikidata="Q465444" start="25011" end="25022" title="Prestressed concrete" label="prestressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q150425" start="25032" end="25044" title="Rebar" label="tension bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328068" start="25111" end="25116" title="truss" label="truss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495288" start="25596" end="25619" title="St. Louis Post-Dispatch" label="St. Louis Post-Dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q56163364" start="25639" end="25649" title="Arthur Witman" label="Art Witman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603366" start="26309" end="26345" title="State Historical Society of Missouri" label="State Historical Society of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q179985" start="26634" end="26643" title="actuary" label="actuarial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125901" start="27117" end="27144" title="Congress of Racial Equality" label="Congress of Racial Equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="27696" end="27731" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27750" end="27769" title="Disparate treatment#Pattern or Practice Discrimination" label="pattern or practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="27797" end="27838" title="Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153228" start="29045" end="29085" title="International Association of Bridge, Structural, Ornamental and Reinforcing Iron Workers" label="International Association of Ironworkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902339" start="29349" end="29376" title="Bi-State Development Agency" label="Bi-State Development Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q464271" start="29491" end="29498" title="AFL–CIO" label="AFL–CIO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29589" end="29618" title="Congress of Industrial Unions" label="Congress of Industrial Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024155" start="29854" end="29884" title="National Labor Relations Board" label="National Labor Relations Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495575" start="29899" end="29909" title="injunction" label="injunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242598" start="29985" end="30003" title="John Keating Regan" label="John Keating Regan"/>
<link wikidata="Q125107" start="30053" end="30070" title="secondary boycott" label="secondary boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="30301" end="30318" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722044" start="30329" end="30349" title="Alfonso J. Cervantes" label="Alfonso J. Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q220919" start="30943" end="30951" title="Keystone (architecture)" label="keystone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075723" start="31021" end="31031" title="topping out" label="topped out"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="31040" end="31054" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="31055" end="31070" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086913" start="31222" end="31232" title="Central Time Zone (North America)" label="local time"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583695" start="31271" end="31288" title="thermal expansion" label="thermal expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q272882" start="31541" end="31555" title="hydraulic jack" label="hydraulic jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017286" start="32972" end="32998" title="Busch Memorial Stadium" label="50,000-seat sports stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q157002" start="34023" end="34043" title="equilateral triangle" label="equilateral triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="34131" end="34146" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="34203" end="34222" title="reinforced concrete" label="reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q967996" start="34265" end="34277" title="carbon steel" label="carbon steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964839" start="34406" end="34421" title="structural load" label="structural load"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623464" start="34440" end="34453" title="Stressed skin" label="stressed-skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q570309" start="34538" end="34545" title="bedrock" label="bedrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="35048" end="35063" title="German-American" label="German-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q90103" start="35073" end="35089" title="Hannskarl Bandel" label="Hannskarl Bandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q204034" start="35604" end="35630" title="hyperbolic function" label="hyperbolic cosine function"/>
<link wikidata="Q214561" start="35656" end="35664" title="catenary" label="catenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q48297" start="36448" end="36456" title="parabola" label="parabola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589599" start="36696" end="36723" title="St. Louis Community College" label="St. Louis Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495288" start="36750" end="36773" title="St. Louis Post-Dispatch" label="St. Louis Post-Dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="37210" end="37215" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="37329" end="37346" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="37598" end="37609" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689229" start="37667" end="37677" title="Jim Talent" label="Jim Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q560427" start="37682" end="37690" title="Kit Bond" label="Kit Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449768" start="37768" end="37797" title="National Breast Cancer Awareness Month" label="breast cancer awareness month"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260606" start="37804" end="37816" title="Estée Lauder Companies" label="Estee Lauder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750720" start="37821" end="37845" title="The May Department Stores Company" label="May Department Store Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1427937" start="38433" end="38450" title="FleishmanHillard" label="Fleishman-Hillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642430" start="38549" end="38594" title="Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp;amp; Bailey Circus" label="Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp;amp; Bailey Circus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38607" end="38626" title="The Wizard of Oz (1987 musical)#1990s productions" label="Wizard of Oz on Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067700" start="38640" end="38651" title="Scottrade Center" label="Kiel Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="38875" end="38895" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40198" end="40232" title="Michael Van Valkenburgh#Michael Van Valkenburgh Associates, Inc." label="Michael Van Valkenburgh Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744496" start="40999" end="41009" title="Mission 66" label="Mission 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804549" start="41436" end="41451" title="mechanical room" label="mechanical room"/>
<link wikidata="Q45234" start="41529" end="41557" title="Museum of Westward Expansion" label="Museum of Westward Expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q787170" start="42016" end="42034" title="westward expansion" label="westward expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="42739" end="42756" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="42770" end="42778" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="42798" end="42819" title="Mississippian culture" label="Mississippian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q333661" start="42830" end="42844" title="Cahokia Mounds" label="Cahokia Mounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="42878" end="42887" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q498034" start="42892" end="42908" title="St. Louis County, Missouri" label="St. Louis County"/>
<link wikidata="Q202570" start="43410" end="43422" title="Ferris wheel" label="Ferris-wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902339" start="43829" end="43856" title="Bi-State Development Agency" label="Bi-State Development Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318018" start="44200" end="44212" title="revenue bond" label="revenue bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086913" start="44876" end="44879" title="Central Daylight Time" label="CDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q182221" start="45494" end="45498" title="electrical fuse" label="fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="46196" end="46202" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="46221" end="46229" title="diabetic" label="diabetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401677" start="46853" end="46884" title="Saint Louis University Hospital" label="Saint Louis University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q696490" start="48234" end="48246" title="panic attack" label="panic attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="48404" end="48435" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551574" start="48665" end="48680" title="hot air balloon" label="hot air balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599210" start="48725" end="48755" title="Great Forest Park Balloon Race" label="Great Forest Park Balloon Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="48908" end="48917" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="48993" end="49007" title="Fourth of July" label="Fourth of July"/>
<link wikidata="Q465501" start="49221" end="49236" title="stunt performer" label="stunt performer"/>
<link wikidata="Q704948" start="49564" end="49576" title="stunt double" label="stunt double"/>
<link wikidata="Q213053" start="49587" end="49595" title="Superman (1978 film)" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q962314" start="49758" end="49776" title="Overland, Missouri" label="Overland, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q809831" start="49926" end="49935" title="base jump" label="base jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704402" start="50744" end="50748" title="KTVI" label="KTVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q315796" start="50925" end="50936" title="Santa Claus" label="Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589671" start="51363" end="51403" title="St. Louis Metropolitan Police Department" label="St. Louis Metropolitan Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q635971" start="51915" end="51926" title="suction cup" label="suction cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q694324" start="52005" end="52016" title="misdemeanor" label="misdemeanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094335" start="52084" end="52102" title="United States Attorney" label="Federal prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181592" start="52288" end="52305" title="Harvey, Louisiana" label="Harvey, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="52418" end="52436" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352597" start="53210" end="53233" title="One Metropolitan Square" label="One Metropolitan Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q516461" start="53753" end="53767" title="telephoto lens" label="telephoto lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892548" start="54200" end="54224" title="United States magistrate judge" label="Federal magistrate judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627314" start="54302" end="54312" title="conspiracy (crime)" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217528" start="55225" end="55246" title="Oklahoma City bombing" label="Oklahoma City bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="55300" end="55316" title="counterterrorism" label="counterterrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="55461" end="55481" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q333921" start="55645" end="55658" title="magnetometers" label="magnetometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="55663" end="55668" title="x-ray" label="x-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430659" start="55790" end="55809" title="restricted airspace" label="restricted airspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="55822" end="55836" title="Fourth of July" label="Fourth of July"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300314" start="55872" end="55886" title="Jersey barrier" label="Jersey barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148389" start="56118" end="56125" title="bollard" label="bollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058438" start="56373" end="56388" title="risk assessment" label="risk assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589599" start="57230" end="57257" title="St. Louis Community College" label="St. Louis Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749733" start="57720" end="57742" title="Missouri State Capitol" label="Missouri State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q886943" start="57777" end="57785" title="List of Governors of Missouri" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q714950" start="57786" end="57796" title="Bob Holden" label="Bob Holden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57881" end="57920" title="50 State quarters#50 State Quarters Program" label="Fifty States Commemorative Coin Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q50030" start="57934" end="57947" title="watercolorist" label="watercolorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151525" start="57948" end="57960" title="Paul Jackson (artist)" label="Paul Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="58007" end="58033" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795316" start="58352" end="58368" title="Arnold Worldwide" label="Arnold Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757610" start="58640" end="58646" title="High modernity" label="modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q889935" start="58732" end="58755" title="The Dallas Morning News" label="The Dallas Morning News"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="59273" end="59284" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q950762" start="59316" end="59330" title="Calvin Trillin" label="Calvin Trillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="59866" end="59877" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q474184" start="59895" end="59911" title="Manifest Destiny" label="Manifest Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917318" start="59924" end="59935" title="frontierism" label="frontierism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="59975" end="59990" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="First Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314452" start="60003" end="60018" title="Indigenous peoples of Mexico" label="Native Mexicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="60172" end="60193" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q466969" start="60255" end="60269" title="Fordism" label="automobile age"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826725" start="60290" end="60314" title="automotive city" label="automobile centric urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="60319" end="60329" title="Interstate Highway System" label="interstate"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="60330" end="60344" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q29098442" start="60537" end="60550" title="Lunar Gateway" label="Lunar Gateway"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="60589" end="60593" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="60598" end="60602" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744156" start="60703" end="60743" title="American Institute of Steel Construction" label="American Institute of Steel Construction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60866" end="60913" title="American Society of Civil Engineers#Outstanding Projects and Leaders (OPAL) awards" label="Outstanding Civil Engineering Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q466880" start="60931" end="60966" title="American Society of Civil Engineers" label="American Society of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505734" start="60998" end="61014" title="Travel + Leisure" label="Travel + Leisure"/>
<link wikidata="Q191414" start="61095" end="61112" title="Lenin&amp;#x27;s Mausoleum" label="Lenin&amp;#x27;s Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q206859" start="61114" end="61126" title="Walt Disney World Resort" label="Disney World"/>
<link wikidata="Q181185" start="61128" end="61138" title="Disneyland" label="Disneyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q243" start="61148" end="61160" title="Eiffel Tower" label="Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="61206" end="61238" title="American Institute of Architects" label="American Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985894" start="61593" end="61629" title="America&amp;#x27;s Favorite Architecture" label="America&amp;#x27;s Favorite Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034318" start="61686" end="61697" title="Peter Schat" label="Peter Schat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2212932" start="61771" end="61799" title="St. Louis Symphony Orchestra" label="St. Louis Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236070" start="61841" end="61861" title="Powell Symphony Hall" label="Powell Symphony Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061388" start="62017" end="62029" title="Paul Muldoon" label="Paul Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899725" start="62317" end="62330" title="Percy Jackson" label="Percy Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q185670" start="62342" end="62349" title="Echidna (mythology)" label="Echidna"/>
<link wikidata="Q182790" start="62358" end="62365" title="Chimera (mythology)" label="Chimera"/>
<link wikidata="Q501514" start="62395" end="62414" title="The Lightning Thief" label="The Lightning Thief"/>
<link wikidata="Q96749211" start="62429" end="62450" title="Percy Jackson and the Olympians (TV series)" label="television adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858892" start="62462" end="62478" title="Grover Underwood" label="Grover Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858892" start="62484" end="62498" title="Annabeth Chase" label="Annabeth Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080272" start="62744" end="62752" title="Defiance (TV series)" label="Defiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="62891" end="62898" title="Antenna (radio)" label="antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="63134" end="63149" title="graffiti artist" label="graffiti artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="63377" end="63382" title="welding" label="welds"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027691" start="63844" end="63882" title="Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc." label="Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64440" end="64458" title="Brickline Greenway" label="Brickline Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q594411" start="64526" end="64537" title="Forest Park (St. Louis)" label="Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="64546" end="64580" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215923" start="64581" end="64596" title="Danforth Campus" label="Danforth Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737911" start="64670" end="64691" title="The Great Rivers Greenway District" label="Great Rivers Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="64725" end="64739" title="St. Louis City" label="St. Louis City"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="64745" end="64779" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787197" start="64883" end="64908" title="Architecture of St. Louis" label="Architecture of St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429906" start="64911" end="64927" title="Fair Saint Louis" label="Fair Saint Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q135462" start="64930" end="64968" title="List of tallest buildings in St. Louis" label="List of tallest buildings in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847405" start="64971" end="65018" title="List of National Historic Landmarks in Missouri" label="List of National Historic Landmarks in Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977524" start="65021" end="65089" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in St. Louis, Missouri" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q834287" start="65092" end="65109" title="Zhivopisny Bridge" label="Zhivopisny Bridge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53355" wikidata="Q583529" url="?curid=53355" title="Gary Condit">
<text>Gary Adrian Condit (born April 21, 1948) is an American former politician who represented California&#x27;s 18th congressional district in the House of Representatives from 1989 to 2003. He gained significant national attention after the May 2001 disappearance of Chandra Levy, an intern with the Federal Bureau of Prisons with whom Condit was having an affair and was subsequently found murdered.

==Early life==
Gary Condit was born in Salina, Oklahoma, on April 21, 1948, the son of Velma Jean (Tidwell) Condit (1929–2017) and Adrian Burl Condit (1927–2021), a Baptist minister. He was raised and educated in Oklahoma, and graduated from Tulsa&#x27;s Nathan Hale High School. During the summers of his high school years, Condit worked as a roustabout in Oklahoma&#x27;s oil fields. In 1967, at age 18, he married his high school sweetheart Carolyn Berry. An investigation by journalists in 2001 revealed that Condit provided the wrong birth date for his marriage license. At the time, Oklahoma required males under age 21 to have parental consent to marry; by claiming to have been born in 1942 rather than 1948, Condit appeared to be older than 18.

In 1967, Condit&#x27;s father became pastor of a Baptist church in Ceres, California, near Modesto, causing his family to relocate there. Condit began attendance at Modesto Junior College and received an Associate of Arts degree in 1970. In 1972, he received a B.A. degree from California State University, Stanislaus. While attending college and at the start of his career, Condit worked at a variety of jobs, including one at a tomato cannery, one at a factory that made munitions during the Vietnam War, and in the paint department of a Montgomery Ward department store.

== Political career ==
Condit began his career on the Ceres city council from 1972 to 1976—the last two years as mayor. He became the youngest mayor in the city&#x27;s history at the age of 25. Condit served on the Stanislaus County Board of Supervisors from 1976 to 1982, and was elected to the California State Assembly in 1982.

=== California State Assembly ===
In 1988, Condit was a member of the &quot;Gang of Five&quot;with Charles M. Calderon of Whittier, Gerald R. Eaves of Rialto, Rusty Areias of Los Banos and Steve Peace of Chula Vistathat failed to unseat Willie Brown as Speaker of the State Assembly by making a deal with Republicans. Peace co-wrote and produced the 1988 film &quot;Return of the Killer Tomatoes&quot;, in which Condit appeared in an uncredited non-speaking cameo during a fight sequence.

=== U.S. House of Representatives ===
Condit was elected to Congress in 1989 in a special election after the resignation of House Democratic Whip Tony Coelho. He was elected to a full term in 1990, and reelected five more times without serious difficulty (Condit had no Republican challenger during the general elections of 1992 and 1998). His most important committee assignment was as a senior member on the House Intelligence Committee in the months and years prior to the September 11 attacks. Like most Democrats from the Central Valley, Condit was somewhat more conservative than other Democrats from California. Being a Blue Dog Democrat, Condit voted against President Bill Clinton more frequently than other members of his party in the chamber. Condit took several populist progressive positions such as opposing NAFTA despite intense lobbying from his own district&#x27;s wine industry and President Clinton himself, voted against the landmark repeal of Glass-Steagall protections, and against the Iraq War and intervention in Kosovo. In the aftermath of Kosovo, Condit was a persistent force in compelling the prosecution of Slobodan Miloševic.

In 1998, during the Monica Lewinsky scandal, Condit publicly demanded that Clinton &quot;come clean&quot; on his relationship with the young woman; a video of this demand was aired almost daily during Condit&#x27;s own scandal involving a relationship with Bureau of Prisons intern Chandra Levy. Following the September 11, 2001 attacks, interest in the Levy case declined. Condit kept his seat on the Intelligence Committee, retained his security clearance, and was one of a small number of members of Congress who were cleared to see the most sensitive information on the 9/11 attacks. On December 7, 2001, Condit announced he would run for re-election. He lost the Democratic primary election in March 2002 to his former aide, then-Assemblyman Dennis Cardoza, and left Congress at the end of his term in January 2003. Condit&#x27;s most notable vote in his last months in office was the resolution to expel Congressman James Traficant after his conviction on corruption charges. In the 420–1 vote on July 24, 2002, Condit was the sole &quot;nay&quot;.

===Levy scandal===

In 2001, Condit became the subject of national news coverage after the disappearance of Chandra Levy, a young woman working as a Washington, D.C., intern, originally from Condit&#x27;s district. Police questioned Condit twice, and both times he denied having an extramarital affair with her; however, Levy&#x27;s aunt eventually went public with conversations she had with her about their relationship. Police questioned Condit a third time, and he confessed to the affair. When the affair began, Condit was 53 and Levy was 23. While Condit was not named as an official suspect in the disappearance, Levy&#x27;s family suspected that he was withholding important information. His reputation suffered from the contrast between his &quot;pro-family&quot; politics, his adultery with a woman younger than his daughter, and his attempts to mislead the police regarding his affair. In July, two months after Levy vanished, Condit agreed to let investigators search his apartment; hours before the search, police said he was spotted throwing a gift box he had received from another woman into a dumpster in a Washington suburb. This followed news reports that Condit had had an affair with a flight attendant.

Levy&#x27;s remains were not found during the extensive search that followed her disappearance, and were discovered accidentally May 22, 2002, in a secluded area of Rock Creek Park in Washington, D.C., and the death was declared a homicide. In late 2002, Condit sued writer Dominick Dunne of &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; for $11 million, claiming that Dunne defamed him by suggesting he ordered Levy killed in 2001. Condit&#x27;s attorney said that the libel lawsuit was based on comments Dunne repeated on national radio and television programs in December 2001, where he suggested Condit frequented Middle Eastern embassies for sexual activity with prostitutes and that, during those times, he made it clear that he wanted someone to get rid of Levy. Condit&#x27;s attorney said that Dunne&#x27;s comments &quot;conveyed that Gary Condit was involved in her kidnapping and in her murder, that friends of Gary Condit had her kidnapped, put in an airplane and dropped in the Atlantic Ocean.&quot; Dunne paid an undisclosed amount to settle that lawsuit in March 2005. Dunne said he had been &quot;completely hoodwinked&quot; by an unreliable informant. Subsequently, Condit sued Dunne again, charging him with &quot;revivifying&quot; the slander in an appearance on CNN&#x27;s &quot;Larry King Live&quot; in November 2005. In July 2008 a federal judge dismissed the second lawsuit filed against Dunne.

In July 2006, Condit sued the &quot;Sonoran News&quot;, a free weekly newspaper, for defamation of character after the publication wrote &quot;that Condit was the &#x27;main focus in the Chandra Levy case in 2001, after lying to investigators about his affair with Levy. The case was dismissed in July 2007 when the judge ruled that Condit had not proved the statement was false, or that the paper had published it with malice. Years later, Condit publicly denied ever having an affair with Chandra Levy. Police continued the murder investigation, and in March 2009, a warrant was issued for the arrest of Ingmar Guandique, an undocumented immigrant from El Salvador who had already been convicted and imprisoned for two other attacks on women in Rock Creek Park. He was subsequently indicted for Levy&#x27;s murder. On November 22, 2010, Guandique was found guilty of first-degree murder, and was sentenced in February 2011 to 60 years in prison. Condit&#x27;s lawyer Bert Fields said, &quot;It&#x27;s a complete vindication but that comes a little late. Who gives him his career back?&quot; On June 4, 2015, D.C. Superior Court Judge Gerald Fisher granted a motion for the retrial of Guandique after it was revealed that the sole witness against him, a jailhouse informant named Armando Morales, had lied about prior jailhouse testimony. Prosecutors dropped all charges against Guandique on July 28, 2016, after an associate of Morales came forward with secret recordings in which he admitted to falsifying testimony about the murder of Levy. Levy&#x27;s death therefore remains unsolved.

== Business career ==
After his departure from office, Condit moved to Arizona and operated two Baskin-Robbins ice cream stores with his wife and son. When the franchise failed, Condit was ordered to pay the company $98,000 in a breach of contract proceeding. In 2012, he was reported to be serving as president of the Phoenix Institute of Desert Agriculture, which listed its status as &quot;Dissolved&quot; in the last corporate filing as of June 4, 2015. Condit later returned to California, where he became a registered lobbyist with the J. Blonien law firm of Sacramento.

== Family ==
===Involvement in local politics===

In 2012, Condit&#x27;s son, Chad, announced his intention to run for the House of Representatives as an independent in California&#x27;s redrawn 10th congressional district. He lost in the top-two election against incumbent Republican Jeff Denham and Democratic challenger José M. Hernández. In 2022, Chad ran for the State Assembly to represent the 22nd Assembly district. Chad finished in 3rd place in the jungle primary and did not advance to the general election. After his loss, Chad worked on Marie Alvarado-Gil&#x27;s campaign for State Senate, and became her chief of staff after she won her election. In December 2023, he was fired from his position, and later sued Alvarado-Gil alleging sexual harassment.

Condit&#x27;s daughter, Cadee Condit Gray, is married to Congressman Adam Gray representing California&#x27;s 13th congressional district since 2025. Gray also served as a California State Assembly member representing the 21st district (2012–2022). In 2020, Condit&#x27;s nephew Buck was elected to the Stanislaus County Board of Supervisors for district 1, defeating Modesto City Councilman Bill Zoslocki 58.77% to 41.23%. Earlier in 2018, Condit&#x27;s grandson, Channce Condit, ran unopposed for a seat on the Ceres City Council. In 2020, Channce was elected to the Stanislaus County Board of Supervisors after he defeated Tom Hallinan 60% to 40%, joining his father&#x27;s cousin, Buck, on the board.

In 2015, another grandson of Condit, Couper Condit, was appointed to the Ceres planning commission but was denied reappointment in 2020 by the council. Couper Condit won a seat on the Ceres City Council later in 2020 by defeating incumbent Michael &quot;Mike&quot; Kline by a 38.19% to 23.52% margin, with two other competitors falling short. After serving for 10 months on the Ceres City Council, Couper Condit resigned with no explanation. Couper Condit has also worked as the district director for Assemblymember Heath Flora.

In 2023, another grandson of Condit, Gary M. Condit (named after his grandfather), was appointed to the Ceres Planning Commission. Gary M. Condit ran for Ceres mayor in 2024 but lost the race to the incumbent mayor, Javier Lopez, by a little under 5%. His wife, Destiny Suarez, worked at the office of State Senator Marie Alvarado-Gil, but quit about eight months after her father in-law, Chad Condit, was fired from the same workplace.

==See also==

*List of federal political sex scandals in the United States

==Notes==
==External links==

*Condit&#x27;s Profile on CNN


|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q583529" start="0" end="18" title="Gary Condit" label="Gary Adrian Condit"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="90" end="100" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225097" start="108" end="135" title="California&amp;#x27;s 18th congressional district" label="18th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="143" end="167" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4256407" start="264" end="276" title="Chandra Levy" label="Chandra Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400015" start="297" end="322" title="Federal Bureau of Prisons" label="Federal Bureau of Prisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q927861" start="438" end="454" title="Salina, Oklahoma" label="Salina, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="641" end="646" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969102" start="654" end="677" title="Nathan Hale High School (Oklahoma)" label="Nathan Hale High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594327" start="743" end="753" title="roustabout" label="roustabout"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="1203" end="1210" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q594171" start="1221" end="1238" title="Ceres, California" label="Ceres, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q204561" start="1245" end="1252" title="Modesto, California" label="Modesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889228" start="1319" end="1341" title="Modesto Junior College" label="Modesto Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="1358" end="1375" title="Associate of Arts" label="Associate of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="1415" end="1419" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="B.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q624564" start="1432" end="1471" title="California State University, Stanislaus" label="California State University, Stanislaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1648" end="1659" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246929" start="1694" end="1709" title="Montgomery Ward" label="Montgomery Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="1842" end="1847" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q108503" start="1944" end="1961" title="Stanislaus County" label="Stanislaus County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175507" start="1962" end="1982" title="Board of Supervisors" label="Board of Supervisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026858" start="2025" end="2050" title="California State Assembly" label="California State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076040" start="2160" end="2179" title="Charles M. Calderon" label="Charles M. Calderon"/>
<link wikidata="Q838791" start="2183" end="2191" title="Whittier, California" label="Whittier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549498" start="2193" end="2208" title="Gerald R. Eaves" label="Gerald R. Eaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q289661" start="2212" end="2218" title="Rialto, California" label="Rialto"/>
<link wikidata="Q23542638" start="2220" end="2232" title="Rusty Areias" label="Rusty Areias"/>
<link wikidata="Q590932" start="2236" end="2245" title="Los Banos, California" label="Los Banos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345028" start="2250" end="2261" title="Steve Peace" label="Steve Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q49270" start="2265" end="2276" title="Chula Vista, California" label="Chula Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365075" start="2298" end="2310" title="Willie Brown (politician)" label="Willie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="2366" end="2377" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q943906" start="2427" end="2456" title="Return of the Killer Tomatoes" label="Return of the Killer Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="2611" end="2619" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586860" start="2633" end="2649" title="Elections in California" label="special election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442506" start="2697" end="2708" title="Tony Coelho" label="Tony Coelho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495362" start="2961" end="2989" title="House Intelligence Committee" label="House Intelligence Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="3027" end="3047" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q27026" start="3078" end="3092" title="Central Valley, California" label="Central Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q146953" start="3178" end="3186" title="Blue Dog Coalition" label="Blue Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="3218" end="3227" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="3228" end="3240" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="3373" end="3378" title="NAFTA" label="NAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410030" start="3515" end="3529" title="Glass-Steagall Act" label="Glass-Steagall"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="3559" end="3567" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="3572" end="3594" title="Kosovo War" label="intervention in Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="3687" end="3705" title="Slobodan Miloševic" label="Slobodan Miloševic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212659" start="3728" end="3743" title="Monica Lewinsky" label="Monica Lewinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400015" start="3965" end="3982" title="Bureau of Prisons" label="Bureau of Prisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4256407" start="3990" end="4002" title="Chandra Levy" label="Chandra Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="4018" end="4044" title="September 11, 2001 attacks" label="September 11, 2001 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q538888" start="4455" end="4469" title="Dennis Cardoza" label="Dennis Cardoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q465728" start="4630" end="4645" title="James Traficant" label="James Traficant"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="4913" end="4929" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2172035" start="6154" end="6169" title="Rock Creek Park" label="Rock Creek Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q149086" start="6220" end="6228" title="homicide" label="homicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q448767" start="6263" end="6277" title="Dominick Dunne" label="Dominick Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="6287" end="6298" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="6342" end="6349" title="defamation" label="defamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="7250" end="7253" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423559" start="7267" end="7282" title="Larry King Live" label="Larry King Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562241" start="7423" end="7435" title="Sonoran News" label="Sonoran News"/>
<link wikidata="Q55019500" start="7807" end="7813" title="malice (law)" label="malice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4256407" start="7993" end="8009" title="Ingmar Guandique" label="Ingmar Guandique"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643519" start="8497" end="8516" title="Superior Court of the District of Columbia" label="D.C. Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q83556989" start="8523" end="8536" title="Gerald Fisher" label="Gerald Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="9050" end="9057" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q584601" start="9075" end="9089" title="Baskin-Robbins" label="Baskin-Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q562566" start="9208" end="9226" title="breach of contract" label="breach of contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="9544" end="9554" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="9711" end="9722" title="Independent (politics)" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305983" start="9744" end="9751" title="redistricting" label="redrawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154579" start="9752" end="9779" title="California&amp;#x27;s 10th congressional district" label="10th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049544" start="9796" end="9803" title="Nonpartisan blanket primary" label="top-two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686295" start="9842" end="9853" title="Jeff Denham" label="Jeff Denham"/>
<link wikidata="Q716333" start="9880" end="9897" title="José M. Hernández" label="José M. Hernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q105424763" start="9913" end="9939" title="2022 California State Assembly election" label="ran for the State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019969" start="9957" end="9979" title="California&amp;#x27;s 22nd State Assembly district" label="22nd Assembly district"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049544" start="10015" end="10029" title="jungle primary" label="jungle primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q115651721" start="10106" end="10124" title="Marie Alvarado-Gil" label="Marie Alvarado-Gil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000097" start="10393" end="10402" title="Adam Gray" label="Adam Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2189596" start="10416" end="10461" title="California&amp;#x27;s 13th congressional district" label="California&amp;#x27;s 13th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026858" start="10496" end="10521" title="California State Assembly" label="California State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019967" start="10546" end="10559" title="California&amp;#x27;s 21st State Assembly district" label="21st district"/>
<link wikidata="Q108503" start="10627" end="10644" title="Stanislaus County" label="Stanislaus County"/>
<link wikidata="Q204561" start="10692" end="10699" title="Modesto" label="Modesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q594171" start="11103" end="11108" title="Ceres, California" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q27916400" start="11546" end="11557" title="Heath Flora" label="Heath Flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q115651721" start="11876" end="11894" title="Marie Alvarado-Gil" label="Marie Alvarado-Gil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619372" start="12013" end="12072" title="List of federal political sex scandals in the United States" label="List of federal political sex scandals in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="12130" end="12133" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53356" wikidata="Q721738" url="?curid=53356" title="Goffredo Mameli">
<text>Goffredo Mameli (; 5 September 1827 – 6 July 1849) was an Italian patriot, poet, writer and a notable figure in the Risorgimento. He is also the author of the lyrics of &quot;Il Canto degli Italiani&quot;, the national anthem of Italy.

==Biography==

The son of an aristocratic Sardinian admiral, Mameli was from Genoa where he was born, and where his father was in command of the fleet of the Kingdom of Sardinia. At the age of seven he was sent to Sardinia, to his grandfather&#x27;s place, to escape the risk of cholera, but soon came back to Genoa to complete his studies.

The achievements of Mameli&#x27;s very short life are concentrated in only two years, during which time he played major parts in insurrectional movements and the Risorgimento.

In 1847 Mameli joined the &quot;Società Entelema&quot;, a cultural movement that soon would have turned to a political movement, and here he became interested in the theories of Giuseppe Mazzini.

Mameli is mostly known as the author of the lyrics of the Italian national anthem, &quot;Il Canto degli Italiani&quot; (music by Michele Novaro), better known in Italy as &quot;Inno di Mameli&quot; (Mameli&#x27;s Hymn). These lyrics were used for the first time in November 1847, celebrating King Charles Albert of Sardinia in his visit to Genoa after his first reforms. Mameli&#x27;s lyrics to a &quot;hymn of the people&quot; —&quot;Suona la tromba&quot;— were set by Giuseppe Verdi the following year.

Mameli was deeply involved in nationalist movements and some more &quot;spectacular&quot; actions are remembered, such as his exposition of the &quot;Tricolore&quot; (current Italian flag, then prohibited) to celebrate the expulsion of Austrians in 1846. Yet, he was with Nino Bixio (Garibaldi&#x27;s later major supporter and friend) in a committee for public health, already on a clear Mazzinian position. In March 1848, hearing of the insurrection in Milan, Mameli organised an expedition with 300 other patriots, joined Bixio&#x27;s troops that were already on site, and entered the town. He was then admitted to Garibaldi&#x27;s irregular army (really the volunteer brigade of general Torres), as a captain, and met Mazzini.

Back in Genoa, he worked more on a literary side, wrote several hymns and other compositions, he became the director of the newspaper &quot;Diario del Popolo&quot; (&quot;People&#x27;s Daily&quot;), and promoted a press campaign for a war against Austria. In December 1848 Mameli reached Rome, where Pellegrino Rossi had been murdered, helping in the clandestine works for declaration (9 February 1849) of the Roman Republic. Mameli then went to Florence where he proposed the creation of a common state between Tuscany and Latium.

In April 1849 he was again in Genoa, with Bixio, where a popular insurrection was strongly opposed by General Alberto La Marmora. Mameli soon left again for Rome, where the French had come to support the Papacy (Pope Pius IX had actually escaped from the town) and took active part in the combat.

===Death===


During the siege of Rome, he was an aide of Giuseppe Garibaldi, who fought in Palestrina (9 May) and in Velletri (19 May). In particular he fought in the defense of the Villa del Vascello on the Janiculum hill. He was wounded in the left leg by the French during the last assault of 3 June at Villa Corsini, occupied by the French.

Mameli suffered from gangrene, which doctor Pietro Maestri observed after four days. After a consultation with Maestri and other doctors, it was decided to amputate the leg, performed by surgeon Paolo Maria Raffaello Baroni. Despite this, the infection gradually increased to the point of causing death by sepsis, on 6 July 1849, at the age of 21, in the hospice of Trinità dei Pellegrini.
He was originally buried at Campo Verano in Rome, however, his remains were moved to the Mausoleo Ossario del Gianicolo in 1941.
==Notes==
==References==

==Bibliography==
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q721738" start="0" end="15" title="Goffredo Mameli" label="Goffredo Mameli"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="116" end="128" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q187" start="175" end="198" title="Il Canto degli Italiani" label="Il Canto degli Italiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140968" start="279" end="288" title="Sardinian people" label="Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="289" end="296" title="admiral" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="314" end="319" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q189524" start="382" end="387" title="Naval fleet" label="fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="516" end="523" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="741" end="753" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q187336" start="934" end="950" title="Giuseppe Mazzini" label="Giuseppe Mazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="1019" end="1034" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q187" start="1042" end="1065" title="Il Canto degli Italiani" label="Il Canto degli Italiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407455" start="1082" end="1096" title="Michele Novaro" label="Michele Novaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q181261" start="1250" end="1276" title="Charles Albert of Sardinia" label="Charles Albert of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641857" start="1388" end="1403" title="Suona la tromba" label="Suona la tromba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317" start="1423" end="1437" title="Giuseppe Verdi" label="Giuseppe Verdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42876" start="1609" end="1618" title="Flag of Italy" label="Tricolore"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="1695" end="1704" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q699354" start="1731" end="1741" title="Nino Bixio" label="Nino Bixio"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="1743" end="1752" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="1913" end="1918" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="2437" end="2444" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q673256" start="2490" end="2506" title="Pellegrino Rossi" label="Pellegrino Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072140" start="2600" end="2614" title="Roman Republic (19th century)" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="2636" end="2644" title="Florence, Italy" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="2702" end="2709" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048669" start="2714" end="2720" title="Latium" label="Latium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113730" start="2833" end="2851" title="Alberto La Marmora" label="Alberto La Marmora"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="2927" end="2933" title="Papacy" label="Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="2935" end="2947" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3046" end="3059" title="Roman Republic (19th century)#French siege" label="siege of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="3079" end="3097" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q303001" start="3230" end="3239" title="Janiculum" label="Janiculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517648" start="3328" end="3341" title="Palazzo Corsini, Rome" label="Villa Corsini"/>
<link wikidata="Q168805" start="3389" end="3397" title="gangrene" label="gangrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="3674" end="3680" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27426" start="3786" end="3798" title="Campo Verano" label="Campo Verano"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53357" wikidata="Q294696" url="?curid=53357" title="AMC Gremlin">
<text>The AMC Gremlin (also American Motors Gremlin) is a subcompact automobile introduced in 1970, manufactured and marketed in a single, two-door body style (1970–1978) by American Motors Corporation (AMC), as well as in Mexico (1974–1983) by AMC&#x27;s Vehículos Automotores Mexicanos (VAM) subsidiary.

Using a shortened Hornet platform and bodywork with a pronounced kammback tail, the Gremlin was classified as an economy car and competed with the Chevrolet Vega and Ford Pinto, as well as imported cars including the Volkswagen Beetle and Toyota Corolla. The small domestic automaker marketed the Gremlin as &quot;the first American-built import.&quot;

The Gremlin reached a total production of 671,475 over a single generation. It was superseded for 1979 by a restyled and revised variant, the AMC Spirit, which continued to be produced through 1983. This was long after the retirement of the Ford Pinto that suffered from stories about exploding gas tanks, as well as the Chevrolet Vega with its rusting bodies and durability problems with its aluminum engine.

== History ==
===Origin and design===

The idea for the Gremlin began in 1966 when design chief at American Motors, Dick Teague, and stylist Bob Nixon discussed the possibility of a shortened version of AMC&#x27;s compact car. On an airline flight, Teague&#x27;s solution, which he said he sketched on an air sickness bag, was to truncate the tail of a Javelin. Bob Nixon joined AMC as a 23-year-old and did the first formal design sketches in 1967 for the car that was to be the Gremlin.

Ford and General Motors were to launch new subcompact cars for 1971, but AMC did not have the financial resources to compete with an entirely new design. Teague&#x27;s idea of using the pony car Javelin resulted in the AMX-GT concept, first shown at the New York International Auto Show in April 1968. This version did not go into production, but the AMX name was used from 1968 through 1970 on a shortened, two-seat sports car built from the Javelin.


Instead, Bob Nixon, AMC&#x27;s future Chief of Design, designed the new subcompact based on the automaker&#x27;s Hornet model, a compact car. The design reduced the wheelbase from and the overall length from , making the Gremlin two inches (50 mm) longer than the Volkswagen Beetle and shorter than the Ford Pinto and Chevrolet Vega.

Capitalizing on AMC&#x27;s advantage as a small car producer, the Gremlin was introduced on April 1, 1970. The April 6, 1970, cover of &quot;Newsweek&quot; magazine featured a red Gremlin for its article, &quot;Detroit Fights Back: The Gremlin&quot;. The car was available as a &quot;base&quot; two-passenger version with no rear seat and a fixed rear window, at a suggested retail price of $1,879, and as a four-seat hatchback with an opening rear window, at $1,959 (US$ in dollars).

From the front of the car to the B-pillars, the Gremlin was essentially the same as the AMC Hornet. Although it was only fractionally longer than the contemporary Volkswagen Beetle, &quot;Time&quot; said the length of its hood over the front-mounted engine made &quot;the difference seem considerably more&quot;, adding that the car &quot;resembles a sawed-off station wagon, with a long, low hood and swept-up rear, and is faintly reminiscent of the original Studebaker Avanti.&quot; As with the Volkswagen, the Gremlin&#x27;s styling set it apart from other cars. &quot;Time&quot; said, &quot;like some other cars of less than standard size, the back seat is designed for small children only.&quot; The Gremlin&#x27;s wider stance gave it &quot;a stable, quiet and relatively comfortable ride—for the two front passengers&quot;, for whom, by small-car standards, there was more than average interior width, seat room, and legroom. The six cubic feet of luggage space behind the back seat was less than in the rear-engined Volkswagen Beetle, but with the seat folded the cargo area tripled to .

The upright design of the tail, which enlarged interior space, was aerodynamically efficient. Later, European and Japanese manufacturers similarly created different body styles on one compact car chassis by extending or curtailing the trunk (e.g. Volkswagen&#x27;s Jetta and Golf models).

===Marketing===

Designed and named by Teague to look either &quot;cute or controversial - depending on one&#x27;s viewpoint ... for many, it seemed perfect for the free-thinking early 1970s.&quot; American Motors executives apparently felt confident enough to not worry that the Gremlin name might have negative connotations. &quot;Time&quot; magazine noted two definitions for gremlin: &quot;Defined by Webster&#x27;s as &#x27;a small gnome held to be responsible for malfunction of equipment.&#x27; American Motors&#x27; definition: &#x27;a pal to its friends and an ogre to its enemies.&#x27;&quot; The car&#x27;s cartoon-inspired mascot was marketed for product differentiation and was intended to be memorable to consumers. The Gremlin&#x27;s hatchback design was also needed to make the car stand out in the competitive marketplace, and according to Teague: &quot;Nobody would have paid it any attention if it had looked like one of the Big Three&quot; automobiles.

AMC promoted the Gremlin as &quot;America&#x27;s first subcompact&quot;. This description overlooks the Nash Metropolitan and the earlier Crosley. The Metropolitan—a subcompact-sized captive import, American-conceived and American-designed for the American market, and built in the UK with a British engine—has a claim to be &quot;America&#x27;s first subcompact.&quot;

AMC marketed the Gremlin as &quot;cute and different,&quot; a strategy successful in attracting more than 60 percent of purchasers under the age of 35.

===Annual changes (1970–1978)===
==== 1970 ====

The Gremlin debuted in April 1970 with AMC&#x27;s I6, a seven main bearing design which produced as standard equipment, with AMC&#x27;s I6 - producing - as an option. AMC said the Gremlin offered &quot;the best gas mileage of any production car made in America&quot;. According to the auto editors of &quot;Consumer Guide&quot;, it had &quot;an unusually long option list for the era&quot; so owners could have luxury and conveniences typically found in more expensive cars, and these options &quot;came with a much higher profit margin&quot; for the automaker.

As the first of the new domestic subcompact cars, &quot;the Gremlin has been the most talked-about car since its introduction.&quot; Sales for the abbreviated model year were 25,300.

&quot;Popular Science&quot; assigned its editor to the equivalent of one year of driving by conducting a cross-country road test of a brand new Gremlin, and reported after driving it &quot;without a single problem is an enviable record&quot; and that &quot;we were all impressed with the quality of this vehicle.&quot; A nationwide survey based on owners driving their 1970 AMC Gremlins over conducted by &quot;Popular Mechanics&quot; concluded that the unique styling attracted many buyers, but economy topped their likes.

==== 1971 ====
For the 1971 model year the &quot;X&quot; appearance/equipment trim package was introduced as a $300 option on the 4-passenger model and &quot;proved extremely popular.&quot; It included body side tape stripes, body color front fascia, slotted road wheels with D70x14 Goodyear Polyglas tires, blackout grille insert, bucket seats, and &quot;X&quot; decals.

The 2-passenger Gremlin version entered into its second and final season. The I6 engine that was optional for 1970 became standard, while a longer-stroke version became the option. Compression ratios dropped from 8.5:1 to 8:1 for 1971, resulting in (gross) from the and (gross) from the 

1971 Gremlin prices increased slightly (up by $20 to $1,899 for the base model), and sales for this first full model year rose to 53,480.

==== 1972 ====

Among many other changes was an available V8 engine. It was &quot;the muscle car formula of stuffing a big motor in a small car.&quot; Engine ratings were downgraded to more accurate Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) net hp figures, bringing the engine to , the to and the 304 V8 to . Even with the lower engine output ratings across the industry, &quot;the V8 Gremlin was a poor-man&#x27;s Corvette, able to spin its rear tires at will and outrun some larger, more expensive pony cars&quot; and it was &quot;the only real performance car available under $2,200.&quot;

The base two-seater model was discontinued, having sold 3,017 units in 18 months. Gremlins also switched from non-synchronized 1st gear manual transmissions to full synchromesh, and the Borg-Warner-sourced automatic transmission was replaced by the Chrysler-designed TorqueFlite. Other minor technical upgrades improved the car&#x27;s reliability and durability. The Gremlin X package continued to be popular, while optional features now included an AM/FM radio, fabric sunroof, tilt steering wheel, inside hood release, trailer towing package for up to with a Class 1 hitch, as well as manual or power-assisted front disk brakes.

American Motors introduced the automobile industry&#x27;s first 12-month or bumper-to-bumper warranty, called the &quot;Buyer Protection Plan&quot;. Its foundation was an emphasis on quality and durability, improved production by reducing the number of models and increasing the level of standard equipment. The new warranty included an innovative promise to customers that AMC would repair anything wrong with the car (except for tires). Owners were provided with a toll-free number to the company, as well as a free loaner car if a warranty repair took overnight. Numerous production and product improvements would result in fewer warranty claims, better public relations, and greater customer satisfaction and loyalty.

Model year 1972 sales totaled 61,717, a 15% gain over the previous year.

==== 1973 ====
For the 1973 model year, AMC strengthened bumpers able to withstand a impact in the front and a impact in the rear, without any damage to the engine, lights, and safety equipment according to new mandates by the U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). Optional was a Levi&#x27;s interior trim package, which included spun nylon upholstery made to look like denim (fire safety regulations prohibited the use of real cotton denim). Details included removable map pockets, burnished copper denim rivets, and red Levi&#x27;s logo tabs. Rear-seat legroom was increased. The X package received a new tape-striping pattern that kicked up over the Gremlin&#x27;s rear-wheel flares.

Sales improved to 122,844 units, nearly 30% more than in 1972. A 1973 Gremlin purchased by &quot;Consumer Reports&quot; was top-rated in a group of six subcompact models tested for the June issue. That car had relatively few sample defects and proved reliable over a long-term test.

==== 1974 ====
The Arab Oil Embargo of October 1973 came just as the 1974 model year began. AMC improved the Gremlin&#x27;s back seat. A deeper front fascia made the car appear longer. A larger front bumper was mounted on self-restoring telescoping gas and oil cylinders. Unlike most other designs, the Gremlin did not use a filler panel between the bumper and body. A stronger rear bumper was set lower—front and rear passenger car bumpers were now required by NHTSA to have uniform heights, take angle impacts, and sustain impacts with no damage. The rear fascia was modified slightly to blend with the design changes. The Gremlin X stripe pattern was given a &quot;hockey stick&quot; look for 1974: the stripes followed the window line as it tapered aft, and swept up now to include four diagonal lines on the wide C-pillar. A new typeface for nameplates was used by AMC for 1974, including on the Gremlin. With the car&#x27;s 1974 model year extended into November to delay the need to install catalytic converters required by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 2004 regulations starting with 1975 models, AMC sold 171,128 1974 Gremlins, an increase of nearly 40% over 1973 and 130% over 1971.

==== 1975 ====

Changes for the 1975 model year Gremlins included standard electronic ignition developed by Prestolite. All U.S. market Gremlins featured catalytic converters that required the use of unleaded regular-grade fuel. &quot;Unleaded Fuel Only&quot; warnings were placed by the fuel filler and on the fuel gauge. Gremlins with I6 engines and manual transmissions gained a new option, the electrically operated overdrive from Laycock de Normanville. The 0.714:1 &quot;J-type&quot; unit was controlled by a pushbutton at the end of the turn signal stalk. When turned on, the unit engaged automatically at speeds above and dropped out at . An accelerator pedal kick-down switch provided faster passing when needed. Steel-belted radial tires were now standard on Gremlins with the X package.

American Motors was promoting its economical models covered by the comprehensive &quot;Buyer Protection Plan&quot; warranty, as well as preparing for the launch of the Pacer The automaker was planning to spend half of the entire 1975 advertising budget on the new Pacer. Marketing for the Gremlin included tie-ins with a &quot;Home Value Days&quot; supplement designed to promote 18,500 hardware stores in &quot;Popular Science&quot; and &quot;The Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot; as well as with Colgate-Palmolive&#x27;s campaign using Willie Mays to &quot;Help Young America&quot; in &quot;Jet&quot; and &quot;Ebony&quot;.

The U.S. subcompacts were compared to the new, front-wheel-drive Volkswagen Rabbit that replaced the aging Beetle. &quot;Popular Science&quot; road tests showed the Gremlin to be the fastest and quietest of all, but had the lowest fuel efficiency with an average EPA rating of , compared to the Chevrolet Vega&#x27;s , Ford Pinto&#x27;s , and the Rabbit&#x27;s . The Gremlin had an I6 engine and a three-speed transmission (in contrast to the I4 engines and four-speed transmissions in the other cars) and weighed over more than the VW Rabbit.

Struggling under stagflation and an inflationary economy, all the domestic subcompact cars&#x27; sales slumped compared to the industry&#x27;s record-breaking 1973 model year. In total, AMC sold 56,011 Gremlins in the (albeit shortened) 1975 model year, a 67% drop. The success of the innovative Pacer launched in mid-February 1975 &quot;severely cut&quot; the sales of both the Gremlin and Hornet models.

==== 1976 ====

Changes were greater for 1976. Oval headlight bezels replaced the previous circular items. The grille shape became a stretched hexagon and included in its insert two opposing loops stacked atop each other and housing new rounded parking/turn signal lights. A new &quot;Custom&quot; trim line debuted, featuring a striped interior trim called &quot;Potomac&quot;, as well as a spare tire cover and other minor details. The A models were given another new striping scheme: the hockey stick-style stripe of the previous year adding a secondary extension that ran from the door handle straight back. The X package was now available only on Custom models. Due to flagging sales, the V8 engine option (now downgraded to ) was cancelled at midyear, after only 826 installations. (A total of 40,994 Gremlins were equipped with the V8 engine from 1972 until 1976.) A 4-speed manual transmission was made available at midyear. Sales tapered slightly to 52,941 - a decline of 5.5%. The Overdrive option continued to be available until midyear when Laycock de Normanville entered receivership. American Motors attempted to purchase the British manufacturer but could not acquire the funding in time.

==== 1977 ====

1977 changes included redesigned sheet metal for the first time in the Gremlin&#x27;s now 8-year history: revised hood, shorter front fenders, new bumpers, taller glass tailgate, enlarged taillights, and rear license plate now covering the fuel filler. The front end was shortened by four inches (102 mm) with all-new sheet metal and a crosshatch grille insert. Parking lights reverted to rectangular, and headlights were recessed into square bezels with rounded corners. The new hood had a small &quot;power bulge&quot; at the front. The base model now included carpeting, as well as rocker panel and wheel lip moldings. The &quot;Custom&quot; model was available with a list price of $2,998. The X package returned as a $189 option, with a new striping pattern that ran straight back from the front fenders and crested upward over the rear wheels. Front disc brakes became standard.

At the start of the model year, the Gremlin was available with either the standard or optional six-cylinder engines. Both had increased power from updated cylinder heads and two-barrel carburetors. In addition, AMC offered a carbureted four-cylinder engine: a Volkswagen/Audi inline-four, also used in fuel-injected form in the Porsche 924. It gave better fuel economy but less power than the standard six-cylinder engines, and reduced the Gremlin&#x27;s weight by , allowing it to achieve an EPA rating of in the city, and on the highway. It was reserved for the Custom version of the Gremlin because the expense of acquiring the rights to the engine meant that AMC could not afford to make it standard equipment. Of 46,171 Gremlins built for 1977 (13% less than in 1976), 7,558 had the new 2.0 L engine.

==== 1978 ====
In its final year of 1978, the Gremlin received a number of changes, but customers on a tighter budget could still get a standard six-cylinder base model Gremlin for under US$3,400. A new &quot;Custom&quot; model featured either the four- or six-cylinder engine with a standard four-speed manual transmission and new vinyl bucket seats, wheel lip moldings, and other trim upgrades. Inside the Gremlin there was a revised instrument panel borrowed from the then-new 1978 Concord. The dashboard had high-level ventilation HVAC, radio switchgear within easier reach, and a flat, full-width top. The X&#x27;s tape striping pattern was revised to match the 1978 Concord Sport package design, with the stripe at the lower body side and curving over the wheel lip.

At mid-season, a GT package became available with a front spoiler and flared wheel openings as on the 1978 AMX. The GT added an aluminum overlay to the instrument panel, was powered by the I6 as standard, and had a unique striping scheme: a wide tape stripe, outlined by a narrow one, ran back from the front fenders and widened aft of the rear quarter windows. The package also included body-color fender flares and front air dam, as well as body-color bumpers, all of which combined to give the GT a modern, aggressive look. Fewer than 3,000 Gremlin GTs were built.

The Gremlin&#x27;s body shape had not changed appreciably in its nine years of production, and other more advanced subcompacts, lighter in weight, with more doors, better interiors, and front-wheel drive, had appeared on the market. Gremlin sales for the final year fell 52% to 22,104 units. By the time production ceased, a total of 671,475 Gremlins had been built.

The updated AMC Spirit replaced the Gremlin for the 1979 model year, basically &quot;a Gremlin with conventional styling ... Lovable, sturdy cars are hard to kill.&quot;

=== Performance ===

The Gremlin was faster than other subcompacts of the time. &quot;Motor Trend&quot; magazine recorded zero to 60 mph (0 to 97 km/h) in 12.6 seconds with the engine. The Ford Pinto and the VW Beetle were in the 18-second range. Fuel economy was to with the small six, compared with the 35-plus mpg economy of the VW Beetle.

Although front-heaviness was generally thought to compromise the handling, Tom McCahill wrote in &quot;Mechanix Illustrated&quot; that the Gremlin was &quot;fast and easy&quot;, with a comparatively stiff ride because of the shortened rear springs. He ran a 232-engined Gremlin with automatic transmission from zero to 60 mph (0 to 97 km/h) in 11.9 seconds, saw on the Daytona Speedway straightaway, and summarized: &quot;On a dollar for dollar basis, I rate the Gremlin the best American buy of the year&quot;.

&quot;Car and Driver&quot; magazine also recorded 0 to 60 mph in 11.9 seconds with a 232-powered Gremlin.

&quot;Automobile Quarterly&quot;″s article &quot;A Critical Look at the 1973 American Cars&quot; summarized that the basic &quot;Gremlin offers outstanding performance for an economy car and excellent fuel mileage.&quot;

When &quot;Popular Mechanics&quot; magazine tested the car with the Audi four-cylinder engine introduced in 1977, they said its acceleration with a four-speed manual felt &quot;amazingly strong&quot;, with 0-60 mph and quarter-mile times one second slower than with the 232 cubic inch straight-six (16 vs. 15, and 21 vs. 20 seconds respectively). The smaller engine produced EPA mileage of highway and city.

The Gremlin&#x27;s body was heavier and stronger than its domestic or imported rivals. The engines were also more powerful than the Gremlin&#x27;s main domestic and imported competition. The powertrains were smoother and more reliable, and the car had fewer recalls. Its chief import rival was the Volkswagen Beetle, which did not handle as well and got similar gas mileage from about 40% of the Gremlin&#x27;s horsepower. The same overall size as the Gremlin, it was packaged marginally better. Gremlin designer Richard Teague commented in &quot;Motor Trend&quot; that to compare the Beetle (whose basic design originated in the late 1930s) to the Gremlin in profile and body design was like &quot;comparing a Ford GT40 to the Hindenburg&quot;.

The Gremlin holds the &quot;distinction of offering one of the widest engine ranges of all time—from two liters to five liters.&quot;

===Randall 401-XR===

Randall AMC dealership in Mesa, Arizona, received AMC&#x27;s endorsement to build V8 powered Gremlins. The cars started out as models from the factory and after Randall&#x27;s modifications would turn in 13.90 second passes at in the quarter mile, for $2,995. Known as the Randall 401-XR (X for Gremlin X, R for Randall), a total of twenty cars were built for the street and one for the strip during 1972, 1973, and 1974. In 2012, the Randalls built a 22nd Continuation Plum 1974 Gremlin 401XR, originally intending to build a few, but completed only one. &quot;Car Craft&quot; magazine tested one with some modifications and achieved in 12.22 seconds in the quarter while still remaining a &quot;totally streetable, daily-driver&quot;. In 1972, &quot;Super Stock and Drag Illustrated&quot; magazine had a &quot;Special Gremlin&quot; issue. One of the many venues where Randall&#x27;s 1972 Gremlin 401XR Super Stock car at the 1972 Winternationals.

== Competition ==

The AMC Gremlin saw action on numerous auto racing venues, including endurance, as well as oval and road racing. Due to their inherent inexpensiveness, strength, and simplicity to modify them for higher performance, many AMC Gremlins were used in drag racing.

In the International Motor Sports Association (IMSA) RS series for compact sedans, Raleigh, North Carolina&#x27;s &quot;Team Highball&quot;, run by Amos Johnson and Bunny Johnson, was the AMC factory-backed team, with Amos Johnson, Whit Diggett, and later, Dennis Shaw driving. The torque of their 6-cylinder Gremlins gave a big advantage on the faster tracks like the Daytona International Speedway, where they were often more than a match for the BMW 2002, Alfa Romeo GTV, Datsun 510, Ford Pinto, Mercury Capri, and Opel Manta. Johnson was the series 1973 co-champion, while independent driver George Alderman took the 1974 title.

Starting in 1970, Wally Booth headed AMC&#x27;s Pro Stock drag racing efforts. He and other drivers campaigned Gremlins painted in the hash red, white, and blue pattern that AMC had adopted as its corporate race livery. Dick Arons built the engines. The team &quot;transformed the brand&#x27;s staid grocery-getter reputation from the ground up into that of a genuine performance powerhouse&quot;. Wally Booth &quot;was one of the Edelbrock crew&#x27;s favorite racers&quot;.

The rule changes for the 1972 Pro Stock season opened drag racing for smaller cars fitted with small-block engines and AMC was committed to fielding the Gremlin. The first car Booth built was a Gremlin body-in-white, but it was wrecked in a towing accident. In preparation for the 1973 racing season, Booth built a tube chassis Gremlin with the former Penske Racing fabricator, Ron Fournier, but switched to a Hornet body Pro Stock body after realizing that the Gremlin&#x27;s aerodynamics were limiting top speed during testing at the Milan Dragway in Michigan.

The automaker&#x27;s involvement in drag racing led to coordination in the development of the Gremlin 401XR. Grant and Mike Randall owners of Randall Rambler/AMC, built a 1972 Gremlin 401XR Drag Car, that they raced at the ARHA Winter Nationals 1972. The Randalls also wrote a high-Performance AMC Engine Tuning guide as well as the &quot;Randall Rambler &amp; Jeep Speed Bible.&quot;

Three factory Pro-Stock 1972 Gremlin drag racers were campaigned around the nation. One was driven by Rich LaMont and sponsored by radio station 99 WIBG in Philadelphia, PA. This car has been restored with a AMC V8 with 4-speed manual transmission and it still runs the quarter-mile at around 8.75 seconds achieving over .

At the 2006 World Power Wheelstanding Championships (not a race, but a &quot;wheelie&quot; contest), Brian Ambrosini&#x27;s specially modified 1974 Gremlin took second place. The car gets all four of its wheels off the ground by its modified AMC V8 producing and achieving average quarter-mile e.t. in the low 8s with a trap speed of around .

The body of the Gremlin was widely used by NASCAR paved and dirt modified stock car teams in the northeastern U.S. and elsewhere from the 1970s to the early 1990s. It was believed that Gremlin&#x27;s long roof with its rear kick-up provided aerodynamic advantages over the more commonly used Pinto and Vega bodies. Lenny Podbielski was &quot;a major player in late 1970s Speedbowl action&quot;.

== Other markets ==
=== Canada ===

American Motors built an assembly plant in Brampton, Ontario, in 1961 for production of motor vehicles for the Canadian market as well as for the United States. The plant built and offered almost all AMC vehicles through the 1960s, allowing AMC to take advantage of the Canada–United States Automotive Products Agreement established between the two countries in 1965. By 1969 production at the Brampton Assembly had grown to such a size that AMC had the plant producing vehicles for the eastern half of the American continent while Kenosha produced vehicles for the western half of the continent. The plant ceased building the Ambassador after 1968 and imported the Javelin and later Matador from the United States but continued to build the Gremlin and Hornet throughout the 1970s.

With Canada moving to the metric system during the 1970s, late model Gremlins were built with their speedometers reading in kilometers per hour.

=== Mexico ===
Vehiculos Automotores Mexicanos (VAM) manufactured Gremlins in Mexico under license and partial ownership (38% equity share) by AMC. Although the Gremlin was introduced to the U.S. and Canadian markets in 1970, VAM continued assembling its version of the Hornet still bearing the name Rambler American as its smallest, least expensive car until 1974. The fact that VAM already had three lines of products (the top limit permitted by legislation) from 1968 through 1973 made it impossible for the Gremlin to be offered. It was until the discontinuation of the Javelin line in 1973 that free space was available for Gremlin production, making 1974 its year of debut.

The 1974 Gremlin was the third VAM car not to bear the Rambler name since the 1968 Javelin and the 1972 Classic (Matador in the U.S.) models. Moreover, the Mexican market continued to use the Gremlin model name for VAM&#x27;s version of the AMC Spirit sedan from 1979 through 1983, several years after the Gremlin nameplate was withdrawn in the U.S. market.

The VAM cars had trim, interiors, and model names that differed from the equivalent AMC-made models. All engines built by VAM were of AMC design, modified to deal with Mexico&#x27;s lower octane gasoline and higher altitudes. The VAM Gremlin was the only car line of its time not to be available with VAM&#x27;s version of AMC&#x27;s I6, due to the economy market segment focus of the cars. This is exactly the opposite case as the AMC Gremlin, which was offered with the option of a 304 V8. The three-speed manual transmission with overdrive, the four-speed manual transmission, the V8 and Audi four-cylinder engines were never available. Trim levels and versions like the two-seater, the Levis Gremlin, the Gremlin Custom, and the Gremlin GT were also never available.

==== 1974 ====
The introductory 1974 Gremlins became unique by incorporating the front clip of the 1974 U.S. AMC Hornet models. VAM never attempted to hide the relationship between the two models, which never harmed the sales or image of either model and was favored by the public. The launch of the Gremlin in Mexico also meant the resurrection of the I6 engine that was discontinued in 1972. The engine was practically the same as in its final year except for a slightly lower compression ratio (8.3:1 instead of 8.5:1). The advertised output was still the same at 145 gross horsepower at 4,400 revolutions per minute and was restricted to one-barrel carburetors. In contrast, since 1973 all VAM-based Hornets had the six as the standard and only engine. VAM Gremlins were basic economy cars with a full synchromesh manual 3-speed transmission, heavy-duty clutch, manual four-wheel drum brakes, manual steering, front sway bar, 3.31:1 rear gear ratio, rigid four-bladed cooling fan, collapsible steering column with anti-theft lock, base steering wheel, side marker and hazard lights, column-mounted shifters only, two-tone padded dashboard with silver-colored front surfaces, electric wipers and washers, monaural AM radio, cigarette lighter, front and rear ashtrays, locking glovebox, folding bench seats, two-point front seatbelts, flip-open rear side vents, roof rack, full carpeting with driver&#x27;s side rubber mat, padded sun visors, sound-insulating cardboard-type headliner, dual coat hooks and round dome light. Factory options for 1974 included a column-mounted automatic transmission, power steering, power drum brakes, heater, parcel shelf, light group, remote-controlled driver and passenger side outside mirrors, sports steering wheel, bright molding package, wheel trim rings, and heavy-duty cooling. All VAM Gremlins used AMC&#x27;s three-pod instrument cluster from the domestic-built Hornet with a blank in the third gauge position from the factory, which could be equipped with a universal tachometer or clock as dealership options. The introductory year production was 2,137.

==== 1975 ====
The 1975 Gremlin models were upgraded, and along with the improvements to the larger car lines VAM took 9% of the Mexican market. VAM Gremlin interiors now featured individual folding front seats with low backs and new door panels, the &quot;two-tone&quot; dashboard with silver-painted front surfaces was replaced by a color-keyed unit, and a new fuel economy gauge was standard on the third space of the instrument cluster. Manual front disk brakes and electronic ignition were among the mechanical upgrades, while the compression ratio of the engine was dropped to 7.6:1. Both transmissions now came only with a floor-mounted shifter. VAM Gremlins ordered with automatic transmissions now included a heater and power steering at no charge. The exterior featured a variation of AMC&#x27;s &quot;hockey stick&quot; side decal and a new design for headlight bezels, grille, and parking lights at the front end that AMC originally developed for its Hornet models. Production doubled to over 4,200 VAM Gremlins.

==== 1976 ====
The Gremlin X version was added in 1976 as a separate model rather than an optional package. The X models included VAM&#x27;s larger I6, a 6000 RPM tachometer, sports steering wheel, 7.00X14 radial tires, Hurst linkage with T-shaped shifter for the manual transmissions, courtesy lights under the parcel shelf, heater, power steering, tinted windshield, bright molding package (drip rails, wheel arches, rocker panels), wheel trim rings, and an in-house two-color rally stripe that was unique to the Mexican market. The 1976 VAM Gremlin X also came with an interior featuring the &quot;Navajo&quot; pattern cloth upholstery that was optional on AMC&#x27;s Pacer DL models built for the Canadian and U.S. markets. The base VAM Gremlin now also included luxurious seating with a center armrest that was never available in the U.S. models. Due to the debut of the Gremlin X and its sportier focus, the base Gremlin switched back to the standard column-mounted shifters for either transmission, but keeping the individual seat configuration. Both versions included revised gauges with a 160 km/h speedometer, new side panel designs, longer folding sun visors, and a styled round dome light lens. Sales for 1976 increased to over 6,000 units.

==== 1977 ====
Starting with the 1977 models, all VAM Gremlins were powered by the I6 regardless of trim level. The exterior featured the shorter new front end clip and rear end treatment as did the U.S. models. The 1977 Gremlin X model included a new digital tachometer and three-point retractable seatbelts, as well as new in-house VAM designs for the seats. The sporty side decal was slightly revised. The seatbelts on the base Gremlin were also changed to three-point units, which were fixed and lacked retractable mechanisms. The option list was expanded with the possibility of ordering a factory air conditioning system for the first time in the VAM line, which was available only in the X model. The previously optional dealership-offered universal air conditioning system remained available for the base model. The VAM Gremlin X (along with the 1977-1979 American ECD, Concord DL four-door equivalent) would be the only VAM car with the 258 I6 engines to be available with a factory air conditioning system, as all other VAM models with it would be units. Around 6,800 VAM Gremlins were sold during 1977.

==== 1978 ====
Only a few changes were made to the 1978 VAM Gremlin. The dashboard design was from the new U.S. market Concord being restricted to the unit with black surfaces only (no wood imitation or brushed aluminum versions). For the Gremlin X, there was a new VAM logo on the steering wheel horn button, smaller pointy volcano hubcaps with bright exposed lug nuts, and a new full-length bodyside decal incorporated the &quot;Gremlin X&quot; logo on the rear quarter panel. The sporty model also got the set of four bumper guards as standard equipment. The base model got another set of new hubcaps with exposed lug nuts, but with a flat top instead. Production fell just below 6,000 VAM Gremlins.

==== Second generation ====

VAM Gremlins used the updated body design of the U.S. and Canadian market AMC Spirit two-door sedan, as well as VAM versions of the Spirit Liftback, called the American GT and the Rally AMX. At the time, cars in Mexico took longer to be perceived as outdated than in the US and since the VAM Gremlin came to the public until 1974 instead of 1970, it was still relatively fresh among the Mexican buyers. Aside from this, the model kept a positive image throughout its whole run. It exceeded VAM&#x27;s sales expectations in its first years. The company originally considered it a temporary low-volume model that would eventually be replaced by the upcoming Pacer model. In the end, the Gremlin stood and became VAM&#x27;s all-time second best-selling line after the American. For these reasons VAM decided to keep the Gremlin name for the upcoming Spirit sedan model, being a testament to the very favorable image VAM cars in general held in Mexico. This was the third time a case like this happened within the company with Rebel and Matador models keeping the name Rambler Classic and the Hornet the Rambler American name.

=== Australia ===

AMC exported a fully built Gremlin to its Australian partner, Australian Motor Industries (AMI) of Port Melbourne, Victoria in 1970 for evaluation purposes. (AMI assembled and marketed other AMC models since 1961.) The evaluation model was painted in AMC&#x27;s &quot;Big Bad Orange&quot; and was converted from left-hand drive to right-hand drive by Sydney Toyota dealer Bill Buckle Pty Ltd. The car featured AMC&#x27;s six-cylinder engine and a three-speed manual transmission. The car was presented at the 1970 Sydney Motor Show to gauge interest and test the market.

The car was featured on the front cover of the November 1970 issue of Australia&#x27;s top motoring magazine, &quot;Wheels&quot; magazine. The magazine&#x27;s review pointed to the likelihood that the &quot;local content&quot; requirements would force the price up to that of the high-priced, Australian-assembled Hornet, and probably price the car out of the market.

For marketing purposes, it was branded as a &quot;Rambler Gremlin&quot; in keeping with the use of the Rambler marque for all AMC vehicles sold in Australia despite that Rambler as a brand was retired in the United States at the end of the 1969 model year. However, no Gremlin models were put into production in Australia.

Right-hand-drive Gremlins were imported into Australia by U.S. servicemen.

=== Switzerland ===
Beginning in 1970 Zurich automotive importer J.H Heller AG began importing American Motors vehicles, specifically the Javelin, Gremlin and later the Pacer. Swiss market vehicles were shipped from AMC&#x27;s Canadian plant.

=== United Kingdom ===
American Motors vehicles were exported to the United Kingdom during the 1960s and 1970s and sold by Rambler Motors (A.M.C.) Ltd in London with dealers in London, Yorks, Kent, and Worcester. While earlier models such as the Rambler Classic, Rebel, Ambassador, and Matador had been exported as completed factory right-hand-drive vehicles, only left-hand-drive Gremlins were exported to the United Kingdom. A British company called C.T. Wooler, in Andover, Hampshire had been in the business for a long time converting LHD cars to RHD and entered into an agreement with AMC to convert AMC vehicles. Wooler converted Gremlins as well as AMC Pacers and Jeeps.

== Hurst Rescue System 1 ==

Between 1972 and 1974, Hurst Performance marketed &quot;a highway safety vehicle&quot; for emergency services, as well as a compact alternative to trucks for motorsport race tracks. The &quot;Hurst Rescue System 1&quot; was based on the AMC Gremlin and designed to quickly assist vehicle extrication of crash victims. The vehicle came with the &quot;Hurst Rescue Tool&quot;, commonly known as &quot;The Jaws of Life&quot;, winch, stretcher, and firefighting and first aid supplies. The vehicle also included push bumpers and a 25-gallon water tank. The price for this fully equipped rescue vehicle was between $11,000 to $13,000.

===Police===
A 1975 Gremlin was used as an experimental police vehicle by the Houston Police Department&#x27;s Traffic Bureau, but this did not result in fleet orders.

== Experimental cars ==
The Gremlin proved a popular testbed for experiments with alternative fuels. Many universities converted them to run on natural gas, hydrogen, and electric power.

=== Hydrogen ===
In 1972 University of California, Los Angeles researchers won a nationwide Urban Vehicle Design Competition when they modified a 1972 AMC Gremlin to run on hydrogen. The lessons learned are still useful today. The engine was a converted Ford V8 noted for its volumetric efficiency. Lacking sophisticated electronics and injection systems, the carburetor was a modified propane unit and the &quot;thermos&quot;-type hydrogen tank gave the Gremlin a range of . Tests indicated that the car would not only meet the scheduled 1976 vehicle United States emission standards, but also actually emit slightly cleaner air than it took in. As part of the 1972 Urban Vehicle Design Competition, UCLA engineering students also enlarged the side glass area above the rear wheels for improved visibility, designed a roll cage which projected through the Gremlin&#x27;s roof to double as a roof rack, and designed 5 MPH bumpers with an environmentally-friendly energy-absorbing popcorn core, covered with a recycled-tire tread surface. In 1984, UCLA&#x27;s first hydrogen-powered car was sold for one dollar to the William F. Harrah Automobile Museum in Reno, Nevada. In 2010, the car was available on an auction site.

=== Alternative fuels ===
Other experiments used AMC Gremlins. To evaluate non-petroleum fuel and measure mechanical wear under mostly short city driving, a 1970 Gremlin with AMC&#x27;s engine operated successfully on methanol for ten years and .

The broadest range of fuel tests were conducted by the United States Department of Energy (DOE) labs in Bartlesville, Oklahoma. Engineers estimated the performance and fuel economy of 1977 Gremlin Xs operating on ordinary gasoline, a variety of wide boiling range fuels (naphtha, kerosene, etc.), as well as two alcohols, ethanol and methanol.

=== Electric ===
The Electric Fuel Propulsion Company (EFP) of Ferndale, Michigan, produced a number of electric cars including the AMC Gremlin based, two-passenger X-144. Introduced in 1973 it featured a direct current motor fueled by a 144-volt cobalt-lead storage batteries designed to reduce the formation of harmful gases during recharging, as well as a regular 12-volt battery to operate the cars lights, horn, and heater blower. Performance was claimed to be similar to a base gasoline Gremlin, including a top speed of , but with a calculated lower cost per mile for the X-144 over five years and of use.

Inventor &quot;Cotton&quot; Whatley of Wichita Falls, Texas, offered an unknown number of modified electric Gremlins for sale through various dealerships between 1973 and 1978. Whatley&#x27;s Gremlin Electric had a top speed of and a maximum range of .

== Exhibition ==
Engineers at Coleman Products Corporation in Coleman, Wisconsin, created a non-drivable plexiglas Gremlin as a demonstrator of the placement and function of electrical wiring harnesses.

== Concept Gremlins ==
=== Gremlin Voyager ===
In 1972 AMC developed a prototype &quot;Gremlin Voyager&quot; with a slide out rear panel called &quot;Grem-Bin&quot;. The car was a production Gremlin with a proposed &quot;shelf&quot; design to make cargo loading easier.

=== XP prototype ===
In 1974 a production car was modified and dubbed the Gremlin XP prototype. It has a larger glass hatchback and additional side quarter windows. A pronounced crease started from the mid-body section and wraps over the roof while the rear quarter panels feature bulges around the wheel well openings. The rear panel has a recessed and blacked-out area with four lights. The design of the concept car improved visibility around the Gremlin&#x27;s original wide C-pillar.

=== G/II prototype ===
Another 1974 Gremlin was modified with a front end from the Hornet. The concept car received a special grille, but the most radical design feature was its fastback roofline. This concept car turned out to be similar to the Gremlin&#x27;s replacement, the liftback Spirit model introduced for the 1979 model year.

=== Concept 80 ===
In 1977 American Motors presented six show cars to illustrate the automaker&#x27;s commitment to smaller, fuel-efficient vehicles for the 1980s. Three of them, the &quot;Concept I&quot;, &quot;Concept II&quot;, and &quot;Concept Grand Touring&quot; represented new subcompact designs.
* The Concept I car combined a &quot;wedge-design&quot; with a short hood, low body beltline, steeply raked windshield, and expanded glass area. The front featured a mesh grille with &quot;rally-type&quot; parking lights and rectangular headlamps. The rear end was squared off featuring large rear quarter windows to eliminate blind spots. The rear panel incorporated a characteristic continental tire bulge.
* The Concept II design was another Gremlin replacement proposal featuring integral soft bumpers, and headlamps concealed by flush sliding doors. A pronounced center structural &quot;Targa-band&quot; was designed to add strength to the roof. The squared-off rear end featured a glass hatchback.
* The Concept Grand Touring was a larger luxury hatchback designed for four passengers. The interior was appointed in leather and corduroy upholstery and luxury appointments with deep-pile carpeting. The front end featured a &quot;venturi&quot; grille with rally-type lights. The rear side windows were &quot;opera&quot; recessed and surrounded by a vinyl cover that ran over the roof&#x27;s rear quarter. The Concept GT car had genuine wire wheels.

Design elements from the AMC&#x27;s show cars &quot;Concept II&quot; and &quot;Concept GT&quot; were incorporated into the Gremlin&#x27;s replacement, the AMC Spirit that was introduced in 1979.

== Marketplace and reception ==
The 1970s were one of the most volatile periods in the history of the automobile industry which is renowned for its ups and downs. A total of 671,475 Gremlins were sold in the United States and Canada, making it the most popular single generation body style/chassis produced by AMC (other models, such as the Rambler and even Hornet, have higher production numbers, but consisted of more than one chassis design and body style in the case of the Rambler, multiple body styles for the Hornet).

A book about the popular history of the 1970s introduces it as the decade of &quot;pet rocks, shag carpets, platform shoes, and the AMC Gremlin.&quot; It is among the cars that people who were in high school in the late 1970s and early 1980s would be familiar with because it was one of the first cars they drove and among most often seen in student parking lots. Kiplinger&#x27;s personal finance magazine, &quot;Changing Times&quot;, listed the AMC Gremlin as first among the best subcompact used cars as &quot;selected by top mechanics for good value, good service.&quot; Five years after the Gremlin&#x27;s introduction, the mechanics liked the six-cylinder engine and most preferred automatic transmission. Comments included, &quot;I have one. It&#x27;s the greatest. I own one with a 304 V-8 engine. Have no trouble outside of normal maintenance.&quot;

During the early 1970s American cars &quot;are remembered far more often for their power than their style, and ... throughout the decade, the character of cars became blurred. Only a handful of cars had real personalities...&quot; the AMC Gremlin was one of them, &quot;a pioneering hatchback&quot;. According to Tom and Ray Magliozzi, &quot;it&#x27;s easy to criticize this car now, because just about any car from the early &#x27;70s would look bad next to today&#x27;s cars. They had no fuel injection, no independent suspension, no air bags, no anti-lock brakes, no nothing! But compared with the other cars of its era, the Gremlin wasn&#x27;t bad.&quot;

Officially discontinued after the 1978 model year, the Gremlin was restyled, including a new model that featured a sloping liftback for 1979 and the model line renamed the AMC Spirit. This restyled continuation of the familiar chopped-tail two-door and the new hatch coupe caused sales to increase to 52,478 units for 1979. The original &quot;Kammback&quot; body style continued in production until 1982 as the Spirit Sedan with larger rear side windows. The basic design was also used for the small AMC Eagle Kammback in 1981 and 1982.

American Motors lacked the funds to come up with a separate platform for a sub-compact car, so it did something different with an existing model, and &quot;although car snobs make fun of the chop-tailed Gremlin, it was a huge sales hit.&quot; The authors of the book &quot;365 Cars You Must Drive&quot; &quot;that any self-respecting auto enthusiast just has to know and experience from the driver&#x27;s seat&quot; describe that &quot;driving a Gremlin isn&#x27;t about the drive; it&#x27;s about being seen in one, making a statement that you dig the mid-1970s, and also wouldn&#x27;t be caught dead in something normal.&quot; An article published by &quot;Time&quot; in 2007 included the Gremlin as one of &quot;The 50 Worst Cars of All Time&quot;, describing it as an AMC Hornet with the rear end whacked off, and criticizing its exterior proportions, with a long low snout, long front overhang, and a truncated tail, &quot;like the tail snapped off a salamander&quot;.
In 2007, &quot;Popular Science&quot; magazine included the AMC Gremlin as one of six historic cars that took &quot;Small Steps to a Smart Future&quot; in a special issue about the &quot;Future of the Car: Efficiency&quot;.

The Gremlin has a following among old car hobbyists and collectors of historic vehicles. In some cases, the Gremlin enjoys &quot;a cult-like following in today&#x27;s collectible car market&quot;. In 2007, &quot;Business Week&quot; reported that 1970s cars such as the Gremlin were increasingly attractive to buyers, and an insurance provider for collector-car owners reported that values were rising at that time.

In light of rising gasoline prices, the Gremlin offers a relatively economical alternative to muscle cars and the more massive American cars of its era-especially for buyers leaning toward the eccentric. AMC said the Gremlin got &quot;the best gas mileage of any production car made in America&quot;, and its gas tank allowed or more between fill-ups.

===Future U.S. Presidents===
Two former U.S. presidents drove AMC Gremlins during their younger days.

&quot;Bill Clinton drove the back roads of Northwest Arkansas in his green AMC Gremlin&quot; during his 1974 campaign for the only attempt he made for a seat in the United States Congress.

An AMC Gremlin with a Levi interior was owned by the George H. W. Bush family and driven by George W. Bush in 1973 while getting his Master of Business Administration (MBA) degree.

===Hot Wheels model===
Hot Wheels designer Paul Tam created a model of a Gremlin with six wheels for the 1972 Hot Wheels series, called &quot;Open Fire&quot;, with the extra pair of wheels under a large, exposed metal engine. Other than the engine, extra wheels, and elongated hood, &quot;the Open Fire retains many accurate styling details of the Gremlin. Later on, in the Flying Colors range, Hot Wheels made the Gremlin Grinder: A rear-jacked Gremlin with a huge open engine that was produced through the mid-1970s in either green or chrome. The last one was a stockcar or rally car custom version of the Gremlin that was first made in the early 1980s and is still popular today, &quot;The Greased Gremlin&quot;.

==See also==
* &quot;Nebraska v. One 1970 2-Door Sedan Rambler (Gremlin)&quot;

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 

== External links ==

* An article about the AMC Gremlin
* The Best and Worst Subcompact, the AMC Gremlin
* Data, information, and resources by Gremlin X com
* 
* AMC Rambler Club
* American Motors Owners Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q294696" start="4" end="15" title="AMC Gremlin" label="AMC Gremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q294696" start="22" end="45" title="AMC Gremlin" label="American Motors Gremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704381" start="52" end="73" title="subcompact car" label="subcompact automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q202708" start="168" end="195" title="American Motors Corporation" label="American Motors Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511956" start="250" end="281" title="Vehículos Automotores Mexicanos" label="Vehículos Automotores Mexicanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q294695" start="319" end="325" title="AMC Hornet" label="Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q676515" start="366" end="374" title="kammback" label="kammback"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940332" start="414" end="425" title="economy car" label="economy car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303236" start="448" end="462" title="Chevrolet Vega" label="Chevrolet Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059377" start="467" end="477" title="Ford Pinto" label="Ford Pinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="518" end="535" title="Volkswagen Beetle" label="Volkswagen Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q243543" start="540" end="554" title="Toyota Corolla" label="Toyota Corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q294717" start="797" end="807" title="AMC Spirit" label="AMC Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934752" start="1182" end="1193" title="Dick Teague" label="Dick Teague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554177" start="1371" end="1387" title="air sickness bag" label="air sickness bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q294706" start="1419" end="1426" title="AMC Javelin" label="Javelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463541" start="1742" end="1750" title="pony car" label="pony car"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652566" start="1775" end="1781" title="AMC AMX-GT" label="AMX-GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q964426" start="1810" end="1842" title="New York International Auto Show" label="New York International Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q294663" start="1907" end="1910" title="AMC AMX" label="AMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q294695" start="2123" end="2129" title="AMC Hornet" label="Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q946808" start="2139" end="2150" title="compact car" label="compact car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128004" start="2175" end="2184" title="wheelbase" label="wheelbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144077" start="2710" end="2732" title="suggested retail price" label="suggested retail price"/>
<link wikidata="Q216762" start="2763" end="2772" title="hatchback" label="hatchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930094" start="2864" end="2872" title="B-pillar" label="B-pillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="3019" end="3023" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q973083" start="3291" end="3308" title="Studebaker Avanti" label="Studebaker Avanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="3995" end="4006" title="aerodynamic" label="aerodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q697152" start="4193" end="4198" title="Volkswagen Jetta" label="Jetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q247" start="4203" end="4207" title="Volkswagen Golf" label="Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412790" start="4597" end="4604" title="gremlin" label="gremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670161" start="4853" end="4859" title="mascot" label="mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200129" start="4877" end="4900" title="product differentiation" label="product differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965741" start="5296" end="5313" title="Nash Metropolitan" label="Nash Metropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141056" start="5330" end="5337" title="Crosley" label="Crosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036945" start="5375" end="5389" title="captive import" label="captive import"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148385" start="5815" end="5817" title="Straight-six engine" label="I6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148385" start="5901" end="5903" title="Straight-six engine" label="I6"/>
<link wikidata="Q20311520" start="7115" end="7127" title="trim package" label="trim package"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583756" start="7320" end="7342" title="Goodyear Polyglas tire" label="Goodyear Polyglas tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430939" start="7369" end="7380" title="bucket seat" label="bucket seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q671554" start="7557" end="7563" title="Stroke (engine)" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q828137" start="7591" end="7608" title="Compression ratio" label="Compression ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652579" start="7896" end="7905" title="AMC V8 engine" label="V8 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427072" start="8037" end="8068" title="Society of Automotive Engineers" label="Society of Automotive Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463541" start="8334" end="8343" title="pony cars" label="pony cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537733" start="8538" end="8554" title="Non-synchronous transmission" label="non-synchronized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208529" start="8564" end="8583" title="manual transmission" label="manual transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q825943" start="8614" end="8625" title="Borg-Warner" label="Borg-Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="8634" end="8656" title="automatic transmission" label="automatic transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="8677" end="8685" title="Chrysler Corporation" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826788" start="8695" end="8706" title="TorqueFlite" label="TorqueFlite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8907" end="8926" title="Steering wheel#Adjustable steering wheels" label="tilt steering wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q545837" start="8989" end="9002" title="tow hitch" label="Class 1 hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q755174" start="9046" end="9056" title="disk brake" label="disk brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q329717" start="9153" end="9161" title="warranty" label="warranty"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="9717" end="9733" title="public relations" label="public relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967350" start="10089" end="10135" title="National Highway Traffic Safety Administration" label="National Highway Traffic Safety Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q127962" start="10160" end="10171" title="Levi&amp;#x27;s" label="Levi&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997557" start="10257" end="10268" title="fire safety" label="fire safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957782" start="10665" end="10681" title="Consumer Reports" label="Consumer Reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="10871" end="10887" title="Arab Oil Embargo" label="Arab Oil Embargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930094" start="11670" end="11678" title="C-pillar" label="C-pillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q653807" start="11850" end="11869" title="catalytic converter" label="catalytic converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="11887" end="11932" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q248382" start="12147" end="12166" title="electronic ignition" label="electronic ignition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241795" start="12180" end="12190" title="Prestolite Electric" label="Prestolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786026" start="12383" end="12393" title="fuel gauge" label="fuel gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545052" start="12492" end="12501" title="Overdrive (mechanics)" label="overdrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002603" start="12807" end="12818" title="radial tire" label="radial tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q294714" start="13039" end="13044" title="AMC Pacer" label="Pacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q609466" start="13362" end="13379" title="Colgate-Palmolive" label="Colgate-Palmolive"/>
<link wikidata="Q561852" start="13402" end="13413" title="Willie Mays" label="Willie Mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545536" start="13556" end="13573" title="Volkswagen Golf Mk1" label="Volkswagen Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="13754" end="13757" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="EPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q185245" start="14053" end="14064" title="stagflation" label="stagflation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14072" end="14092" title="Economic history of the United States#Inflation woes: 1970s" label="inflationary economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850364" start="14278" end="14288" title="model year" label="model year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208529" start="15325" end="15344" title="manual transmission" label="manual transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q755174" start="16520" end="16530" title="disc brake" label="disc brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q217312" start="16705" end="16718" title="cylinder head" label="cylinder head"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="16810" end="16820" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23317" start="16821" end="16825" title="Audi" label="Audi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784109" start="16826" end="16837" title="Straight-four engine" label="inline-four"/>
<link wikidata="Q294679" start="17842" end="17849" title="AMC Concord" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798773" start="17892" end="17896" title="HVAC" label="HVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501625" start="18189" end="18196" title="Spoiler (automotive)" label="spoiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q847962" start="18886" end="18903" title="front-wheel drive" label="front-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q294717" start="19080" end="19090" title="AMC Spirit" label="AMC Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109600" start="19325" end="19336" title="Motor Trend" label="Motor Trend"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545619" start="19361" end="19375" title="0 to 60 mph" label="zero to 60 mph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816760" start="19658" end="19670" title="Tom McCahill" label="Tom McCahill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804664" start="19686" end="19706" title="Mechanix Illustrated" label="Mechanix Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545619" start="19894" end="19908" title="0 to 60 mph" label="zero to 60 mph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179250" start="19952" end="19968" title="Daytona Speedway" label="Daytona Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q858319" start="20102" end="20116" title="Car and Driver" label="Car and Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="20800" end="20803" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="EPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q359495" start="21092" end="21098" title="Product recall" label="recall"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="21132" end="21149" title="Volkswagen Beetle" label="Volkswagen Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q291149" start="21545" end="21554" title="Ford GT40" label="Ford GT40"/>
<link wikidata="Q217964" start="21562" end="21572" title="LZ 129 Hindenburg" label="Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q49261" start="21764" end="21777" title="Mesa, Arizona" label="Mesa, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22642" end="22653" title="Super Stock" label="Super Stock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22665" end="22669" title="1972 NHRA Winternationals" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785088" start="22670" end="22685" title="NHRA Winternationals" label="Winternationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="22746" end="22757" title="auto racing" label="auto racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404296" start="22807" end="22818" title="road racing" label="road racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q46241" start="22954" end="22965" title="drag racing" label="drag racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179250" start="23337" end="23367" title="Daytona International Speedway" label="Daytona International Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596771" start="23417" end="23425" title="BMW 02 Series" label="BMW 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834760" start="23427" end="23441" title="Alfa Romeo 105/115 Series Coupés" label="Alfa Romeo GTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489002" start="23443" end="23453" title="Datsun 510" label="Datsun 510"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059377" start="23455" end="23465" title="Ford Pinto" label="Ford Pinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q887416" start="23467" end="23480" title="Mercury Capri" label="Mercury Capri"/>
<link wikidata="Q918043" start="23486" end="23496" title="Opel Manta" label="Opel Manta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620156" start="25430" end="25437" title="wheelie" label="wheelie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360297" start="26399" end="26449" title="Canada–United States Automotive Products Agreement" label="Canada–United States Automotive Products Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715377" start="26523" end="26540" title="Brampton Assembly (AMC)" label="Brampton Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q294677" start="26756" end="26766" title="AMC Ambassador" label="Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q294706" start="26795" end="26802" title="AMC Javelin" label="Javelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q294704" start="26813" end="26820" title="AMC Matador" label="Matador"/>
<link wikidata="Q294695" start="26883" end="26889" title="AMC Hornet" label="Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824338" start="26939" end="26952" title="Metrication in Canada" label="metric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q180154" start="27037" end="27056" title="kilometers per hour" label="kilometers per hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511956" start="27074" end="27105" title="Vehiculos Automotores Mexicanos" label="Vehiculos Automotores Mexicanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507706" start="27359" end="27375" title="Rambler American" label="Rambler American"/>
<link wikidata="Q193423" start="28287" end="28293" title="Octane rating" label="octane"/>
<link wikidata="Q294717" start="35175" end="35185" title="AMC Spirit" label="AMC Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q781589" start="36306" end="36333" title="Australian Motor Industries" label="Australian Motor Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151625" start="36758" end="36775" title="Australian International Motor Show" label="Sydney Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992353" start="36926" end="36944" title="Wheels (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Wheels&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991371" start="37572" end="37582" title="Soldier" label="servicemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q294706" start="37723" end="37730" title="AMC Javelin" label="Javelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q473352" start="38075" end="38090" title="Rambler Classic" label="Rambler Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q294709" start="38092" end="38097" title="AMC Rebel" label="Rebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q294677" start="38099" end="38109" title="Rambler Ambassador" label="Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q294704" start="38115" end="38122" title="AMC Matador" label="Matador"/>
<link wikidata="Q492805" start="38297" end="38304" title="Andover, Hampshire" label="Andover"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="38306" end="38315" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q294714" start="38485" end="38494" title="AMC Pacer" label="AMC Pacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q30113" start="38500" end="38504" title="Jeep" label="Jeep"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996177" start="38560" end="38577" title="Hurst Performance" label="Hurst Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q814610" start="38628" end="38646" title="emergency services" label="emergency services"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="38695" end="38705" title="motorsport" label="motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777138" start="38706" end="38716" title="race track" label="race track"/>
<link wikidata="Q352189" start="38817" end="38836" title="vehicle extrication" label="vehicle extrication"/>
<link wikidata="Q611035" start="38936" end="38952" title="Hydraulic rescue tools" label="The Jaws of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265780" start="39224" end="39238" title="Police transport" label="police vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916689" start="39246" end="39271" title="Houston Police Department" label="Houston Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318674" start="39390" end="39397" title="testbed" label="testbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="39481" end="39492" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="39494" end="39502" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="39508" end="39516" title="electric" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="39550" end="39587" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824163" start="39801" end="39822" title="volumetric efficiency" label="volumetric efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q308881" start="39862" end="39879" title="Fuel injection" label="injection systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q165435" start="39885" end="39895" title="carburetor" label="carburetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131189" start="39911" end="39918" title="propane" label="propane"/>
<link wikidata="Q23664" start="39932" end="39956" title="vacuum flask" label="&amp;quot;thermos&amp;quot;-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892471" start="40077" end="40109" title="United States emission standards" label="United States emission standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008389" start="40642" end="40659" title="William F. Harrah" label="William F. Harrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="40681" end="40693" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="40826" end="40835" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="40965" end="40973" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="41050" end="41084" title="United States Department of Energy" label="United States Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q809450" start="41099" end="41121" title="Bartlesville, Oklahoma" label="Bartlesville, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="41217" end="41225" title="gasoline" label="gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q898983" start="41266" end="41273" title="naphtha" label="naphtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="41275" end="41283" title="kerosene" label="kerosene"/>
<link wikidata="Q194361" start="41317" end="41324" title="Ethanol fuel" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206984" start="41329" end="41337" title="Methanol fuel" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41361" end="41399" title="Apollo Energy Systems#AMC conversions" label="Electric Fuel Propulsion Company (EFP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406927" start="41403" end="41421" title="Ferndale, Michigan" label="Ferndale, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="41545" end="41559" title="direct current" label="direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="41587" end="41593" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="41594" end="41598" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q187510" start="41599" end="41616" title="Rechargeable battery" label="storage batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q128349" start="41993" end="42013" title="Wichita Falls, Texas" label="Wichita Falls, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525707" start="42270" end="42288" title="Coleman, Wisconsin" label="Coleman, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q146123" start="42313" end="42322" title="plexiglas" label="plexiglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145550" start="43351" end="43359" title="fastback" label="fastback"/>
<link wikidata="Q3688934" start="44199" end="44215" title="continental tire" label="continental tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535526" start="44406" end="44416" title="Targa top" label="Targa-band"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354062" start="44827" end="44832" title="Opera window" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746628" start="44955" end="44966" title="wire wheels" label="wire wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q680922" start="46864" end="46885" title="Tom and Ray Magliozzi" label="Tom and Ray Magliozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q294717" start="47383" end="47393" title="AMC Spirit" label="AMC Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q294685" start="47711" end="47720" title="AMC Eagle" label="AMC Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q833195" start="49159" end="49172" title="Business Week" label="Business Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072763" start="49457" end="49468" title="muscle cars" label="muscle cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="49756" end="49771" title="President of the United States" label="U.S. presidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="49825" end="49837" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="49872" end="49880" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="49984" end="50006" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="50062" end="50079" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="50101" end="50115" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="50142" end="50175" title="Master of Business Administration" label="Master of Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q585537" start="50214" end="50224" title="Hot Wheels" label="Hot Wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q110707369" start="50929" end="50980" title="Nebraska v. One 1970 2-Door Sedan Rambler (Gremlin)" label="Nebraska v. One 1970 2-Door Sedan Rambler (Gremlin)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53358" wikidata="Q160373" url="?curid=53358" title="Pope Marcellinus">
<text>Pope Marcellinus was the bishop of Rome from 30 June 296 to his death in 304. A historical accusation was levelled at him by some sources to the effect that he might have renounced Christianity during Emperor Diocletian&#x27;s persecution of Christians before repenting afterwards, which would explain why he is omitted from lists of martyrs. The accusation is rejected, among others, by Augustine of Hippo. He is today venerated as a saint in the Catholic Church and in the Serbian Orthodox Church.

==Pontificate==
According to the &quot;Liberian Catalogue&quot;, Marcellinus was a Roman, the son of Proiectus or Projectus. He succeeded Caius as bishop of Rome on 30 June 296. Marcellinus&#x27; pontificate began at a time when Diocletian was Roman emperor, but had not yet started to persecute the Christians, and their membership grew. Caesar Galerius led the pagan movement against Christianity and aroused Diocletian against Christians in 302; first, Christian soldiers had to leave the army, later the Church&#x27;s property was confiscated and their books destroyed. After two fires in Diocletian&#x27;s palace, he took harder measures; Christians had to apostatize or be sentenced to death.

Marcellinus is not mentioned in the &quot;Martyrologium hieronymianum&quot;, or in the &quot;Depositio episcoporum&quot;, or in the &quot;Depositio martyrum&quot;. The &quot;Liber Pontificalis&quot;, based on the lost &quot;Acts of St Marcellinus&quot;, relates that during Diocletian’s persecution, Marcellinus offered incense to idols, but that, repenting shortly afterwards, he re-confessed the faith of Christ and suffered martyrdom with several companions. Other documents speak of his defection, and it is probably this lapse that explains the silence of the ancient liturgical calendars. In the beginning of the 5th century, Petilianus, the Donatist bishop of Cirta, says that Marcellinus and his priests had given up the holy books to the pagans during the persecution and offered incense to false gods. Augustine of Hippo denied the affair. The records of the pseudo-Council of Sinuessa, which were fabricated at the beginning of the 6th century, state that Marcellinus after his fall presented himself before a council, which refused to try him on the ground that &quot;prima sedes a nemine iudicatur&quot; (&quot;The first See is judged by none&quot;).

According to the &quot;Liber Pontificalis&quot;, Marcellinus was buried on 26 April 304 in the cemetery of Priscilla, on the Via Salaria, 25 days after his martyrdom; the Liberian Catalogue gives as the date 25 October. The fact of the martyrdom, too, is not established with certainty. After a considerable interregnum, he was succeeded by Marcellus, with whom he has sometimes been confused.

== Veneration==
Marcellinus was mentioned in the General Roman Calendar, into which a feast day in his honour jointly with that of Saint Cletus on 26 April was inserted in the thirteenth century. Because of the uncertainties regarding both, this joint feast was removed from that calendar in 1969. Saint Cletus is still listed in the Roman Martyrology under 26 April date; but Saint Marcellinus is no longer mentioned in that professedly incomplete list of recognized saints. Pope Marcellinus, along with Pope Marcellus, is commemorated in the Serbian Prologue of Ohrid on 7 June according to the Julian Calendar.

==See also==

*List of Catholic saints
*List of popes

==Notes==
==External links==

*Colonnade Statue in St Peter&#x27;s Square</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160373" start="0" end="16" title="Pope Marcellinus" label="Pope Marcellinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="25" end="39" title="bishop of Rome" label="bishop of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="181" end="193" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="209" end="219" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265674" start="227" end="252" title="Diocletianic Persecution" label="persecution of Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="388" end="406" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="448" end="463" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="475" end="498" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268359" start="540" end="558" title="Liberian Catalogue" label="Liberian Catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="584" end="589" title="Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q160882" start="639" end="644" title="Pope Caius" label="Caius"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="648" end="662" title="bishop of Rome" label="bishop of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="730" end="740" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="745" end="758" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265674" start="787" end="810" title="Diocletianic Persecution" label="persecute the Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188751" start="840" end="846" title="Caesar (title)" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q172168" start="847" end="855" title="Galerius" label="Galerius"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="864" end="869" title="pagan" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786752" start="1243" end="1270" title="Martyrologium hieronymianum" label="Martyrologium hieronymianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q309061" start="1375" end="1393" title="Liber Pontificalis" label="Liber Pontificalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="1475" end="1485" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q840665" start="1532" end="1536" title="Idolatry" label="idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="1628" end="1634" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816050" start="1833" end="1843" title="Petilianus" label="Petilianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203204" start="1849" end="1857" title="Donatist" label="Donatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093156" start="1868" end="1873" title="Cirta" label="Cirta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="2013" end="2031" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55648542" start="2070" end="2096" title="pseudo-Council of Sinuessa" label="pseudo-Council of Sinuessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661285" start="2104" end="2119" title="Symmachian forgeries" label="were fabricated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165927" start="2473" end="2482" title="Priscilla" label="Priscilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q549998" start="2491" end="2502" title="Via Salaria" label="Via Salaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012667" start="2810" end="2832" title="General Roman Calendar" label="General Roman Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="2847" end="2856" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q80450" start="2892" end="2904" title="Saint Cletus" label="Saint Cletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="3358" end="3373" title="Julian Calendar" label="Julian Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566424" start="3391" end="3414" title="List of Catholic saints" label="List of Catholic saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q40483" start="3416" end="3429" title="List of popes" label="List of popes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53359" wikidata="Q54065" url="?curid=53359" title="Suffolk County, New York">
<text>Suffolk County ( ) is the easternmost county in the U.S. state of New York, constituting the eastern two-thirds of Long Island. It is bordered to its west by Nassau County, to its east by Gardiners Bay and the open Atlantic Ocean, to its north by Long Island Sound, and to its south by the Atlantic Ocean.

As of the 2020 United States census, the county&#x27;s population was 1,525,920, its highest decennial count ever, making Suffolk the fourth-most populous county in the State of New York, and the most populous outside of the boroughs of New York City. Its county seat is Riverhead, though most county offices are in Hauppauge. The county was named after the county of Suffolk in England, the origin of its earliest European settlers.

Suffolk County incorporates the easternmost extreme of both the New York City metropolitan area and New York State. The geographically largest of Long Island&#x27;s four counties and the second-largest of New York&#x27;s 62 counties, Suffolk County is in length and in width at its widest (including water). Most of the island is near sea level, with over of coastline.

Like other parts of Long Island, the county&#x27;s high population density and proximity to New York City has resulted in a diverse economy, including industry, science, agriculture, fishery, and tourism. Major scientific research facilities in Suffolk County include Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton and Plum Island Animal Disease Center on Plum Island. The county is home to Stony Brook University in Stony Brook and Farmingdale State College in Farmingdale.

==History==
Suffolk County was part of the Connecticut Colony before becoming an original county of the Province of New York, one of twelve created in 1683. From 1664 until 1683, it had been the East Riding of Yorkshire. Its boundaries were essentially the same as at present, with only minor changes in the boundary with its western neighbor, which was originally Queens County but has been Nassau County since the separation of Nassau from Queens in 1899.

During the American Revolutionary War, Great Britain occupied Suffolk County after the retreat of George Washington&#x27;s forces in the Battle of Long Island, and the county remained under occupation until the British evacuation of New York on November 25, 1783.

According to the Suffolk County website, the county is the leading agricultural county in the state of New York, saying that: &quot;The weather is temperate, clean water is abundant, and the soil is so good that Suffolk is the leading agricultural county in New York State. That Suffolk is still number one in farming, even with the development that has taken place, is a tribute to thoughtful planning, along with the excellent soil, favorable weather conditions, and the work of the dedicated farmers in this region.&quot;

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has an area of , of which is land and (62%) is water. It is the second-largest county in New York by total area and occupies 66% of the land area of Long Island.

Suffolk County occupies the central and eastern part of Long Island, in the extreme east of the State of New York. The eastern end of the county splits into two peninsulas, known as the North Fork and the South Fork. The county is surrounded by water on three sides, including the Atlantic Ocean and Long Island Sound, with of coastline. The eastern end contains large bays.

The highest elevation in the county, and on Long Island as a whole, is Jayne&#x27;s Hill in West Hills, at above sea level. This low lying-geography means that much of the county is vulnerable to sea level rise.

===Climate===
Suffolk County sits at the convergence of climate zones including the humid continental (&quot;Dfa&quot;) and humid subtropical (&quot;Cfa&quot;), bordering closely on an oceanic climate (Cfb). The majority of the county by land area is in the &quot;Dfa&quot; zone. Summers are cooler at the east end than in the western part of the county. The hardiness zone is 7a, except in Copiague Harbor, Lindenhurst, and Montauk, where it is 7b. Average monthly temperatures in Hauppauge range from in January to in July, and in the Riverhead town center they range from in January to in July, which includes both daytime and nighttime temperatures. On February 9, 2013, Suffolk County was besieged with 30 inches of snow, making it the largest day of snowfall on record in Suffolk.
===Adjacent counties===
Suffolk County has maritime boundaries with five other U.S. counties and is connected by land only to Nassau County.
* Nassau County - west
* Fairfield County, Connecticut - northwest
* New Haven County, Connecticut - north
* Middlesex County, Connecticut - north
* New London County, Connecticut - north
* Washington County, Rhode Island - northeast

===National protected areas===
* Amagansett National Wildlife Refuge
* Conscience Point National Wildlife Refuge
* Elizabeth A. Morton National Wildlife Refuge
* Fire Island National Seashore
* Sayville National Wildlife Refuge
* Seatuck National Wildlife Refuge
* Target Rock National Wildlife Refuge
* Wertheim National Wildlife Refuge

==Demographics==
According to the 2010 U.S. census there were 1,493,350 people and 569,985 households residing in the county. The census estimated Suffolk County&#x27;s population decreased slightly to 1,481,093 in 2018, representing 7.5% of the census-estimated New York State population of 19,745,289 and 19.0% of the census-estimated Long Island population of 7,869,820. The population density in 2010 was , with 569,985 households at an average density of . However, by 2012, with an estimated total population increasing moderately to 1,499,273 there were 569,359 housing units. As of 2006, Suffolk County was the 21st-most populous county in the United States.

By 2014, the county&#x27;s racial makeup was estimated at 85.2% White, 8.3% African American, 0.6% Native American, 4.0% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, and 1.8% from two or more races. Those identifying as Hispanic or Latino, of any race, were 18.2% of the population. Those who identified as &quot;white alone&quot;, not being of Hispanic or Latino origin, represented 69.3% of the population. In 2006, the county&#x27;s racial or ethnic makeup was 83.6% White (75.4% White Non-Hispanic). African Americans were 7.4% of the population. Asians stood at 3.4% of the population. 5.4% were of other or mixed race. Latinos were 13.0% of the population. In 2007, Suffolk County&#x27;s most common ethnicities were Italian (29.5%), Irish (24.0%), and German (17.6%).

In 2002, &quot;The New York Times&quot; cited a study by the non-profit group ERASE Racism, which determined Suffolk and its neighboring county, Nassau, to be the most racially segregated suburbs in the United States.

In 2006, there were 469,299 households, of which 37.00% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.00% were married couples living together, 10.80% had a female householder with no husband present, and 23.20% were non-families. 18.30% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.80% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.96 and the average family size was 3.36.

In the county, the population was spread out, with 26.10% under the age of 18, 7.60% from 18 to 24, 31.20% from 25 to 44, 23.30% from 45 to 64, and 11.80% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.90 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.80 males.

In 2008, &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine released its American Community Survey and named Suffolk County number 4 in its list of the top 25 richest counties in America. In 2016, according to &quot;Business Insider&quot;, the 11962 zip code encompassing Sagaponack, within Southampton, was listed as the most expensive in the U.S., with a median home sale price of $8.5 million.

The median income for a household in the county was $84,767, and the median income for a family was $72,112. Males had a median income of $50,046 versus $33,281 for females. The per capita income for the county was $26,577. Using a weighted average from 2009 to 2014 about 6.40% of the population were below the poverty line In earlier censuses, the population below the poverty line included 2.70% of those under age 18 and 2.30% of those age 65 or over.

==Law and government==












|}

===State Senate Officials for Suffolk County===
===State Assembly Officials for Suffolk County===
===United States House of Representatives Officials for Suffolk County===
===United States Senate===

In 2003, Democrat Steve Levy was elected county executive, ending longtime Republican control. In 2001, Democrat Thomas Spota was elected District Attorney, and ran unopposed in 2005. Although Suffolk voters gave George H. W. Bush a victory here in 1992, the county voted for Bill Clinton in 1996 and continued the trend by giving Al Gore an 11-percent victory in the county in 2000. 2004 Democratic candidate John Kerry won by a much smaller margin of under one percent, in 2008 Democratic candidate Barack Obama won by a slightly larger 6 percent margin, 52.5%-46.5%. In 2012, he carried the county by a slightly smaller margin 51%-47%. In 2016, Republican candidate Donald Trump won Suffolk County by a 6.9 percent margin, becoming the first Republican to carry the county since 1992. In 2020, Trump again won Suffolk County; this time, however, it was decided by just 232 votes out of nearly 800,000 votes cast, making it the closest county in the nation in terms of percentage margin, and representing nearly a seven-point swing towards the Democratic ticket of former Vice President Joe Biden and junior California senator Kamala Harris. In percentage terms, it was the closest county in the state, although Ontario County and Warren County had narrower raw vote margins of just 33 and 57 votes, respectively. Suffolk was one of five counties in the state that Trump won by less than 500 votes. With Tarrant County, Texas and Maricopa County, Arizona flipping Democratic in 2020, Suffolk County was the most populous county in the nation to vote for Trump in 2020. In 2024, Trump won 54% of the vote in Suffolk county, the highest percentage since 1988.

As a whole, both Suffolk and Nassau counties are considered swing counties. However, until 2016, they tended not to receive significant attention from presidential candidates, as the state of New York has turned reliably Democratic at the national level. In 2008 and 2012, Hofstra University in Nassau County hosted a presidential debate. Hofstra hosted the first debate of the 2016 presidential election season, on September 26, 2016, making Hofstra the first college or university in the United States to host a presidential debate in three consecutive elections. The presence on the 2016 ticket of Westchester County resident Hillary Clinton and Manhattan resident Donald Trump resulted in greater attention by the candidates to the concerns of Long Island. Trump visited Long Island voters and donors at least four times while Clinton made one stop for voters and one additional stop in the Hamptons for donors.

After the 2022 midterm election results were counted, Suffolk appears to have moved further to the right. Republican gubernatorial candidate and Suffolk County native Lee Zeldin won the county by more than 17 points over the Democratic candidate Kathy Hochul. Republicans, as of 2024, hold both congressional districts covering that being New York&#x27;s 1st congressional district represented by Nick LaLota and New York&#x27;s 2nd congressional district represented by Andrew Garbarino.

The 2023 election saw this trend continue, with Republican Edward P. Romaine defeating Democrat David Calone by 14 points to become the next County Executive. Republicans also gained a 12-6 supermajority in the County Legislature, seeing a net gain of one seat.

===Suffolk County Executives===
&quot;* Appointed to complete Cohalan&#x27;s term.&quot;

&quot;** Levy was originally elected as a Democrat, but became a Republican in 2010.&quot;

===Suffolk County Legislature===
The county has 18 legislative districts, each represented by a legislator. As of 2024, there are 11 Republicans, 6 Democrats, and 1 Conservative.

==== Historical composition of the Suffolk County Legislature ====
Republicans controlled the county legislature until a landmark election in November 2005 where three Republican seats switched to the Democrats, giving them control. In November 2007, the Democratic Party once again retained control over the Suffolk County Legislature, picking up one seat in the process. In November 2009, the Republican Party regained the seat lost in 2007 but remained in the minority for the 2010-2011 session. In November 2011, the Democratic Party maintained control over the Suffolk County Legislature picking up one seat that had been held by an Independence Party member. In November 2013, the Republican Party gained the 14th district seat, but remained in the minority until 2021, when the GOP flipped the county legislature, picking up three seats with incumbents Robert Calarco (the sitting Presiding Officer) and Susan Berland (the sitting Majority Leader) losing their bids for re-election. The Suffolk GOP built on these gains in the 2023 general election, gaining a 12-6 supermajority.

===Law enforcement===
Police services in the five western towns (Babylon, Huntington, Islip, Smithtown and Brookhaven) are provided primarily by the Suffolk County Police Department. The five &quot;East End&quot; towns (Riverhead, Southold, Shelter Island, East Hampton, and Southampton), maintain their own police and other law enforcement agencies. Also, there are a number of villages, such as Amityville, Lloyd Harbor, Northport, and Westhampton Beach that maintain their own police forces. In 1994, the Village of Greenport voted to abolish its police department and turn responsibility for law and order over to the Southold police department.

After the Long Island State Parkway Police was disbanded in 1980, all state parkways in Suffolk County became the responsibility of Troop L of the New York State Police, headquartered at Republic Airport. State parks, such as Robert Moses State Park, are the responsibility of the New York State Park Police, based at Belmont Lake State Park. In 1996, the Long Island Rail Road Police Department was consolidated into the Metropolitan Transportation Authority Police, which has jurisdiction over all rail lines in the county. Since the New York state legislature created the New York State University Police in 1999, they are in charge of all law enforcement services for State University of New York property and campuses. The State University Police have jurisdiction in Suffolk County at Stony Brook University and Farmingdale State College.

The Suffolk County Sheriff&#x27;s Office is a separate agency. The sheriff, an elected official who serves a four-year term, operates the two Suffolk County correctional facilities (in Yaphank and Riverhead), provides county courthouse security and detention, service and enforcement of civil papers, evictions and warrants. The Sheriff&#x27;s Office is also responsible for securing all county-owned property, such as county government office buildings, as well as the campuses of the Suffolk County Community College. As of 2008, the Suffolk County Sheriff&#x27;s Office employed 275 Deputy Sheriffs, 850 corrections officers, and about 200 civilian staff.

Suffolk County has a long maritime history with several outer barrier beaches and hundreds of square miles of waterways. The Suffolk Police Marine Bureau patrols the of navigable waterways within the police district, from the Connecticut and Rhode Island state line which bisects Long Island Sound to the New York state line south of Fire Island in the Atlantic Ocean. Some Suffolk County towns (Islip, Brookhaven, Southampton, East Hampton, Babylon, Huntington, Smithtown) also employ various bay constables and other local marine patrol, which are sworn armed peace officers with full arrest powers, providing back up to the Suffolk Police Marine Bureau as well as the United States Coast Guard.

This includes Fire Island and parts of Jones Island barrier beaches and the islands of the Great South Bay. Marine units also respond to water and ice rescues on the inland lakes, ponds, and streams of the District.

In February 2019, legislator Robert Trotta (R-Fort Salonga) put forward a resolution to recover salary and benefits from James Burke, the county&#x27;s former police chief. Burke had pled guilty to beating a man while in police custody and attempting to conceal it, and the county had paid the victim $1.5 million in a settlement; it had also paid Burke more than $500,000 in benefits and salary while Burke was concealing his conduct. Trotta said that the faithless servant doctrine in New York common law gave him the power to claw back the compensation. The Suffolk County Legislature supported the suit unanimously. The following month Suffolk County Executive Steve Bellone signed the bill.

Also in February 2019, a court ruled against the Suffolk County jail in the case of a former inmate who was denied hormone replacement therapy by the jail&#x27;s doctors. Documents introduced in the trial indicate 11 other inmates were also denied treatment.
===Courts===

Suffolk County is part of the 10th Judicial District of the New York State Unified Court System; is home to the Alfonse M. D&#x27;Amato Courthouse of the Federal U.S. District Court, Eastern District of New York; and has various local municipal courts. The State Courts are divided into Supreme Court, which has general jurisdiction over all cases, and lower courts that either hear claims of a limited dollar amount, or of a specific nature. Similarly, the local courts hear claims of a limited dollar amount, or hear specific types of cases. The Federal Court has jurisdiction over Federal Claims, State Law claims that are joined with Federal claims, and claims where there is a diversity of citizenship.

====Supreme Court====
* The Suffolk County Supreme Court is a trial court of unlimited general original jurisdiction (except as to matters which the federal courts have exclusive jurisdiction), but it generally only hears cases that are outside the subject-matter jurisdiction of other trial courts of more limited jurisdiction. The Suffolk County Clerk is the Clerk of the Court of the Supreme Court.
* The main courthouse for the Supreme Court is in Riverhead, which has been the court&#x27;s home since 1729. The original courthouse was replaced in 1855, and that courthouse was expanded in 1881. The courthouse was damaged by fire and rebuilt in 1929. In 1994, a new court building was added to the complex. This Courthouse was dedicated as the &quot;Alan D. Oshrin Supreme Court Building&quot; on August 1, 2011.
* The Supreme Court also shares space in the Cohalan Court Complex in Central Islip with several other courts and county agencies. Matrimonial actions are heard in the Supreme Court, and those matters are generally heard in the Supreme Court section of the Cohalan Court Complex.

====Other Superior Courts====
* The Suffolk County Court is a trial court of limited jurisdiction. It has jurisdiction over all of Suffolk County, and is authorized to handle criminal prosecutions of both felonies and lesser offenses committed within the county, although in practice most minor offenses are handled by the local courts. It is the trial court for felonies, or where a person is indicted by a Grand Jury in Suffolk County. The County Court also has limited jurisdiction in civil cases, generally involving amounts up to $25,000. The County Court is in the Cromarty Court Complex Criminal Courts Building in Riverhead.
* The Suffolk County Surrogate&#x27;s Court hears cases involving the affairs of decedents, including the probate of wills and the administration of estates, guardianships, and adoptions. The Surrogate&#x27;s Court is in the County Center in Riverhead.
* The Suffolk County Family Court has jurisdiction over all of Suffolk County in petitions filed for Neglect &amp; Abuse, Juvenile Delinquency/Designated Felonies, Persons in Need of Supervision, Adoption, Guardianship, Foster Care, Family Offense (Order of Protection), Custody &amp; Visitation, Paternity, Support Matters (Child &amp; Spousal), Consent to Marry. The court also has a Juvenile Drug Court and Family Treatment Court. Individuals, attorneys, and agencies may initiate a proceeding in the Family Court with the filing of a petition. The Suffolk County Family Court is in the Cohalan Court Complex in Central Islip and maintains a facility in Riverhead. Case assignment is dependent upon the geographical location of the parties.

====Local courts====
The District Court and the Town and Village Courts are the local courts of Suffolk County. There are more than 30 local courts, each with limited criminal and civil subject matter and geographic jurisdictions. The local criminal courts have trial jurisdiction over misdemeanors, violations and infractions; preliminary jurisdiction over felonies; and traffic tickets charging a crime. The local civil courts calendar small claims, evictions, and civil actions.
* Suffolk County District Court has geographic jurisdiction over the 5 western towns of Suffolk County (Babylon, Brookhaven, Huntington, Islip &amp; Smithtown). The Criminal division of the Suffolk District Court is in the Cohalan Court Complex, Central Islip, and includes Domestic Violence Courts, Drug Court, and a Mental Health Court. The Civil division is divided up in the 5 &quot;outlying&quot; courthouses in Lindenhurst, Huntington Station, Hauppauge, Ronkonkoma, and Patchogue. Civil actions may be filed up to $15,000, and small claims actions up to $5000. Actions are commenced by filing with the court. Summary proceedings under the RPAPL are filed in the district where the property is located.
* The Town Courts of East Hampton, Riverhead, Shelter Island, Southampton, and Southold have geographic jurisdiction over the 5 eastern towns of Suffolk County. Each town maintains a courthouse where judges hear criminal cases (including a regional Drug Court) and civil actions. Civil actions are commenced by serving a summons and complaint for claims up to $3,000, and small claims actions are heard up to $3000. Summary proceedings under the RPAPL are filed in the town where the property is located.
* The Village Courts of Amityville, Asharoken, Babylon, Belle Terre, Bellport, Brightwaters, Head of the Harbor, Huntington Bay, Islandia, Lake Grove, Lindenhurst, Lloyd Harbor, Nissequogue, Northport, Ocean Beach, Old Field, Patchogue, Poquott, Port Jefferson, Quogue, Sag Harbor, Saltaire, Shoreham, Southampton, Village of the Branch, West Hampton Dunes, and Westhampton Beach have geographic jurisdiction within each incorporated village. Criminal and civil subject matter jurisdiction varies in each court.

Most non-criminal moving violation tickets issued in the 5 west towns are handled by the Traffic Violations Bureau, which is part of the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles, not the court system.

==Economy==
==Education==
===Colleges and universities===
* State University of New York
** Stony Brook University in Stony Brook with a satellite campus in Southampton
** Farmingdale State College in East Farmingdale
** Suffolk County Community College in Selden, Riverhead, and Brentwood, satellite centers in Sayville and Riverhead
* Private
** Five Towns College in Dix Hills
** St. Joseph&#x27;s University in Patchogue
** Touro University System with its School of Health Sciences in Central Islip and its Law Center in Central Islip
** Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory School of Biological Sciences in Cold Spring Harbor
* Satellite and branch campuses
** Adelphi University in Hauppauge
** Long Island University in Brentwood and Riverhead, on the campuses of Suffolk County Community College
** Molloy University in Amityville

===School districts===
School districts (all officially designated for grades K-12) include:
* Amagansett Union Free School District
* Amityville Union Free School District
* Babylon Union Free School District
* Bay Shore Union Free School District
* Bayport-Blue Point Union Free School District
* Brentwood Union Free School District
* Bridgehampton Union Free School District
* Brookhaven-Comsewogue Union Free School District
* Center Moriches Union Free School District
* Central Islip Union Free School District
* Cold Spring Harbor Central School District
* Commack Union Free School District
* Connetquot Central School District
* Copiague Union Free School District
* Deer Park Union Free School District
* East Hampton Union Free School District
* East Islip Union Free School District
* East Moriches Union Free School District
* East Quogue Union Free School District
* Eastport-South Manor Central School District
* Elwood Union Free School District
* Farmingdale Union Free School District
* Fire Island Union Free School District (Only operates elementary school)
* Fishers Island Union Free School District
* William Floyd Union Free School District
* Greenport Union Free School District
* Half Hollow Hills Central School District
* Hampton Bays Union Free School District
* Harborfields Central School District
* Hauppauge Union Free School District
* Huntington Union Free School District
* Islip Union Free School District
* Kings Park Central School District
* Lindenhurst Union Free School District
* Middle Country Central School District
* Longwood Central School District
* Mattituck-Cutchogue Union Free School District
* Miller Place Union Free School District
* Montauk Union Free School District
* Mount Sinai Union Free School District
* New Suffolk Common School District
* North Babylon Union Free School District
* Northport-East Northport Union Free School District
* Oysterponds Union Free School District
* Patchogue-Medford Union Free School District
* Port Jefferson Union Free School District
* Quogue Union Free School District
* Remsenburg-Speonk Union Free School District
* Riverhead Central School District
* Rocky Point Union Free School District
* Sachem Central School District
* Sag Harbor Union Free School District
* Sagaponack Common School District
* Sayville Union Free School District
* Shelter Island Union Free School District
* Shoreham-Wading River Central School District
* Smithtown Central School District
* South Country Central School District
* South Huntington Union Free School District
* Southampton Union Free School District
* Southold Union Free School District
* Springs Union Free School District
* Three Village Central School District
* Tuckahoe Common School District
* Wainscott Common School District
* West Babylon Union Free School District
* West Islip Union Free School District
* Westhampton Beach Union Free School District
* Wyandanch Union Free School District
==Media==
===Newspapers===
* &quot;Amityville Record&quot;
* &quot;Bayport-Blue Point Gazette&quot;
* &quot;Dan&#x27;s Papers&quot;
* &quot;Fire Island News&quot;
* &quot;Newsday&quot;
* &quot;Sayville Gazette&quot;
* &quot;Shelter Island Reporter&quot;
* &quot;The Beacon&quot;
* &quot;The East Hampton Press&quot;
* &quot;The East Hampton Star&quot;
* &quot;The Islip Bulletin&quot;
* &quot;The Long Island Advance&quot;
* &quot;The Port Times Record&quot;
* &quot;The Riverhead News-Review&quot;
* &quot;The Shelter Island Reporter&quot;
* &quot;The Southampton Press&quot;
* &quot;The Suffolk County News&quot;
* &quot;The Suffolk Times&quot;
* &quot;The Tide of Moriches and Manorville&quot;
* &quot;The Times Beacon Record&quot;
* &quot;The Times of Huntington&quot;
* &quot;The Times of Middle Country&quot;
* &quot;The Times of Northport and East Northport&quot;
* &quot;The Times of Smithtown&quot;
* &quot;The Village Beacon Record&quot;
* &quot;The Village Times Herald&quot;

===Radio stations===
* WALK-FM, Patchogue
* WAPP-LP, Westhampton
* WBAB, Babylon
* WBAZ, Bridgehampton
* WBEA, Southold
* WBLI, Patchogue
* WBWD, Islip
* WBZO, Westhampton
* WDRE, Riverhead
* WEER, Montauk
* WEGB, Napeague
* WEGQ, Quogue
* WEHM, Manorville
* WEHN, East Hampton
* WELJ, Montauk
* WFRS, Smithtown
* WGSS, Copiague
* WHFM, Southampton
* WJJF, Montauk
* WJVC, Center Moriches
* WLID, Patchogue
* WLIM, Medford
* WLIR-FM, Hampton Bays
* WLIW-FM, Southampton
* WLIX-LP, Ridge
* WLNG, Sag Harbor
* WNYG, Patchogue
* WNYH, Huntington
* WPLF, Shelter Island
* WPTY, Calverton-Roanoke
* WRCN-FM, Riverhead
* WRIV, Riverhead
* WRLI, Southampton
* WSHR, Lake Ronkonkoma
* WSUF, Noyack
* WUSB, Stony Brook
* WWSK, Smithtown
* WWWF-FM, Bay Shore
* WXBA, Brentwood

===Television stations===
* WFTY-DT, Smithtown
* WLNY-TV, Riverhead
* WVVH-CD, Southampton

==Suffolk seashore==

Fire Island Lighthouse was an important landmark for many trans-Atlantic ships coming into New York Harbor in the early 20th century. For many European immigrants, the Fire Island Light was their first sight of land upon arrival in America.

The Fire Island Inlet span of the Robert Moses Causeway connects to Robert Moses State Park on the western tip of Fire Island.

The Great South Bay Bridge, the first causeway bridge, had only one northbound and one southbound lane, was opened to traffic in April 1954. The span of across Great South Bay to Captree Island features a main span of , with a clearance for boats of .

After crossing the State Boat Channel over its -long bascule bridge, the causeway meets the Ocean Parkway at a cloverleaf interchange. This interchange provides access to Captree State Park, Gilgo State Park and Jones Beach State Park.

The Fire Island Inlet Bridge continues the two-lane road, one lane in each direction, across Fire Island Inlet to its terminus at Robert Moses State Park and The Fire Island Lighthouse. Robert Moses Causeway opened in 1964.

Suffolk County has the most lighthouses of any United States county, with 15 of its original 26 lighthouses still standing. Of these 15, eight are in Southold township alone, giving it more lighthouses than any other township in the United States.

==Secessionist movements==

At various times, there have been proposals for a division of Suffolk County into two counties. The western portion would be called Suffolk County, while the eastern portion of the current Suffolk County would comprise a new county to be called Peconic County. Peconic County would consist of the five easternmost towns of Suffolk County: East Hampton, Riverhead, Shelter Island, Southampton and Southold, plus the Shinnecock Indian Reservation.

The proposed Peconic County flag showed the two forks at the east end of Long Island separated by Peconic Bay. The star on the north represents Southold. The stars on the South Fork represent Southampton and East Hampton. Riverhead is at the fork mouth and Shelter Island is between the forks.

The secessionist movement has not been active since 1998.

&quot;The End of the Hamptons: Scenes from the Class Struggle in America&#x27;s Paradise&quot;, by Corey Dolgon (New York University Press, 2005) examined the class roots of the secessionist movement in the Hamptons. In his review, Howard Zinn wrote that the book &quot;[t]akes us beyond the much-romanticized beaches of Long Island to the rich entrepreneurs and their McMansions, the Latino workers, and the stubborn indigenous residents refusing to disappear. The book is important because it is in so many ways a microcosm of the nation.&quot; The book won the Association for Humanist Sociology&#x27;s 2005 Book Prize and the American Sociological Association&#x27;s Marxist Section Book Award in 2007.

Matt DeSimone, a young adult from Southold, and his partner Jake Dominy unsuccessfully started a similar movement in the late 2010s.

==Finance and taxation==
Suffolk County has an 8.625% sales tax, compared to an overall New York State sales tax of 4%, consisting of an additional 4.25% on top of the state and MTA assessment of .375%

== Health ==
In March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic first affected the county. As of December 12, 2020, there are a total of 73,281 cases and 2,153 deaths.

==Hospitals==
Tertiary care Hospitals:
* Good Samaritan University Hospital
* South Shore University Hospital
* Stony Brook University Hospital

Community Hospitals:
* Huntington Hospital
* Long Island Community Hospital
* Mather Hospital
* Peconic Bay Medical Center
* Stony Brook Eastern Long Island Hospital
* Stony Brook Southampton Hospital
* St. Charles Hospital
* St. Catherine of Sienna Medical Center

Specialty care Hospitals:
* South Oaks Hospital
* Stony Brook Children&#x27;s Hospital

==Communities==


In the State of New York, a town is the major subdivision of each county. Towns provide or arrange for most municipal services for residents of hamlets and selected services for residents of villages. All residents of New York who do not live in a city or on an Indian reservation live in a town. A village is an incorporated area which is usually, but not always, within a single town. A village is a clearly defined municipality that provides the services closest to the residents, such as garbage collection, street and highway maintenance, street lighting and building codes. Some villages provide their own police and other optional services. A hamlet is an informally defined populated area within a town that is not part of a village.

Figures in parentheses are 2022 population estimates from the Census Bureau.

===Towns===

* Babylon (217,656)
* Brookhaven (488,497)
* East Hampton (28,607)
* Huntington (203,243)
* Islip (337,922)
* Riverhead (35,834)
* Shelter Island (3,276)
* Smithtown (115,768)
* Southampton (69,490)
* Southold (23,912)
===Villages (incorporated)===

* Amityville (9,573)
* Asharoken (603)
* Babylon (12,146)
* Belle Terre (782)
* Bellport (2,197)
* Brightwaters (3,170)
* Dering Harbor (36)
* East Hampton (1,531)
* Greenport (2,583)
* Head of the Harbor (1,481)
* Huntington Bay (1,427)
* Islandia (3,568)
* Lake Grove (11,041)
* Lindenhurst (27,064)
* Lloyd Harbor (3,551)
* Nissequogue (1,603)
* North Haven (1,161)
* Northport (7,300)
* Ocean Beach (171)
* Old Field (906)
* Patchogue (12,344)
* Poquott (925)
* Port Jefferson (8,059)
* Quogue (1,687)
* Sag Harbor (2,785)
* Sagaponack (736)
* Saltaire (110)
* Shoreham (521)
* Southampton (4,615)
* Village of the Branch (1,759)
* Westhampton Beach (2,183)
* West Hampton Dunes (115)
===Census-designated places (unincorporated)===

* Amagansett
* Aquebogue
* Baiting Hollow
* Bay Shore
* Bayport
* Baywood
* Blue Point
* Bohemia
* Brentwood
* Bridgehampton
* Brookhaven
* Calverton
* Captree
* Center Moriches
* Centereach
* Centerport
* Central Islip
* Cold Spring Harbor
* Commack
* Copiague
* Coram
* Cutchogue
* Deer Park
* Dix Hills
* East Farmingdale
* East Hampton North
* East Islip
* East Marion
* East Moriches
* East Northport
* East Patchogue
* East Quogue
* East Setauket
* East Shoreham
* Eastport
* Eatons Neck
* Elwood
* Farmingville
* Fire Island
* Fishers Island
* Flanders
* Fort Salonga
* Gilgo
* Gordon Heights
* Great River
* Greenlawn
* Greenport West
* Halesite
* Hampton Bays
* Hauppauge
* Holbrook
* Holtsville
* Huntington
* Huntington Station
* Islip
* Islip Terrace
* Jamesport
* Kings Park
* Lake Ronkonkoma
* Laurel
* Manorville
* Mastic
* Mastic Beach
* Mattituck
* Medford
* Melville
* Middle Island
* Miller Place
* Montauk
* Moriches
* Mount Sinai
* Napeague
* Nesconset
* New Suffolk
* North Amityville
* North Babylon
* North Bay Shore
* North Bellport
* North Great River
* North Lindenhurst
* North Patchogue
* North Sea
* Northampton
* Northville
* Northwest Harbor
* Noyack
* Oak Beach
* Oakdale
* Orient
* Peconic
* Port Jefferson Station
* Quiogue
* Remsenburg-Speonk
* Ridge
* Riverhead
* Riverside
* Rocky Point
* Ronkonkoma
* Sayville
* Selden
* Setauket
* Shelter Island
* Shelter Island Heights
* Shinnecock Hills
* Shirley
* Smithtown
* Sound Beach
* South Huntington
* Southold
* Springs
* St. James
* Stony Brook
* Stony Brook University
* Terryville
* Tuckahoe
* Wading River
* Wainscott
* Water Mill
* West Babylon
* West Bay Shore
* West Hills
* West Islip
* West Sayville
* Westhampton
* Wheatley Heights
* Wyandanch
* Yaphank

===Gardiners Island===
Gardiners Island is an island off eastern Suffolk County. The Island is long, and wide and has of coastline. The same family has owned the Island for nearly 400 years; one of the largest privately owned islands in America or the world. In addition, it is the only American real estate still intact as part of an original royal grant from the English Crown.

===Robins Island===

Robins Island is an Island in the Peconic Bay between the North and South folks of eastern Suffolk County. It is within the jurisdiction of Town of Southold in Suffolk County, New York. The Island is and presently undeveloped. The island is privately owned and not accessible to the public.

===Indian reservations===
Two Indian reservations are within the borders of Suffolk County:
* Shinnecock Reservation
* Poospatuck Reservation

==Transportation==
The county includes a lot of roadways and other public transportation infrastructure. The local Suffolk County Legislature oversees funding and regulations for the infrastructure. In 2019, the legislature required all new projects to account for future climate change caused sea level rise.

===Major highways===
* I-495 (Long Island Expressway) traverses the county from the Nassau County line in the West to Riverhead in the East. Original plans called for the Expressway to extend further past Riverhead and along the island&#x27;s North Fork, possibly to Orient Point, where a crossing to Connecticut could be built. The expressway connects to Manhattan via the Queens-Midtown Tunnel.
* New York State Route 27 crosses the county from the Nassau County line in the West to Montauk Point in the East, which is also the easternmost point in the State of New York. The road is limited-access from West Babylon to Southampton.

===Airports===
Commercial Airport:
* Long Island MacArthur Airport (ISP/KISP)

General Aviation Airport:
* Republic Airport (FRG/KFRG)
* Brookhaven Calabro Airport (WSH/KHWV/HWV)
* Francis S. Gabreski Airport (FOK/KFOK)
* Town of East Hampton Airport (JPX/KJPX)
* Elizabeth Field (Fisher&#x27;s Island) (FID/0B8)

===Public transportation===
Suffolk County is served by Suffolk County Transit. Long Island Rail Road, the Hampton Jitney, and Hampton Luxury Liner connect Suffolk County to New York City. Some parts of Suffolk County are also served by NICE bus.

==Notable people==
* Craig Biggio
* Jimmy Buffett 
* Mariah Carey
* Mick Foley
* Kevin James
* Loudon Wainwright III
* Carl Yastrzemski

==See also==
* List of counties in New York
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Suffolk County, New York
* Suffolk County, Farmland Development Rights
* USS &quot;Suffolk County&quot; (LST-1173)

==References==
== Bibliography ==

* Retrieved October 10, 2021. ; .

==External links==

* Long Island History: Suffolk County
* Suffolk County Police
* Suffolk Historical Newspapers
* Map of Suffolk County CDPs in 2010
* Map of Suffolk County CDPs in 2000</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="0" end="14" title="Suffolk County, New York" label="Suffolk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q762726" start="38" end="44" title="List of counties in New York" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="115" end="126" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="158" end="171" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522551" start="188" end="201" title="Gardiners Bay" label="Gardiners Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q867460" start="247" end="264" title="Long Island Sound" label="Long Island Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="317" end="342" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="400" end="415" title="United States census" label="decennial count"/>
<link wikidata="Q408804" start="532" end="540" title="borough (New York City)" label="boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="563" end="574" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770518" start="578" end="587" title="Riverhead (town), New York" label="Riverhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476502" start="623" end="632" title="Hauppauge" label="Hauppauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="675" end="682" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="806" end="837" title="New York City metropolitan area" label="New York City metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="888" end="899" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333712" start="1124" end="1144" title="Economy of Long Island" label="parts of Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="1324" end="1343" title="scientific research" label="scientific research"/>
<link wikidata="Q585777" start="1381" end="1411" title="Brookhaven National Laboratory" label="Brookhaven National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752638" start="1415" end="1420" title="Upton, New York" label="Upton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205327" start="1425" end="1458" title="Plum Island Animal Disease Center" label="Plum Island Animal Disease Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099672" start="1462" end="1473" title="Plum Island (New York)" label="Plum Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q969850" start="1497" end="1519" title="Stony Brook University" label="Stony Brook University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376559" start="1523" end="1534" title="Stony Brook, New York" label="Stony Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435862" start="1539" end="1564" title="Farmingdale State College" label="Farmingdale State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737048" start="1568" end="1579" title="Farmingdale, New York" label="Farmingdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q951500" start="1625" end="1643" title="Connecticut Colony" label="Connecticut Colony"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1663" end="1706" title="Province of New York#The twelve original counties" label="original county of the Province of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055546" start="1792" end="1801" title="York Shire (Province of New York)" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="1947" end="1960" title="Queens County, New York" label="Queens County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="1974" end="1987" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau County"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="2052" end="2078" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="2080" end="2093" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="2139" end="2170" title="Continental Army" label="George Washington&amp;#x27;s forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q862751" start="2178" end="2199" title="Battle of Long Island" label="Battle of Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2863" end="2881" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="3218" end="3227" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344119" start="3243" end="3253" title="North Fork, Suffolk County, New York" label="North Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492251" start="3262" end="3272" title="South Fork, Suffolk County, New York" label="South Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q867460" start="3357" end="3374" title="Long Island Sound" label="Long Island Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q39594" start="3426" end="3429" title="bay" label="bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167866" start="3504" end="3521" title="Jayne&amp;#x27;s Hill" label="Jayne&amp;#x27;s Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461211" start="3525" end="3535" title="West Hills, New York" label="West Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="3629" end="3643" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="3730" end="3747" title="humid continental" label="humid continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="3770" end="3787" title="humid subtropical" label="humid subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328292" start="3952" end="3960" title="East End (Long Island)" label="east end"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="4005" end="4019" title="hardiness zone" label="hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168574" start="4037" end="4052" title="Copiague Harbor" label="Copiague Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089219" start="4476" end="4495" title="maritime boundaries" label="maritime boundaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="4576" end="4589" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54231" start="4599" end="4615" title="Fairfield County, Connecticut" label="Fairfield County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54234" start="4643" end="4659" title="New Haven County" label="New Haven County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54238" start="4683" end="4699" title="Middlesex County, Connecticut" label="Middlesex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54240" start="4723" end="4740" title="New London County" label="New London County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54258" start="4764" end="4781" title="Washington County, Rhode Island" label="Washington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739114" start="4842" end="4877" title="Amagansett National Wildlife Refuge" label="Amagansett National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162719" start="4880" end="4921" title="Conscience Point National Wildlife Refuge" label="Conscience Point National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362265" start="4924" end="4968" title="Elizabeth A. Morton National Wildlife Refuge" label="Elizabeth A. Morton National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q252541" start="4971" end="5000" title="Fire Island National Seashore" label="Fire Island National Seashore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429327" start="5003" end="5036" title="Sayville National Wildlife Refuge" label="Sayville National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442222" start="5039" end="5071" title="Seatuck National Wildlife Refuge" label="Seatuck National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685877" start="5074" end="5110" title="Target Rock National Wildlife Refuge" label="Target Rock National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983609" start="5113" end="5146" title="Wertheim National Wildlife Refuge" label="Wertheim National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="5182" end="5198" title="2010 U.S. census" label="2010 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066666" start="5767" end="5813" title="list of the most populous counties in the United States" label="21st-most populous county in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5880" end="5885" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5892" end="5908" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5915" end="5930" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5937" end="5942" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5949" end="5965" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5981" end="5998" title="Race (United States Census)" label="two or more races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6021" end="6029" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6033" end="6039" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="6524" end="6531" title="Italian American" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="6541" end="6546" title="Irish American" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="6560" end="6566" title="German American" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="6592" end="6610" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="7578" end="7584" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q286707" start="7756" end="7772" title="Business Insider" label="Business Insider"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460147" start="7812" end="7822" title="Sagaponack" label="Sagaponack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631643" start="7831" end="7842" title="Southampton, New York" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613143" start="8652" end="8662" title="Steve Levy (politician)" label="Steve Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="8847" end="8864" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="8910" end="8922" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="8965" end="8972" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="9044" end="9054" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="9135" end="9147" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="9303" end="9315" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="9723" end="9732" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="9763" end="9776" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q115025" start="9848" end="9862" title="Ontario County, New York" label="Ontario County"/>
<link wikidata="Q56151" start="9867" end="9880" title="Warren County, New York" label="Warren County"/>
<link wikidata="Q110412" start="10040" end="10061" title="Tarrant County, Texas" label="Tarrant County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q58691" start="10066" end="10090" title="Maricopa County, Arizona" label="Maricopa County, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623314" start="10568" end="10586" title="Hofstra University" label="Hofstra University"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="10590" end="10603" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau County"/>
<link wikidata="Q12357474" start="11551" end="11593" title="New York&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district" label="New York&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q115168182" start="11609" end="11620" title="Nick LaLota" label="Nick LaLota"/>
<link wikidata="Q12357472" start="11625" end="11667" title="New York&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district" label="New York&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q21257859" start="11683" end="11699" title="Andrew Garbarino" label="Andrew Garbarino"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="12198" end="12209" title="legislative" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="12280" end="12291" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="12295" end="12304" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163079" start="12312" end="12324" title="Conservative Party (New York State)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750870" start="13480" end="13487" title="Babylon, New York" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q999123" start="13489" end="13499" title="Huntington, New York" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751219" start="13501" end="13506" title="Islip (town), New York" label="Islip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594054" start="13508" end="13517" title="Smithtown, New York" label="Smithtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q550032" start="13522" end="13532" title="Brookhaven, New York" label="Brookhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634558" start="13564" end="13596" title="Suffolk County Police Department" label="Suffolk County Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770518" start="13635" end="13644" title="Riverhead (town), New York" label="Riverhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709805" start="13646" end="13654" title="Southold, New York" label="Southold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330668" start="13656" end="13670" title="Shelter Island, New York" label="Shelter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q994372" start="13672" end="13684" title="East Hampton, New York" label="East Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631643" start="13690" end="13701" title="Southampton, New York" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q472509" start="13812" end="13822" title="Amityville" label="Amityville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452992" start="13824" end="13836" title="Lloyd Harbor" label="Lloyd Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452681" start="13838" end="13847" title="Northport, New York" label="Northport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453197" start="13853" end="13870" title="Westhampton Beach" label="Westhampton Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q94652" start="13923" end="13943" title="Greenport, Suffolk County, New York" label="Village of Greenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709805" start="14037" end="14045" title="Southold, New York" label="Southold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672738" start="14076" end="14108" title="Long Island State Parkway Police" label="Long Island State Parkway Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057860" start="14213" end="14234" title="New York State Police" label="New York State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314385" start="14253" end="14269" title="Republic Airport" label="Republic Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q262853" start="14292" end="14315" title="Robert Moses State Park" label="Robert Moses State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014156" start="14347" end="14373" title="New York State Park Police" label="New York State Park Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884386" start="14384" end="14407" title="Belmont Lake State Park" label="Belmont Lake State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q125943" start="14422" end="14443" title="Long Island Rail Road" label="Long Island Rail Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825288" start="14488" end="14532" title="Metropolitan Transportation Authority Police" label="Metropolitan Transportation Authority Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014722" start="14641" end="14673" title="New York State University Police" label="New York State University Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469076" start="15097" end="15104" title="Yaphank" label="Yaphank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770518" start="15109" end="15118" title="Riverhead, New York" label="Riverhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634547" start="15398" end="15430" title="Suffolk County Community College" label="Suffolk County Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112020" start="15628" end="15641" title="outer barrier" label="outer barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267889" start="15682" end="15691" title="waterways" label="waterways"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="15798" end="15809" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="15814" end="15826" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q867460" start="15852" end="15869" title="Long Island Sound" label="Long Island Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="16243" end="16268" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418789" start="16285" end="16296" title="Fire Island" label="Fire Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16310" end="16322" title="Jones Island (New York)" label="Jones Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544353" start="16362" end="16377" title="Great South Bay" label="Great South Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471969" start="16534" end="16546" title="Fort Salonga" label="Fort Salonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q68769534" start="16945" end="16962" title="faithless servant" label="faithless servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129769" start="17017" end="17026" title="claw back" label="claw back"/>
<link wikidata="Q18684717" start="17153" end="17166" title="Steve Bellone" label="Steve Bellone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354346" start="17300" end="17327" title="hormone replacement therapy" label="hormone replacement therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303129" start="17518" end="17553" title="New York State Unified Court System" label="New York State Unified Court System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721975" start="17570" end="17604" title="Alfonse M. D&amp;#x27;Amato United States Courthouse" label="Alfonse M. D&amp;#x27;Amato Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001111" start="18210" end="18223" title="New York Supreme Court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911328" start="18416" end="18443" title="subject-matter jurisdiction" label="subject-matter jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459283" start="19055" end="19068" title="Central Islip" label="Central Islip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014750" start="19920" end="19942" title="New York Surrogate&amp;#x27;s Court" label="Surrogate&amp;#x27;s Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500369" start="20005" end="20012" title="probate" label="probate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459283" start="20767" end="20780" title="Central Islip" label="Central Islip"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109616" start="23243" end="23286" title="New York State Department of Motor Vehicles" label="New York State Department of Motor Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="23371" end="23399" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q969850" start="23403" end="23425" title="Stony Brook University" label="Stony Brook University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376559" start="23429" end="23440" title="Stony Brook, New York" label="Stony Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619517" start="23448" end="23464" title="Stony Brook Southampton" label="satellite campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631643" start="23468" end="23479" title="Southampton, New York" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435862" start="23483" end="23508" title="Farmingdale State College" label="Farmingdale State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460492" start="23512" end="23528" title="East Farmingdale" label="East Farmingdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634547" start="23532" end="23564" title="Suffolk County Community College" label="Suffolk County Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889137" start="23568" end="23574" title="Selden, New York" label="Selden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770518" start="23576" end="23585" title="Riverhead, New York" label="Riverhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300932" start="23591" end="23600" title="Brentwood, New York" label="Brentwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469089" start="23623" end="23631" title="Sayville" label="Sayville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770518" start="23636" end="23645" title="Riverhead, New York" label="Riverhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="23648" end="23655" title="Private university" label="Private"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456170" start="23659" end="23677" title="Five Towns College" label="Five Towns College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459205" start="23681" end="23690" title="Dix Hills" label="Dix Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463909" start="23694" end="23722" title="St. Joseph&amp;#x27;s University (New York)" label="St. Joseph&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q580140" start="23726" end="23735" title="Patchogue" label="Patchogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q48739865" start="23739" end="23762" title="Touro University System" label="Touro University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459283" start="23801" end="23814" title="Central Islip" label="Central Islip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829357" start="23823" end="23833" title="Touro Law Center" label="Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459283" start="23837" end="23850" title="Central Islip" label="Central Islip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974850" start="23854" end="23913" title="Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory School of Biological Sciences" label="Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory School of Biological Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q953080" start="23917" end="23935" title="Cold Spring Harbor" label="Cold Spring Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682076" start="23971" end="23989" title="Adelphi University" label="Adelphi University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476502" start="23993" end="24002" title="Hauppauge" label="Hauppauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783603" start="24006" end="24028" title="Long Island University" label="Long Island University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300932" start="24032" end="24041" title="Brentwood, New York" label="Brentwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770518" start="24046" end="24055" title="Riverhead, New York" label="Riverhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896481" start="24112" end="24129" title="Molloy University" label="Molloy University"/>
<link wikidata="Q472509" start="24133" end="24143" title="Amityville" label="Amityville"/>
<link wikidata="Q110654961" start="24240" end="24277" title="Amagansett Union Free School District" label="Amagansett Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="24280" end="24317" title="Amityville Union Free School District" label="Amityville Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836637" start="24320" end="24354" title="Babylon Union Free School District" label="Babylon Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q106879955" start="24357" end="24393" title="Bay Shore Union Free School District" label="Bay Shore Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q28229278" start="24396" end="24441" title="Bayport-Blue Point School District" label="Bayport-Blue Point Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q106879815" start="24444" end="24480" title="Brentwood Union Free School District" label="Brentwood Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966506" start="24483" end="24523" title="Bridgehampton Union Free School District" label="Bridgehampton Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="24526" end="24574" title="Brookhaven-Comsewogue Union Free School District" label="Brookhaven-Comsewogue Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="24577" end="24619" title="Center Moriches Union Free School District" label="Center Moriches Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q10464597" start="24622" end="24662" title="Central Islip Union Free School District" label="Central Islip Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="24665" end="24707" title="Cold Spring Harbor Central School District" label="Cold Spring Harbor Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152068" start="24710" end="24744" title="Commack Union Free School District" label="Commack Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161792" start="24747" end="24781" title="Connetquot Central School District" label="Connetquot Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="24784" end="24819" title="Copiague Union Free School District" label="Copiague Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="24822" end="24858" title="Deer Park Union Free School District" label="Deer Park Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328542" start="24861" end="24900" title="East Hampton Union Free School District" label="East Hampton Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="24903" end="24940" title="East Islip Union Free School District" label="East Islip Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="24943" end="24983" title="East Moriches Union Free School District" label="East Moriches Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="24986" end="25024" title="East Quogue Union Free School District" label="East Quogue Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330889" start="25027" end="25071" title="Eastport-South Manor Central School District" label="Eastport-South Manor Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368357" start="25074" end="25107" title="Elwood Union Free School District" label="Elwood Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="25110" end="25148" title="Farmingdale Union Free School District" label="Farmingdale Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q106880678" start="25151" end="25189" title="Fire Island Union Free School District" label="Fire Island Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q106880695" start="25226" end="25267" title="Fishers Island Union Free School District" label="Fishers Island Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568613" start="25270" end="25310" title="William Floyd Union Free School District" label="William Floyd Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604402" start="25313" end="25349" title="Greenport Union Free School District" label="Greenport Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641677" start="25352" end="25393" title="Half Hollow Hills Central School District" label="Half Hollow Hills Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646160" start="25396" end="25435" title="Hampton Bays Union Free School District" label="Hampton Bays Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="25438" end="25474" title="Harborfields Central School District" label="Harborfields Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682753" start="25477" end="25513" title="Hauppauge Union Free School District" label="Hauppauge Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706481" start="25516" end="25553" title="Huntington Union Free School District" label="Huntington Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997358" start="25556" end="25588" title="Islip Union Free School District" label="Islip Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="25591" end="25625" title="Kings Park Central School District" label="Kings Park Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="25628" end="25666" title="Lindenhurst Union Free School District" label="Lindenhurst Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841281" start="25669" end="25707" title="Middle Country Central School District" label="Middle Country Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674515" start="25710" end="25742" title="Longwood Central School District" label="Longwood Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791844" start="25745" end="25791" title="Mattituck-Cutchogue Union Free School District" label="Mattituck-Cutchogue Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="25794" end="25833" title="Miller Place Union Free School District" label="Miller Place Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="25836" end="25870" title="Montauk Union Free School District" label="Montauk Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="25873" end="25911" title="Mount Sinai Union Free School District" label="Mount Sinai Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="25914" end="25948" title="New Suffolk Common School District" label="New Suffolk Common School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054043" start="25951" end="25991" title="North Babylon Union Free School District" label="North Babylon Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083996" start="25994" end="26045" title="Northport-East Northport Union Free School District" label="Northport-East Northport Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116375" start="26048" end="26086" title="Oysterponds Union Free School District" label="Oysterponds Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="26089" end="26133" title="Patchogue-Medford Union Free School District" label="Patchogue-Medford Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="26136" end="26177" title="Port Jefferson Union Free School District" label="Port Jefferson Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="26180" end="26213" title="Quogue Union Free School District" label="Quogue Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="26216" end="26260" title="Remsenburg-Speonk Union Free School District" label="Remsenburg-Speonk Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338216" start="26263" end="26296" title="Riverhead Central School District" label="Riverhead Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="26299" end="26337" title="Rocky Point Union Free School District" label="Rocky Point Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396690" start="26340" end="26370" title="Sachem Central School District" label="Sachem Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398867" start="26373" end="26410" title="Sag Harbor Union Free School District" label="Sag Harbor Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q110664485" start="26413" end="26446" title="Sagaponack Common School District" label="Sagaponack Common School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="26449" end="26484" title="Sayville Union Free School District" label="Sayville Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="26487" end="26528" title="Shelter Island Union Free School District" label="Shelter Island Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="26531" end="26576" title="Shoreham-Wading River Central School District" label="Shoreham-Wading River Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545650" start="26579" end="26612" title="Smithtown Central School District" label="Smithtown Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566901" start="26615" end="26652" title="South Country Central School District" label="South Country Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="26655" end="26698" title="South Huntington Union Free School District" label="South Huntington Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569173" start="26701" end="26739" title="Southampton Union Free School District" label="Southampton Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570920" start="26742" end="26777" title="Southold Union Free School District" label="Southold Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q110664592" start="26780" end="26814" title="Springs Union Free School District" label="Springs Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797894" start="26817" end="26854" title="Three Village Central School District" label="Three Village Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q85810969" start="26857" end="26888" title="Tuckahoe Common School District" label="Tuckahoe Common School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="26891" end="26923" title="Wainscott Common School District" label="Wainscott Common School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035595" start="26926" end="26965" title="West Babylon Union Free School District" label="West Babylon Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035765" start="26968" end="27005" title="West Islip Union Free School District" label="West Islip Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="27008" end="27052" title="Westhampton Beach Union Free School District" label="Westhampton Beach Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q54954495" start="27055" end="27091" title="Wyandanch Union Free School District" label="Wyandanch Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151009" start="27200" end="27217" title="Dan&amp;#x27;s Papers" label="Dan&amp;#x27;s Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140593" start="27263" end="27270" title="Newsday" label="Newsday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731448" start="27416" end="27437" title="The East Hampton Star" label="The East Hampton Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769398" start="27523" end="27544" title="The Times Beacon Record" label="The Port Times Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769398" start="27797" end="27820" title="The Times Beacon Record" label="The Times Beacon Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769398" start="27835" end="27858" title="The Times Beacon Record" label="The Times of Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769398" start="27873" end="27900" title="The Times Beacon Record" label="The Times of Middle Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769398" start="27915" end="27956" title="The Times Beacon Record" label="The Times of Northport and East Northport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769398" start="27971" end="27993" title="The Times Beacon Record" label="The Times of Smithtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769398" start="28008" end="28033" title="The Times Beacon Record" label="The Village Beacon Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769398" start="28048" end="28072" title="The Times Beacon Record" label="The Village Times Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946542" start="28103" end="28110" title="WALK-FM" label="WALK-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q580140" start="28112" end="28121" title="Patchogue" label="Patchogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707627" start="28124" end="28131" title="WAPP-LP" label="WAPP-LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460058" start="28133" end="28144" title="Westhampton, New York" label="Westhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946954" start="28147" end="28151" title="WBAB" label="WBAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461796" start="28153" end="28160" title="Babylon (village), New York" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946981" start="28163" end="28167" title="WBAZ" label="WBAZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925171" start="28169" end="28182" title="Bridgehampton" label="Bridgehampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947072" start="28185" end="28189" title="WBEA" label="WBEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825947" start="28191" end="28199" title="Southold (CDP), New York" label="Southold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947261" start="28202" end="28206" title="WBLI" label="WBLI"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707675" start="28220" end="28224" title="WBWD (AM)" label="WBWD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826325" start="28226" end="28231" title="Islip (hamlet), New York" label="Islip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947345" start="28234" end="28238" title="WBZO (FM)" label="WBZO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949549" start="28254" end="28258" title="WDRE (AM)" label="WDRE"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703248" start="28260" end="28269" title="Riverhead (CDP), New York" label="Riverhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707642" start="28272" end="28276" title="WEER (FM)" label="WEER"/>
<link wikidata="Q498773" start="28278" end="28285" title="Montauk, New York" label="Montauk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948845" start="28288" end="28292" title="WEGB" label="WEGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460293" start="28294" end="28302" title="Napeague" label="Napeague"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450739" start="28311" end="28317" title="Quogue" label="Quogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948870" start="28320" end="28324" title="WEHM" label="WEHM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460208" start="28326" end="28336" title="Manorville, New York" label="Manorville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826265" start="28345" end="28357" title="East Hampton (village), New York" label="East Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948921" start="28360" end="28364" title="WELJ" label="WELJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q905753" start="28376" end="28380" title="WFRS" label="WFRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460011" start="28382" end="28391" title="Smithtown (CDP), New York" label="Smithtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707658" start="28394" end="28398" title="WGSS (FM)" label="WGSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452286" start="28400" end="28408" title="Copiague" label="Copiague"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840959" start="28411" end="28415" title="WHFM" label="WHFM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826291" start="28417" end="28428" title="Southampton (village), New York" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951215" start="28431" end="28435" title="WJJF" label="WJJF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951428" start="28447" end="28451" title="WJVC" label="WJVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462028" start="28453" end="28468" title="Center Moriches" label="Center Moriches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946543" start="28471" end="28475" title="WLID" label="WLID"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953689" start="28489" end="28493" title="WLIM" label="WLIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573670" start="28495" end="28502" title="Medford, New York" label="Medford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952264" start="28505" end="28512" title="WLIR-FM" label="WLIR-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461320" start="28514" end="28526" title="Hampton Bays" label="Hampton Bays"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954422" start="28529" end="28536" title="WLIW-FM" label="WLIW-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952269" start="28552" end="28559" title="WLIX-LP" label="WLIX-LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461788" start="28561" end="28566" title="Ridge, New York" label="Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952365" start="28569" end="28573" title="WLNG" label="WLNG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087814" start="28575" end="28585" title="Sag Harbor" label="Sag Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853250" start="28588" end="28592" title="WNYG" label="WNYG"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953690" start="28606" end="28610" title="WNYH" label="WNYH"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776128" start="28612" end="28622" title="Huntington (CDP), New York" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008513" start="28625" end="28629" title="WPLF" label="WPLF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460185" start="28631" end="28645" title="Shelter Island (CDP), New York" label="Shelter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954518" start="28648" end="28652" title="WPTY" label="WPTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877571" start="28654" end="28663" title="Calverton, New York" label="Calverton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28664" end="28671" title="Riverhead (town), New York#Other communities" label="Roanoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954925" start="28674" end="28681" title="WRCN-FM" label="WRCN-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955073" start="28695" end="28699" title="WRIV" label="WRIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161583" start="28713" end="28717" title="WRLI" label="WRLI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955654" start="28733" end="28737" title="WSHR" label="WSHR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459304" start="28739" end="28754" title="Lake Ronkonkoma" label="Lake Ronkonkoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955973" start="28757" end="28761" title="WSUF" label="WSUF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461161" start="28763" end="28769" title="Noyack" label="Noyack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956677" start="28772" end="28776" title="WUSB (FM)" label="WUSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376559" start="28778" end="28789" title="Stony Brook, New York" label="Stony Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957466" start="28792" end="28796" title="WWSK" label="WWSK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947569" start="28810" end="28817" title="WWWF-FM" label="WWWF-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q384692" start="28819" end="28828" title="Bay Shore" label="Bay Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957565" start="28831" end="28835" title="WXBA" label="WXBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300932" start="28837" end="28846" title="Brentwood, New York" label="Brentwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949554" start="28876" end="28883" title="WFTY-DT" label="WFTY-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952377" start="28897" end="28904" title="WLNY-TV" label="WLNY-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957062" start="28918" end="28925" title="WVVH-CD" label="WVVH-CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451374" start="28962" end="28984" title="Fire Island Lighthouse" label="Fire Island Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138301" start="29053" end="29068" title="New York Harbor" label="New York Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451371" start="29208" end="29225" title="Fire Island Inlet" label="Fire Island Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487860" start="29238" end="29259" title="Robert Moses Causeway" label="Robert Moses Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q262853" start="29272" end="29295" title="Robert Moses State Park" label="Robert Moses State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599986" start="29336" end="29358" title="Great South Bay Bridge" label="Great South Bay Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603094" start="29638" end="29652" title="State Boat Channel Bridge" label="bascule bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036965" start="29756" end="29774" title="Captree State Park" label="Captree State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561797" start="29776" end="29792" title="Gilgo State Park" label="Gilgo State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6275135" start="29797" end="29819" title="Jones Beach State Park" label="Jones Beach State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451372" start="29826" end="29850" title="Fire Island Inlet Bridge" label="Fire Island Inlet Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q262853" start="29952" end="29975" title="Robert Moses State Park" label="Robert Moses State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q39715" start="30075" end="30086" title="lighthouses" label="lighthouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709805" start="30197" end="30205" title="Southold, New York" label="Southold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158786" start="30569" end="30583" title="Peconic County" label="Peconic County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30638" end="30643" title="Political subdivisions of New York#Town" label="towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q994372" start="30663" end="30675" title="East Hampton (town), New York" label="East Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770518" start="30677" end="30686" title="Riverhead (town), New York" label="Riverhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330668" start="30688" end="30702" title="Shelter Island (town), New York" label="Shelter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631643" start="30704" end="30715" title="Southampton, New York" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709805" start="30720" end="30728" title="Southold, New York" label="Southold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497683" start="30739" end="30768" title="Shinnecock Indian Reservation" label="Shinnecock Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30100870" start="31224" end="31236" title="Corey Dolgon" label="Corey Dolgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q119546" start="31357" end="31368" title="Howard Zinn" label="Howard Zinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146109" start="32145" end="32148" title="Metropolitan Transportation Authority" label="MTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873577" start="32202" end="32219" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United States" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706292" start="32366" end="32400" title="Good Samaritan University Hospital" label="Good Samaritan University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056650" start="32403" end="32434" title="Northwell Health" label="South Shore University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619524" start="32437" end="32468" title="Stony Brook University Hospital" label="Stony Brook University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q122834565" start="32493" end="32512" title="Huntington Hospital (New York)" label="Huntington Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q30286694" start="32515" end="32545" title="Long Island Community Hospital" label="Long Island Community Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q27969880" start="32548" end="32563" title="Mather Hospital" label="Mather Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056650" start="32566" end="32592" title="Northwell Health" label="Peconic Bay Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619524" start="32595" end="32635" title="Stony Brook University Hospital" label="Stony Brook Eastern Long Island Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569137" start="32638" end="32670" title="Stony Brook Southampton Hospital" label="Stony Brook Southampton Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32673" end="32693" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Rockville Centre#Catholic Health" label="St. Charles Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q39054896" start="32696" end="32734" title="Saint Catherine of Siena Medical Center" label="St. Catherine of Sienna Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056650" start="32764" end="32783" title="Northwell Health" label="South Oaks Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32786" end="32822" title="Stony Brook University Hospital#Stony Brook Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Stony Brook Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="32849" end="32866" title="State of New York" label="State of New York"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32870" end="32874" title="Administrative divisions of New York (state)#Town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33090" end="33094" title="Administrative divisions of New York (state)#City" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="33104" end="33122" title="Indian reservation" label="Indian reservation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33141" end="33148" title="Administrative divisions of New York (state)#Village" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389680" start="33155" end="33172" title="incorporated area" label="incorporated area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33492" end="33498" title="Administrative divisions of New York (state)#Hamlet" label="hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750870" start="33678" end="33685" title="Babylon, New York" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q550032" start="33698" end="33708" title="Brookhaven, New York" label="Brookhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q994372" start="33721" end="33733" title="East Hampton (town), New York" label="East Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q999123" start="33745" end="33755" title="Huntington, New York" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751219" start="33768" end="33773" title="Islip, New York" label="Islip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770518" start="33786" end="33795" title="Riverhead (town), New York" label="Riverhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330668" start="33807" end="33821" title="Shelter Island, New York" label="Shelter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594054" start="33832" end="33841" title="Smithtown, New York" label="Smithtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631643" start="33854" end="33865" title="Southampton, New York" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709805" start="33877" end="33885" title="Southold, New York" label="Southold"/>
<link wikidata="Q472509" start="33928" end="33938" title="Amityville" label="Amityville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459881" start="33949" end="33958" title="Asharoken" label="Asharoken"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461796" start="33967" end="33974" title="Babylon (village), New York" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452543" start="33986" end="33997" title="Belle Terre" label="Belle Terre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894994" start="34006" end="34014" title="Bellport" label="Bellport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452689" start="34025" end="34037" title="Brightwaters, New York" label="Brightwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452608" start="34048" end="34061" title="Dering Harbor" label="Dering Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826265" start="34069" end="34081" title="East Hampton (village), New York" label="East Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q94652" start="34092" end="34101" title="Greenport, Suffolk County, New York" label="Greenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019293" start="34112" end="34130" title="Head of the Harbor" label="Head of the Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452524" start="34141" end="34155" title="Huntington Bay" label="Huntington Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452395" start="34166" end="34174" title="Islandia, New York" label="Islandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442569" start="34185" end="34195" title="Lake Grove, New York" label="Lake Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336904" start="34207" end="34218" title="Lindenhurst, New York" label="Lindenhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452992" start="34230" end="34242" title="Lloyd Harbor" label="Lloyd Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019266" start="34253" end="34264" title="Nissequogue" label="Nissequogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458148" start="34275" end="34286" title="North Haven, New York" label="North Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452681" start="34297" end="34306" title="Northport, New York" label="Northport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458137" start="34317" end="34328" title="Ocean Beach, New York" label="Ocean Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016789" start="34337" end="34346" title="Old Field, New York" label="Old Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q580140" start="34355" end="34364" title="Patchogue" label="Patchogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q370133" start="34376" end="34383" title="Poquott" label="Poquott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104746" start="34392" end="34406" title="Port Jefferson" label="Port Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450739" start="34417" end="34423" title="Quogue" label="Quogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087814" start="34434" end="34444" title="Sag Harbor" label="Sag Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460147" start="34455" end="34465" title="Sagaponack" label="Sagaponack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014190" start="34474" end="34482" title="Saltaire, New York" label="Saltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453037" start="34491" end="34499" title="Shoreham, New York" label="Shoreham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826291" start="34508" end="34519" title="Southampton (village), New York" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452826" start="34530" end="34551" title="Village of the Branch" label="Village of the Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453197" start="34562" end="34579" title="Westhampton Beach" label="Westhampton Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458150" start="34590" end="34608" title="West Hampton Dunes" label="West Hampton Dunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411458" start="34666" end="34676" title="Amagansett" label="Amagansett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462057" start="34679" end="34688" title="Aquebogue" label="Aquebogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461967" start="34691" end="34705" title="Baiting Hollow, New York" label="Baiting Hollow"/>
<link wikidata="Q384692" start="34708" end="34717" title="Bay Shore" label="Bay Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460582" start="34720" end="34727" title="Bayport, New York" label="Bayport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460593" start="34730" end="34737" title="Baywood, New York" label="Baywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460883" start="34740" end="34750" title="Blue Point, New York" label="Blue Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468957" start="34753" end="34760" title="Bohemia, New York" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300932" start="34763" end="34772" title="Brentwood, New York" label="Brentwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925171" start="34775" end="34788" title="Bridgehampton" label="Bridgehampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974628" start="34791" end="34801" title="Brookhaven (CDP), New York" label="Brookhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877571" start="34804" end="34813" title="Calverton, New York" label="Calverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q108146879" start="34816" end="34823" title="Captree, New York" label="Captree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462028" start="34826" end="34841" title="Center Moriches" label="Center Moriches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459299" start="34844" end="34854" title="Centereach" label="Centereach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461439" start="34857" end="34867" title="Centerport, New York" label="Centerport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459283" start="34870" end="34883" title="Central Islip" label="Central Islip"/>
<link wikidata="Q953080" start="34886" end="34904" title="Cold Spring Harbor" label="Cold Spring Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459193" start="34907" end="34914" title="Commack" label="Commack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452286" start="34917" end="34925" title="Copiague" label="Copiague"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459236" start="34928" end="34933" title="Coram, New York" label="Coram"/>
<link wikidata="Q614676" start="34936" end="34945" title="Cutchogue" label="Cutchogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182481" start="34948" end="34957" title="Deer Park, New York" label="Deer Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459205" start="34960" end="34969" title="Dix Hills" label="Dix Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460492" start="34972" end="34988" title="East Farmingdale" label="East Farmingdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461765" start="34991" end="35009" title="East Hampton North, New York" label="East Hampton North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469029" start="35012" end="35022" title="East Islip" label="East Islip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460525" start="35025" end="35036" title="East Marion" label="East Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462105" start="35039" end="35052" title="East Moriches" label="East Moriches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459309" start="35055" end="35069" title="East Northport" label="East Northport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459226" start="35072" end="35086" title="East Patchogue" label="East Patchogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469038" start="35089" end="35100" title="East Quogue" label="East Quogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q49349466" start="35103" end="35116" title="East Setauket" label="East Setauket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461394" start="35119" end="35132" title="East Shoreham" label="East Shoreham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469016" start="35135" end="35143" title="Eastport, New York" label="Eastport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461752" start="35146" end="35157" title="Eatons Neck" label="Eatons Neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462037" start="35160" end="35166" title="Elwood, New York" label="Elwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q941968" start="35169" end="35181" title="Farmingville" label="Farmingville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418789" start="35184" end="35195" title="Fire Island" label="Fire Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460931" start="35198" end="35212" title="Fishers Island" label="Fishers Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459889" start="35215" end="35223" title="Flanders, New York" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461337" start="35226" end="35238" title="Fort Salonga, New York" label="Fort Salonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561796" start="35241" end="35246" title="Gilgo, New York" label="Gilgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460365" start="35249" end="35263" title="Gordon Heights" label="Gordon Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460817" start="35266" end="35277" title="Great River, New York" label="Great River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475569" start="35280" end="35289" title="Greenlawn, New York" label="Greenlawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655081" start="35292" end="35306" title="Greenport West" label="Greenport West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462111" start="35309" end="35317" title="Halesite" label="Halesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461320" start="35320" end="35332" title="Hampton Bays" label="Hampton Bays"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476502" start="35335" end="35344" title="Hauppauge" label="Hauppauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459180" start="35347" end="35355" title="Holbrook, New York" label="Holbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468992" start="35358" end="35368" title="Holtsville" label="Holtsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776128" start="35371" end="35381" title="Huntington (CDP), New York" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452350" start="35384" end="35402" title="Huntington Station, New York" label="Huntington Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826325" start="35405" end="35410" title="Islip (hamlet), New York" label="Islip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476395" start="35413" end="35426" title="Islip Terrace" label="Islip Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460398" start="35429" end="35438" title="Jamesport, New York" label="Jamesport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460406" start="35441" end="35451" title="Kings Park, New York" label="Kings Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459304" start="35454" end="35469" title="Lake Ronkonkoma" label="Lake Ronkonkoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460637" start="35472" end="35478" title="Laurel, New York" label="Laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460208" start="35481" end="35491" title="Manorville, New York" label="Manorville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462195" start="35494" end="35500" title="Mastic, New York" label="Mastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461049" start="35503" end="35515" title="Mastic Beach" label="Mastic Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q533896" start="35518" end="35527" title="Mattituck" label="Mattituck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573670" start="35530" end="35537" title="Medford, New York" label="Medford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101080" start="35540" end="35548" title="Melville, New York" label="Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461670" start="35551" end="35564" title="Middle Island, New York" label="Middle Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460277" start="35567" end="35579" title="Miller Place" label="Miller Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q498773" start="35582" end="35589" title="Montauk, New York" label="Montauk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462094" start="35592" end="35600" title="Moriches, New York" label="Moriches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468969" start="35603" end="35614" title="Mount Sinai, New York" label="Mount Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460293" start="35617" end="35625" title="Napeague" label="Napeague"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461978" start="35628" end="35637" title="Nesconset" label="Nesconset"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461077" start="35640" end="35651" title="New Suffolk" label="New Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461350" start="35654" end="35670" title="North Amityville" label="North Amityville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460922" start="35673" end="35686" title="North Babylon" label="North Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460347" start="35689" end="35704" title="North Bay Shore" label="North Bay Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461142" start="35707" end="35721" title="North Bellport" label="North Bellport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461996" start="35724" end="35741" title="North Great River" label="North Great River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461804" start="35744" end="35761" title="North Lindenhurst" label="North Lindenhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461203" start="35764" end="35779" title="North Patchogue" label="North Patchogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460263" start="35782" end="35791" title="North Sea, New York" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826269" start="35794" end="35805" title="Northampton, Suffolk County, New York" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459914" start="35808" end="35818" title="Northville, Suffolk County, New York" label="Northville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461812" start="35821" end="35837" title="Northwest Harbor, New York" label="Northwest Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461161" start="35840" end="35846" title="Noyack" label="Noyack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073431" start="35849" end="35858" title="Oak Beach" label="Oak Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462188" start="35861" end="35868" title="Oakdale, New York" label="Oakdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461988" start="35871" end="35877" title="Orient, New York" label="Orient"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461877" start="35880" end="35887" title="Peconic, New York" label="Peconic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460279" start="35890" end="35912" title="Port Jefferson Station" label="Port Jefferson Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092979" start="35915" end="35922" title="Quiogue" label="Quiogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461263" start="35925" end="35942" title="Remsenburg-Speonk" label="Remsenburg-Speonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461788" start="35945" end="35950" title="Ridge, New York" label="Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703248" start="35953" end="35962" title="Riverhead (CDP), New York" label="Riverhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470973" start="35965" end="35974" title="Riverside, Suffolk County, New York" label="Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459765" start="35977" end="35988" title="Rocky Point, New York" label="Rocky Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459768" start="35991" end="36001" title="Ronkonkoma, New York" label="Ronkonkoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469089" start="36004" end="36012" title="Sayville" label="Sayville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889137" start="36015" end="36021" title="Selden, New York" label="Selden"/>
<link wikidata="Q122942690" start="36024" end="36032" title="Setauket" label="Setauket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330668" start="36035" end="36049" title="Shelter Island, New York" label="Shelter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461370" start="36052" end="36074" title="Shelter Island Heights" label="Shelter Island Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460166" start="36077" end="36093" title="Shinnecock Hills, New York" label="Shinnecock Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671223" start="36096" end="36103" title="Shirley, New York" label="Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460011" start="36106" end="36115" title="Smithtown (CDP), New York" label="Smithtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461366" start="36118" end="36129" title="Sound Beach" label="Sound Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460300" start="36132" end="36148" title="South Huntington" label="South Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825947" start="36151" end="36159" title="Southold (CDP), New York" label="Southold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111100" start="36162" end="36169" title="Springs, New York" label="Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568157" start="36172" end="36181" title="St. James, New York" label="St. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376559" start="36184" end="36195" title="Stony Brook, New York" label="Stony Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q969850" start="36198" end="36220" title="Stony Brook University" label="Stony Brook University"/>
<link wikidata="Q9086344" start="36223" end="36233" title="Terryville, New York" label="Terryville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153682" start="36236" end="36244" title="Tuckahoe, Suffolk County, New York" label="Tuckahoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476417" start="36247" end="36259" title="Wading River, New York" label="Wading River"/>
<link wikidata="Q516171" start="36262" end="36271" title="Wainscott, New York" label="Wainscott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460040" start="36274" end="36284" title="Water Mill, New York" label="Water Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452101" start="36287" end="36299" title="West Babylon" label="West Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461178" start="36302" end="36316" title="West Bay Shore" label="West Bay Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461211" start="36319" end="36329" title="West Hills, New York" label="West Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459327" start="36332" end="36342" title="West Islip" label="West Islip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460019" start="36345" end="36358" title="West Sayville" label="West Sayville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460058" start="36361" end="36372" title="Westhampton, New York" label="Westhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460111" start="36375" end="36391" title="Wheatley Heights" label="Wheatley Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460228" start="36394" end="36403" title="Wyandanch" label="Wyandanch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469076" start="36406" end="36413" title="Yaphank" label="Yaphank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373915" start="36851" end="36862" title="Peconic Bay" label="Peconic Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="37139" end="37157" title="Indian reservation" label="Indian reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497683" start="37203" end="37225" title="Shinnecock Reservation" label="Shinnecock Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138411" start="37228" end="37250" title="Poospatuck Reservation" label="Poospatuck Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="37367" end="37393" title="Suffolk County Legislature" label="Suffolk County Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="37524" end="37538" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="37546" end="37560" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451739" start="37586" end="37591" title="Interstate 495 (New York)" label="I-495"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="37647" end="37660" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770518" start="37681" end="37690" title="Riverhead (town), New York" label="Riverhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q125138" start="37937" end="37958" title="Queens-Midtown Tunnel" label="Queens-Midtown Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486024" start="37962" end="37985" title="New York State Route 27" label="New York State Route 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="38014" end="38027" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau County"/>
<link wikidata="Q498773" start="38048" end="38061" title="Montauk Point" label="Montauk Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452101" start="38169" end="38181" title="West Babylon" label="West Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631643" start="38185" end="38196" title="Southampton, New York" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q937590" start="38236" end="38276" title="Long Island MacArthur Airport" label="Long Island MacArthur Airport (ISP/KISP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314385" start="38306" end="38333" title="Republic Airport" label="Republic Airport (FRG/KFRG)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888181" start="38336" end="38377" title="Brookhaven Airport" label="Brookhaven Calabro Airport (WSH/KHWV/HWV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482369" start="38380" end="38418" title="Francis S. Gabreski Airport" label="Francis S. Gabreski Airport (FOK/KFOK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328540" start="38421" end="38460" title="East Hampton Airport" label="Town of East Hampton Airport (JPX/KJPX)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362765" start="38463" end="38511" title="Elizabeth Field (Suffolk County, New York)" label="Elizabeth Field (Fisher&amp;#x27;s Island) (FID/0B8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634561" start="38569" end="38591" title="Suffolk County Transit" label="Suffolk County Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q125943" start="38593" end="38614" title="Long Island Rail Road" label="Long Island Rail Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646239" start="38620" end="38634" title="Hampton Jitney" label="Hampton Jitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646245" start="38640" end="38660" title="Hampton Luxury Liner" label="Hampton Luxury Liner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967576" start="38750" end="38758" title="Nassau Inter-County Express" label="NICE bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q988487" start="38782" end="38794" title="Craig Biggio" label="Craig Biggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q726071" start="38797" end="38810" title="Jimmy Buffett" label="Jimmy Buffett"/>
<link wikidata="Q41076" start="38814" end="38826" title="Mariah Carey" label="Mariah Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="38829" end="38839" title="Mick Foley" label="Mick Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q44561" start="38842" end="38853" title="Kevin James" label="Kevin James"/>
<link wikidata="Q437752" start="38856" end="38877" title="Loudon Wainwright III" label="Loudon Wainwright III"/>
<link wikidata="Q956100" start="38880" end="38896" title="Carl Yastrzemski" label="Carl Yastrzemski"/>
<link wikidata="Q762726" start="38913" end="38941" title="List of counties in New York" label="List of counties in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977565" start="38944" end="39017" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Suffolk County, New York" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Suffolk County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435928" start="39020" end="39063" title="Suffolk County, Farmland Development Rights" label="Suffolk County, Farmland Development Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874449" start="39066" end="39107" title="USS Suffolk County (LST-1173)" label="USS &amp;quot;Suffolk County&amp;quot; (LST-1173)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53360" wikidata="Q215120" url="?curid=53360" title="Cole Porter">
<text>Cole Albert Porter (June 9, 1891 – October 15, 1964) was an American composer and songwriter. Many of his songs became standards noted for their witty, urbane lyrics, and many of his scores found success on Broadway and in Hollywood films.

Born to a wealthy family in Indiana, Porter defied his grandfather&#x27;s wishes for him to practice law and took up music as a profession. Classically trained, he was drawn to musical theatre. After a slow start, he began to achieve success in the 1920s, and by the 1930s he was one of the major songwriters for the Broadway musical stage. Unlike many successful Broadway composers, Porter wrote the lyrics as well as the music for his songs.

After a serious horseback riding accident in 1937, Porter was left disabled and in constant pain, but he continued to work. His shows of the early 1940s did not contain the lasting hits of his best work of the 1920s and 1930s, but in 1948 he made a triumphant comeback with his most successful musical, &quot;Kiss Me, Kate&quot;. It won the first Tony Award for Best Musical.

Porter&#x27;s other musicals include &quot;Fifty Million Frenchmen&quot;, &quot;DuBarry Was a Lady&quot;, &quot;Anything Goes&quot;, &quot;Can-Can&quot; and &quot;Silk Stockings&quot;. His numerous hit songs include &quot;Night and Day&quot;, &quot;Begin the Beguine&quot;, &quot;I Get a Kick Out of You&quot;, &quot;Well, Did You Evah!&quot;, &quot;I&#x27;ve Got You Under My Skin&quot;, &quot;My Heart Belongs to Daddy&quot; and &quot;You&#x27;re the Top&quot;. He also composed scores for films from the 1930s to the 1950s, including &quot;Born to Dance&quot; (1936), which featured the song &quot;You&#x27;d Be So Easy to Love&quot;; &quot;Rosalie&quot; (1937), which featured &quot;In the Still of the Night&quot;; &quot;High Society&quot; (1956), which included &quot;True Love&quot;; and &quot;Les Girls&quot; (1957).

==Life and career==

===Early years===

Porter was born in Peru, Indiana, on June 9, 1891, the only surviving child of a wealthy family. His father, Samuel Fenwick Porter, was a pharmacist by trade. His mother, Kate, was the indulged daughter of James Omar &quot;J. O.&quot; Cole, &quot;the richest man in Indiana&quot;, a coal and timber speculator who dominated the family. J. O. Cole built the couple a house on his Peru-area property, known as Westleigh Farms. After high school, Porter returned to his childhood home only for occasional visits.

Porter&#x27;s strong-willed mother doted on him and began his musical training at an early age. He learned the violin at age six, the piano at eight, and wrote his first operetta (with help from his mother) at ten. She falsified his recorded birth year, changing it from 1891 to 1893 to make him appear more precocious. His father, a shy and unassertive man, played a lesser role in Porter&#x27;s upbringing, although as an amateur poet, he may have influenced his son&#x27;s gifts for rhyme and meter. Porter&#x27;s father was also a talented singer and pianist, but the father-son relationship was not close.
J. O. Cole wanted his grandson to become a lawyer, and with that in mind, sent him to Worcester Academy in Massachusetts in 1905. Porter brought an upright piano with him to school and found that music, and his ability to entertain, made it easy for him to make friends. Porter did well in school and rarely came home to visit. He became class valedictorian and was rewarded by his grandfather with a tour of France, Switzerland and Germany. Entering Yale College in 1909, Porter majored in English, minored in music, and also studied French. He was a member of Scroll and Key and Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity, and contributed to campus humor magazine &quot;The Yale Record&quot;. He was an early member of the Whiffenpoofs &quot;a cappella&quot; singing group and participated in several other music clubs; in his senior year, he was elected president of the Yale Glee Club and was its principal soloist. 

Porter wrote 300 songs while at Yale, including student songs such as the football fight songs &quot;Bulldog&quot; and &quot;Bingo Eli Yale&quot; (aka &quot;Bingo, That&#x27;s The Lingo!&quot;) that are still played at Yale. During college, Porter became acquainted with New York City&#x27;s vibrant nightlife, taking the train there for dinner, theater, and nights on the town with his classmates, before returning to New Haven, Connecticut, early in the morning. He also wrote musical comedy scores for his fraternity, the Yale Dramatic Association, and as a student at Harvard – &quot;Cora&quot; (1911), &quot;And the Villain Still Pursued Her&quot; (1912), &quot;The Pot of Gold&quot; (1912), &quot;The Kaleidoscope&quot; (1913) and &quot;Paranoia&quot; (1914) – which helped prepare him for a career as a Broadway and Hollywood composer and lyricist. After graduating from Yale, Porter enrolled in Harvard Law School in 1913, where he roomed with future Secretary of State Dean Acheson. He soon felt that he was not destined to be a lawyer, and, at the suggestion of the dean of the law school, switched to Harvard&#x27;s music department, where he studied harmony and counterpoint with Pietro Yon. His mother did not object to this move, but it was kept secret from J. O. Cole.

In 1915, Porter&#x27;s first song on Broadway, &quot;Esmeralda&quot;, appeared in the revue &quot;Hands Up&quot;. The quick success was immediately followed by failure: his first Broadway production, in 1916, &quot;See America First&quot;, a &quot;patriotic comic opera&quot; modeled on Gilbert and Sullivan, with a book by T. Lawrason Riggs, was a flop, closing after two weeks. Porter spent the next year in New York City before going overseas during World War I.

===WWI, Paris and marriage===

In 1917, when the United States entered World War I, Porter moved to Paris to work with the Duryea Relief organization. Some writers have been skeptical about Porter&#x27;s claim to have served in the French Foreign Legion, but the Legion lists Porter as one of its soldiers and displays his portrait at its museum in Aubagne. By some accounts, he served in North Africa and was transferred to the French Officers School at Fontainebleau, teaching gunnery to American soldiers. An obituary notice in &quot;The New York Times&quot; stated that, while in the Legion, &quot;he had a specially constructed portable piano made for him so that he could carry it on his back and entertain the troops in their bivouacs.&quot; Another account, given by Porter, is that he joined the recruiting department of the American Aviation Headquarters, but, according to his biographer Stephen Citron, there is no record of his joining this or any other branch of the forces.

Porter maintained a luxury apartment in Paris, where he entertained lavishly. His parties were extravagant and scandalous, with &quot;much gay and bisexual activity, Italian nobility, cross-dressing, international musicians and a large surplus of recreational drugs&quot;. In 1918, he met Linda Lee Thomas, a rich, Louisville, Kentucky-born divorcée eight years his senior. She was beautiful and well-connected socially; the couple shared mutual interests, including a love of travel, and she became Porter&#x27;s confidante and companion. The couple married the following year. She was in no doubt about Porter&#x27;s homosexuality, but it was mutually advantageous for them to marry. For Linda, it offered continued social status and a partner who was the antithesis of her abusive first husband. For Porter, it brought a respectable heterosexual front in an era when homosexuality was not publicly acknowledged. They were, moreover, genuinely devoted to each other and remained married from December 19, 1919, until her death in 1954. Linda remained protective of her social position and, believing that classical music might be a more prestigious outlet than Broadway for her husband&#x27;s talents, tried to use her connections to find him suitable teachers, including Igor Stravinsky, but was unsuccessful. Finally, Porter enrolled at the Schola Cantorum in Paris, where he studied orchestration and counterpoint with Vincent d&#x27;Indy. Meanwhile, Porter&#x27;s first big hit was the song &quot;Old-Fashioned Garden&quot; from the revue &quot;Hitchy-Koo of 1919&quot;. In 1920, he contributed the music of several songs to the musical &quot;A Night Out&quot;.
Marriage did not diminish Porter&#x27;s taste for extravagant luxury. The Porter home on the rue Monsieur near Les Invalides was a palatial house with platinum wallpaper and chairs upholstered in zebra skin. In 1923, Porter came into an inheritance from his grandfather, and the Porters began living in rented palaces in Venice. He once hired the entire Ballets Russes to entertain his guests, and for a party at Ca&#x27; Rezzonico, which he rented for $4,000 a month ($ in current value), he hired 50 gondoliers to act as footmen and had a troupe of tightrope walkers perform in a blaze of lights. In the midst of this extravagant lifestyle, Porter continued to write songs with his wife&#x27;s encouragement.
Porter received few commissions for songs in the years immediately after his marriage. He had the occasional number interpolated into other writers&#x27; revues in Britain and the U.S. For a C. B. Cochran show in 1921, he had two successes with the comedy numbers &quot;The Blue Boy Blues&quot; and &quot;Olga, Come Back to the Volga&quot;. In 1923, in collaboration with Gerald Murphy, he composed a short ballet, originally titled &quot;Landed&quot; and then &quot;Within the Quota&quot;, satirically depicting the adventures of an immigrant to America who becomes a film star. The work, written for the Ballets suédois, lasts about 16 minutes. It was orchestrated by Charles Koechlin and shared the same opening night as Milhaud&#x27;s &quot;La création du monde&quot;. Porter&#x27;s work was one of the earliest symphonic jazz-based compositions, predating George Gershwin&#x27;s &quot;Rhapsody in Blue&quot; by four months, and was well received by both French and American reviewers after its premiere at the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées in October 1923.

After a successful New York performance the following month, the Ballets suédois toured the work in the U.S., performing it 69 times. A year later the company disbanded, and the score was lost until it was reconstructed from Porter&#x27;s and Koechlin&#x27;s manuscripts between 1966 and 1990, with help from Milhaud and others. Porter had less success with his work on &quot;The Greenwich Village Follies&quot; (1924). He wrote most of the original score, but his songs were gradually dropped during the Broadway run, and by the time of the post-Broadway tour in 1925, all his numbers had been deleted. Frustrated by the public response to most of his work, Porter nearly gave up songwriting as a career, although he continued to compose songs for friends and perform at private parties.

===Broadway and West End success===

At the age of 36, Porter reintroduced himself to Broadway in 1928 with the musical &quot;Paris&quot;, his first hit. It was commissioned by E. Ray Goetz at the instigation of Goetz&#x27;s wife and the show&#x27;s star, Irène Bordoni. She had wanted Rodgers and Hart to write the songs, but they were unavailable, and Porter&#x27;s agent persuaded Goetz to hire Porter instead. In August 1928, Porter&#x27;s work on the show was interrupted by the death of his father. He hurried back to Indiana to comfort his mother before returning to work. The songs for the show included &quot;Let&#x27;s Misbehave&quot; and one of his best-known list songs, &quot;Let&#x27;s Do It, Let&#x27;s Fall in Love&quot;, which was introduced by Bordoni and Arthur Margetson. The show opened on Broadway on October 8, 1928. The Porters did not attend the first night because Porter was in Paris supervising another show for which he had been commissioned, &quot;La Revue des Ambassadeurs&quot; at the Les Ambassadeurs music hall. This was also a success, and, in Citron&#x27;s phrase, Porter was finally &quot;accepted into the upper echelon of Broadway songwriters&quot;. Cochran now wanted more from Porter than isolated extra songs; he planned a West End extravaganza similar to Ziegfeld&#x27;s shows, with a Porter score and a large international cast led by Jessie Matthews, Sonnie Hale and Tilly Losch. The revue, &quot;Wake Up and Dream&quot;, ran for 263 performances in London, after which Cochran transferred it to New York in 1929. On Broadway, business was badly affected by the 1929 Wall Street crash, and the production ran for only 136 performances. From Porter&#x27;s point of view, it was nonetheless a success, as his song &quot;What Is This Thing Called Love?&quot; became immensely popular. Porter&#x27;s new fame brought him offers from Hollywood, but because his score for Paramount&#x27;s &quot;The Battle of Paris&quot; was undistinguished, and its star, Gertrude Lawrence, was miscast, the film was not a success. Citron expresses the view that Porter was not interested in cinema and &quot;noticeably wrote down for the movies.&quot;

Still on a Gallic theme, Porter&#x27;s last Broadway show of the 1920s was &quot;Fifty Million Frenchmen&quot; (1929), for which he wrote 28 numbers, including &quot;You Do Something to Me&quot;, &quot;You&#x27;ve Got That Thing&quot; and &quot;The Tale of the Oyster&quot;. The show received mixed notices. One critic wrote, &quot;the lyrics alone are enough to drive anyone but P. G. Wodehouse into retirement&quot;, but others dismissed the songs as &quot;pleasant&quot; and &quot;not an outstanding hit song in the show&quot;. As it was a lavish and expensive production, nothing less than full houses would suffice, and after only three weeks, the producers announced that they would close it. Irving Berlin, who admired and championed Porter, took out a paid press advertisement calling the show &quot;The best musical comedy I&#x27;ve heard in years. ... One of the best collections of song numbers I have ever listened to&quot;. This saved the show, which ran for 254 performances, considered a successful run at the time.

===1930s===
Ray Goetz, producer of &quot;Paris&quot; and &quot;Fifty Million Frenchmen&quot;, the success of which had kept him solvent when other producers were bankrupted by the post-crash slump in Broadway business, invited Porter to write a musical show about the other city that he knew and loved: New York. Goetz offered the team with whom Porter had last worked: Herbert Fields writing the book and Porter&#x27;s old friend Monty Woolley directing. &quot;The New Yorkers&quot; (1930) acquired instant notoriety for including a song about a streetwalker, &quot;Love for Sale&quot;. Originally performed by Kathryn Crawford in a street setting, critical disapproval led Goetz to reassign the number to Elisabeth Welch in a nightclub scene. The lyric was considered too explicit for radio at the time, though it was recorded and aired as an instrumental and rapidly became a standard. Porter often referred to it as his favorite of his songs. &quot;The New Yorkers&quot; also included the hit &quot;I Happen to Like New York&quot;.
Next came Fred Astaire&#x27;s last stage show, &quot;Gay Divorce&quot; (1932). It featured a hit that became Porter&#x27;s best-known song, &quot;Night and Day&quot;. Despite mixed press (some critics were reluctant to accept Astaire without his previous partner, his sister Adele), the show ran for a profitable 248 performances, and the rights to the film, retitled &quot;The Gay Divorcee&quot;, were sold to RKO Pictures. Porter followed this with a West End show for Gertrude Lawrence, &quot;Nymph Errant&quot; (1933), presented by Cochran at the Adelphi Theatre, where it ran for 154 performances. Among the hit songs Porter composed for the show were &quot;Experiment&quot; and &quot;The Physician&quot; for Lawrence, and &quot;Solomon&quot; for Elisabeth Welch.

In 1934, producer Vinton Freedley came up with a new approach to producing musicals. Instead of commissioning book, music and lyrics and then casting the show, Freedley sought to create an ideal musical with stars and writers all engaged from the outset. The stars he wanted were Ethel Merman, William Gaxton and comedian Victor Moore. He planned a story about a shipwreck and a desert island, and for the book he turned to P. G. Wodehouse and Guy Bolton. For the songs, he decided on Porter. By telling each of these that he had already signed the others, Freedley gathered his ideal team together. A drastic last-minute rewrite was necessitated by a major shipping accident that dominated the news and made Bolton and Wodehouse&#x27;s book seem tasteless. Nevertheless, the show, &quot;Anything Goes&quot;, was an immediate hit. Porter wrote what many consider his greatest score of this period. &quot;The New Yorker&quot; magazine&#x27;s review said, &quot;Mr. Porter is in a class by himself&quot;, and Porter subsequently called it one of his two perfect shows, along with the later &quot;Kiss Me, Kate&quot;. Its songs include &quot;I Get a Kick Out of You&quot;, &quot;All Through the Night&quot;, &quot;You&#x27;re the Top&quot; (one of his best-known list songs), and &quot;Blow, Gabriel, Blow&quot;, as well as the title number. The show ran for 420 performances in New York (a particularly long run in the 1930s) and 261 in London. Porter, despite his lessons in orchestration from d&#x27;Indy, did not orchestrate his musicals. &quot;Anything Goes&quot; was orchestrated by Robert Russell Bennett and Hans Spialek. Now at the height of his success, Porter was able to enjoy the opening night of his musicals; he made grand entrances and sat in front, apparently relishing the show as much as any audience member. Russel Crouse commented &quot;Cole&#x27;s opening-night behaviour is as indecent as that of a bridegroom who has a good time at his own wedding.&quot;

&quot;Anything Goes&quot; was the first of five Porter shows featuring Merman. He loved her loud, brassy voice and wrote many numbers that displayed her strengths. &quot;Jubilee&quot; (1935), written with Moss Hart while on a cruise around the world, was not a major hit, running for only 169 performances, but it featured two songs that have since become standards, &quot;Begin the Beguine&quot; and &quot;Just One of Those Things&quot;. &quot;Red, Hot and Blue&quot; (1936), featuring Merman, Jimmy Durante and Bob Hope, ran for 183 performances and introduced &quot;It&#x27;s De-Lovely&quot;, &quot;Down in the Depths (on the Ninetieth Floor)&quot;, and &quot;Ridin&#x27; High&quot;. The relative failure of these shows convinced Porter that his songs did not appeal to a broad enough audience. In an interview, he said &quot;Sophisticated allusions are good for about six weeks ... more fun, but only for myself and about eighteen other people, all of whom are first-nighters anyway. Polished, urbane and adult playwriting in the musical field is strictly a creative luxury.&quot;

Porter also wrote for Hollywood in the mid-1930s. His scores include those for the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer films &quot;Born to Dance&quot; (1936), with James Stewart, featuring &quot;You&#x27;d Be So Easy to Love&quot; and &quot;I&#x27;ve Got You Under My Skin&quot;, and &quot;Rosalie&quot; (1937), featuring &quot;In the Still of the Night&quot;. He wrote the score of the short film &quot;Paree, Paree&quot;, in 1935, using some of the songs from &quot;Fifty Million Frenchmen&quot;. Porter also composed the cowboy song &quot;Don&#x27;t Fence Me In&quot; for &quot;Adios, Argentina&quot;, an unproduced movie, in 1934, but it did not become a hit until Roy Rogers sang it in the 1944 film &quot;Hollywood Canteen&quot;. Bing Crosby, The Andrews Sisters, and other artists also popularized it in the 1940s. The Porters moved to Hollywood in December 1935, but Porter&#x27;s wife did not like the movie environment, and Porter&#x27;s closeted homosexual acts, formerly very discreet, became less so; she retreated to their Paris house. When his film assignment on &quot;Rosalie&quot; was finished in 1937, Porter hastened to Paris to make peace with Linda, but she remained cool. After a walking tour of Europe with his friends, Porter returned to New York in October 1937 without her. They were soon reunited by an accident Porter suffered.

On October 24, 1937, Porter was riding with Countess Edith di Zoppola and Duke Fulco di Verdura at Piping Rock Club in Locust Valley, New York, when his horse rolled on him and crushed his legs, leaving him substantially crippled and in constant pain for the rest of his life. Though doctors told Porter&#x27;s wife and mother that his right leg would have to be amputated, and possibly the left one as well, he refused to have the procedure. Linda rushed from Paris to be with him, and supported him in his refusal of amputation. He remained in the hospital for seven months before being allowed to go home to his apartment at the Waldorf Towers. He resumed work as soon as he could, finding it took his mind off his perpetual pain.

Porter&#x27;s first show after his accident was not a success. &quot;You Never Know&quot; (1938), starring Clifton Webb, Lupe Vélez and Libby Holman, ran for only 78 performances. The score included the songs &quot;From Alpha to Omega&quot; and &quot;At Long Last Love&quot;. He returned to success with &quot;Leave It to Me!&quot; (1938); the show introduced Mary Martin, singing &quot;My Heart Belongs to Daddy&quot;, and other numbers included &quot;Most Gentlemen Don&#x27;t Like Love&quot; and &quot;From Now On&quot;. Porter&#x27;s last show of the 1930s was &quot;DuBarry Was a Lady&quot; (1939), a particularly risqué show starring Merman and Bert Lahr. After a pre-Broadway tour, during which it ran into trouble with Boston censors, it achieved 408 performances, beginning at the 46th Street Theatre. The score included &quot;But in the Morning, No&quot; (which was banned from the airwaves), &quot;Do I Love You?&quot;, &quot;Well, Did You Evah!&quot;, &quot;Katie Went to Haiti&quot; and another of Porter&#x27;s up-tempo list songs, &quot;Friendship&quot;. At the end of 1939, Porter contributed six songs to the film &quot;Broadway Melody of 1940&quot; for Fred Astaire, George Murphy and Eleanor Powell.

Meanwhile, as political unrest increased in Europe, Porter&#x27;s wife closed their Paris house in 1939, and the next year bought a country home in the Berkshire mountains, near Williamstown, Massachusetts, which she decorated with elegant furnishings from their Paris home. Porter spent time in Hollywood, New York and Williamstown.

===1940s and postwar===

&quot;Panama Hattie&quot; (1940) was Porter&#x27;s longest-running hit so far, running in New York for 501 performances despite the absence of any enduring Porter songs. It starred Merman, Arthur Treacher and Betty Hutton. &quot;Let&#x27;s Face It!&quot; (1941), starring Danny Kaye, had an even better run, with 547 performances in New York. This, too, lacked any numbers that became standards, and Porter always counted it among his lesser efforts. &quot;Something for the Boys&quot; (1943), starring Merman, ran for 422 performances, and &quot;Mexican Hayride&quot; (1944), starring Bobby Clark, with June Havoc, ran for 481 performances. These shows, too, are short of Porter standards. The critics did not pull their punches, complaining about the lack of hit tunes and the generally low standard of the scores. After two flops, &quot;Seven Lively Arts&quot; (1944) (which featured the standard &quot;Ev&#x27;ry Time We Say Goodbye&quot;) and &quot;Around the World&quot; (1946), many thought that Porter&#x27;s best period was over.

Between Broadway musicals, Porter continued to write for Hollywood. His film scores of this period were &quot;You&#x27;ll Never Get Rich&quot; (1941) with Astaire and Rita Hayworth, &quot;Something to Shout About&quot; (1943) with Don Ameche, Janet Blair and William Gaxton, and &quot;Mississippi Belle&quot; (1943–44), which was abandoned before filming began. He also cooperated in the making of the film &quot;Night and Day&quot; (1946), a largely fictional biography of Porter, with Cary Grant implausibly cast in the lead. The critics scoffed, but the film was a huge success, chiefly because of the wealth of vintage Porter numbers in it. The biopic&#x27;s success contrasted starkly with the failure of Vincente Minnelli&#x27;s film &quot;The Pirate&quot; (1948), with Judy Garland and Gene Kelly, in which five new Porter songs received little attention.
From this low spot, Porter made a conspicuous comeback in 1948 with &quot;Kiss Me, Kate&quot;. It was by far his most successful show, running for 1,077 performances in New York and 400 in London. The production won the Tony Award for Best Musical (the first Tony awarded in that category), and Porter won for best composer and lyricist. The score includes &quot;Another Op&#x27;nin&#x27;, Another Show&quot;, &quot;Wunderbar&quot;, &quot;So In Love&quot;, &quot;We Open in Venice&quot;, &quot;Tom, Dick or Harry&quot;, &quot;I&#x27;ve Come to Wive It Wealthily in Padua&quot;, &quot;Too Darn Hot&quot;, &quot;Always True to You (in My Fashion)&quot;, and &quot;Brush Up Your Shakespeare&quot;.

Porter began the 1950s with &quot;Out of This World&quot; (1950), which had some good numbers but too much camp and vulgarity, and was not greatly successful. His next show, &quot;Can-Can&quot; (1952), featuring &quot;C&#x27;est Magnifique&quot; and &quot;It&#x27;s All Right with Me&quot;, was another hit, running for 892 performances. Porter&#x27;s last original Broadway production, &quot;Silk Stockings&quot; (1955), featuring &quot;All of You&quot;, was also successful, with a run of 477 performances. Porter wrote two more film scores and music for a television special before ending his Hollywood career. The film &quot;High Society&quot; (1956), starring Bing Crosby, Frank Sinatra and Grace Kelly, included Porter&#x27;s last major hit song &quot;True Love&quot;. It was adapted as a stage musical of the same name. Porter also wrote numbers for the film &quot;Les Girls&quot; (1957), which starred Gene Kelly. His final score was for the CBS television special &quot;Aladdin&quot; (1958).

===Last years===
Porter&#x27;s mother died in 1952, and his wife died of emphysema in 1954. By 1958, Porter&#x27;s injuries caused a series of ulcers on his right leg. After 34 operations, it had to be amputated and replaced with an artificial limb. His friend Noël Coward visited him in the hospital and wrote in his diary, &quot;The lines of ceaseless pain have been wiped from his face...I am convinced that his whole life will cheer up and that his work will profit accordingly.&quot; In fact, Porter never wrote another song after the amputation and spent the remaining six years of his life in relative seclusion, seeing only intimate friends. He continued to live in the Waldorf Towers in New York in his memorabilia-filled apartment. On weekends, he often visited an estate in the Berkshires, and he stayed in California during the summers.

Porter died of kidney failure at age 73 on October 15, 1964, in Santa Monica, California. He is interred in Mount Hope Cemetery in his native Peru, Indiana, between his wife and father.

==Tributes and legacy==

Many artists have recorded Porter songs, and dozens have released entire albums of his songs. In 1956, jazz singer Ella Fitzgerald released &quot;Ella Fitzgerald Sings the Cole Porter Songbook&quot;. In 1972, she released another collection, &quot;Ella Loves Cole&quot;. Among the many album collections of Porter songs are the following: &quot;Oscar Peterson Plays the Cole Porter Songbook&quot; (1959); &quot;Anita O&#x27;Day Swings Cole Porter with Billy May&quot; (1959); &quot;All Through the Night: Julie London Sings the Choicest of Cole Porter&quot; (1965); &quot;Rosemary Clooney Sings the Music of Cole Porter&quot; (1982); &quot;Anything Goes: Stephane Grappelli &amp; Yo-Yo Ma Play (Mostly) Cole Porter&quot; (1989) and &quot;Love for Sale&quot; (Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga, 2021). In 1990 Dionne Warwick released &quot;Dionne Sings Cole Porter&quot;. In that same year, &quot;Red Hot + Blue&quot; was released as a benefit CD for AIDS research and featured 20 Cole Porter songs recorded by artists such as U2 and Annie Lennox.

Additional recording collections include &quot;Frank Sinatra Sings the Select Cole Porter&quot; (1996) and &quot;John Barrowman Swings Cole Porter&quot; (2004); Barrowman played &quot;Jack&quot; in the 2004 film &quot;De-Lovely&quot;. Other singers who have paid tribute to Porter include the Swedish pop music group Gyllene Tider, which recorded a song called &quot;Flickan i en Cole Porter-sång&quot; (&quot;That Girl from the Cole Porter Song&quot;) in 1982. He is referenced in the merengue song &quot;The Call of the Wild&quot; by David Byrne on his 1989 album &quot;Rei Momo&quot;. He also is mentioned in the song &quot;Tonite It Shows&quot; by Mercury Rev on their 1998 album &quot;Deserter&#x27;s Songs&quot;. After &quot;Can-Can&quot; was adapted as a film, the soundtrack won the 1960 Grammy Award for Best Sound Track Album.

In 1965, Judy Garland performed a medley of Porter&#x27;s songs at the 37th Academy Awards shortly after Porter&#x27;s death. The biographical show &quot;Cole&quot;, by Alan Strachan and Benny Green, featuring Porter hits, ran in 1974 at London&#x27;s Mermaid Theatre. In 1980, Porter&#x27;s music was used for the score of &quot;Happy New Year&quot;, based on the Philip Barry play &quot;Holiday&quot;. The cast of &quot;The Carol Burnett Show&quot; paid a tribute to Porter in a humorous sketch in their CBS television series. &quot;You&#x27;re the Top: The Cole Porter Story&quot;, a video of archival material and interviews, and &quot;Red, Hot and Blue&quot;, a video of artists performing Porter&#x27;s music, were released in 1990 to celebrate the one hundredth anniversary of Porter&#x27;s birth. In contrast to the highly embellished 1946 screen biography &quot;Night and Day&quot;, Porter&#x27;s life was chronicled more realistically in &quot;De-Lovely&quot;, a 2004 Irwin Winkler film starring Kevin Kline as Porter and Ashley Judd as Linda. The soundtrack to &quot;De-Lovely&quot; includes Porter songs sung by Alanis Morissette, Sheryl Crow, Elvis Costello, Diana Krall and Natalie Cole, among others. Porter also appears as a character in Woody Allen&#x27;s 2011 film &quot;Midnight in Paris&quot;.

Many events commemorated the centenary of Porter&#x27;s birth, including the halftime show of the 1991 Orange Bowl. Joel Grey and a large cast of singers, dancers and marching bands, performed a tribute to Porter in Miami, Florida during the 57th King Orange Jamboree parade, whose theme was &quot;Anything Goes&quot;. The Indianapolis Symphony Orchestra performed a program of Cole Porter music at the Circle Theatre in Indianapolis, which also featured clips of Porter&#x27;s Hollywood films. &quot;A Gala Birthday Concert&quot; was held at New York City&#x27;s Carnegie Hall, with more than 40 entertainers and friends paying tribute to Porter&#x27;s long career in theater and film. In addition, the U.S. Postal Service issued a commemorative postage stamp honoring Porter&#x27;s birth. The Indiana University Opera performed Porter&#x27;s musical, &quot;Jubilee&quot;, in Bloomington, Indiana.

In May 2007, a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame was dedicated to Porter. In December 2010, his portrait was added to the Hoosier Heritage Gallery in the office of the Governor of Indiana. Numerous symphony orchestras have paid tribute to Porter in the years since his death including Seattle Symphony Orchestra, with Marvin Hamlisch as conductor and the Boston Pops, both in 2011. In 2012, Marvin Hamlisch, Michael Feinstein, and the Dallas Symphony Orchestra honored Porter with a concert that included his familiar classics. The Cole Porter Festival is held every year in June in his hometown of Peru, Indiana, to foster music and art appreciation. Costumed singers in the cabaret-style Cole Porter Room at the Indiana Historical Society&#x27;s Eugene and Marilyn Glick Indiana History Center in Indianapolis take requests from visitors and perform Porter&#x27;s hit songs. Since Porter&#x27;s death, except for a brief time at the New York Historical Society, his 1908 Steinway grand piano, which he had used when composing since the mid-1930s, has been displayed and often played in the lobby of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. Porter is a member of the American Theater Hall of Fame and Great American Songbook Hall of Fame, which recognized his &quot;musically complex [songs] with witty, urbane lyrics&quot;. In 2014, Porter was honored with a plaque on the Legacy Walk in Chicago, which celebrates LGBT achievers.

==Notable songs==

Shows listed are stage musicals unless otherwise noted. Where the show was later made into a film, the year refers to the stage version. A complete list of Porter&#x27;s works is in the Library of Congress in its Cole Porter Collection.
* (1916) &quot;See America First&quot;
* (1919) &quot;Hitchy-Koo of 1919&quot; – &quot;Old-Fashioned Garden&quot;
* (1928) &quot;Paris&quot; – &quot;Let&#x27;s Do It, Let&#x27;s Fall in Love&quot;
* (1929) &quot;Wake Up and Dream&quot; – &quot;What Is This Thing Called Love?&quot;
* (1929) &quot;Fifty Million Frenchmen&quot; – &quot;You Do Something to Me&quot;
* (1930) &quot;The New Yorkers&quot; – &quot;Love for Sale&quot;, &quot;I Happen to Like New York&quot;, &quot;Where Have You Been?&quot;
* (1932) &quot;Gay Divorce&quot; – &quot;After You, Who?&quot;, &quot;Night and Day&quot; (adapted as &quot;The Gay Divorcee&quot;, 1934)
* (1933) &quot;Nymph Errant&quot; – &quot;Experiment&quot;, &quot;The Physician&quot;, &quot;It&#x27;s Bad for Me&quot;
* (1934) &quot;Hi Diddle Diddle&quot; (revue) — &quot;Miss Otis Regrets&quot;
* (1934) &quot;Anything Goes&quot; – &quot;All Through the Night&quot;, &quot;Anything Goes&quot;, &quot;I Get a Kick Out of You&quot;, &quot;You&#x27;re the Top&quot;
* (1934) &quot;Adios Argentina&quot; (un-produced film) – &quot;Don&#x27;t Fence Me In&quot;
* (1935) &quot;Jubilee&quot; – &quot;Begin the Beguine&quot;, &quot;Just One of Those Things&quot;
* (1936) &quot;Red, Hot and Blue&quot; – &quot;Down in the Depths (on the Ninetieth Floor)&quot;, &quot;Ridin&#x27; High&quot;, &quot;It&#x27;s De-Lovely&quot;
* (1936) &quot;Born to Dance&quot; (film) – &quot;You&#x27;d Be So Easy to Love&quot;, &quot;I&#x27;ve Got You Under My Skin&quot;
* (1937) &quot;Rosalie&quot; (film)  – &quot;In the Still of the Night&quot;
* (1937) &quot;You Never Know&quot; – &quot;At Long Last Love&quot;, &quot;From Alpha to Omega&quot;, &quot;Let&#x27;s Misbehave&quot;
* (1938) &quot;Leave It to Me!&quot; – &quot;From Now On&quot;, &quot;Get Out of Town&quot;, &quot;My Heart Belongs to Daddy&quot;
* (1939) &quot;Broadway Melody of 1940&quot; (film) – &quot;Between You and Me&quot;, &quot;I Concentrate on You&quot;, &quot;I&#x27;ve Got My Eyes on You&quot;, &quot;I Happen to Be in Love&quot;, &quot;Begin the Beguine&quot;
* (1939) &quot;DuBarry Was a Lady&quot; – &quot;But in the Morning No&quot;, &quot;Do I Love You?&quot;, &quot;Well, Did You Evah!&quot;, &quot;Friendship&quot;

* (1940) &quot;Panama Hattie&quot; – &quot;I&#x27;ve Still Got My Health&quot;, &quot;Let&#x27;s Be Buddies&quot;
* (1941) &quot;You&#x27;ll Never Get Rich&quot; (film) – &quot;Dream Dancing&quot;, &quot;So Near and Yet So Far&quot;
* (1941) &quot;Let&#x27;s Face It!&quot; – &quot;I Hate You, Darling&quot;, &quot;Ace in the Hole&quot;
* (1942) &quot;Something for the Boys&quot; – &quot;Could It Be You&quot;
* (1942) &quot;Something to Shout About&quot; – &quot;You&#x27;d Be So Nice to Come Home To&quot;
* (1943) &quot;Mexican Hayride&quot; – &quot;I Love You&quot;
* (1944) &quot;Seven Lively Arts&quot; – &quot;Ev&#x27;ry Time We Say Goodbye&quot;
* (1946) &quot;Around the World&quot; – &quot;Look What I Found&quot;
* (1947) &quot;The Pirate&quot; (film) – &quot;Be a Clown&quot;, &quot;Mack the Black&quot;, &quot;You Can Do No Wrong&quot;
* (1948) &quot;Kiss Me, Kate&quot; – &quot;Always True to You in My Fashion&quot;, &quot;Another Op&#x27;nin&#x27;, Another Show&quot;, &quot;Brush Up Your Shakespeare&quot;, &quot;I Hate Men&quot;, &quot;Why Can&#x27;t You Behave?&quot;, &quot;So in Love&quot;, &quot;Tom, Dick or Harry&quot;, &quot;Too Darn Hot&quot;, &quot;Wunderbar&quot;
* (1950) &quot;Out of This World&quot; – &quot;From This Moment On&quot;, &quot;I Am Loved&quot;
* (1950) &quot;Stage Fright&quot; (film) – &quot;The Laziest Gal in Town&quot;
* (1953) &quot;Can-Can&quot; – &quot;I Am in Love&quot;, &quot;I Love Paris&quot;, &quot;C&#x27;est Magnifique&quot;, &quot;It&#x27;s All Right With Me&quot;
* (1954) &quot;Silk Stockings&quot; – &quot;All of You&quot;, &quot;Paris Loves Lovers&quot;
* (1955) &quot;High Society&quot; (film) – &quot;Mind if I Make Love to You?&quot;, &quot;True Love&quot;, &quot;Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?&quot;, &quot;You&#x27;re Sensational&quot;
* (1956) &quot;Les Girls&quot; (film) – &quot;Ça, C&#x27;est L&#x27;amour&quot;, &quot;You&#x27;re Just Too, Too&quot;
* (1958) &quot;Aladdin&quot; (television) – &quot;Come to the Supermarket (In Old Peking)&quot;
== Notes, references, sources and further reading ==

===Notes===
===References===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Further reading===
* Garrison, John S. &quot;Red Hot + Blue&quot; (London and New York: Bloomsbury, 2024). 
* Greher, Gena R. &quot;Night &amp; Day: Cole Porter, hip hop, their shared sensibilities and their teachable moments.&quot; &quot;College Music Symposium&quot;. Vol. 49. 2009. online
* Hill, Edwin. &quot;Making claims on echoes: Dranem, Cole Porter and the biguine between the Antilles, France and the US.&quot; &quot;Popular Music&quot; 33.3 (2014): 492–508.
* McAuliffe, Mary. &quot;When Paris Sizzled: The 1920s Paris of Hemingway, Chanel, Cocteau, Cole Porter, Josephine Baker, and Their Friends&quot; (Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2016). 
* Porter, Cole. &quot;The Letters of Cole Porter&quot; (Yale University Press, 2019). 
* Randel, Don M., Matthew Shaftel, and Susan Forscher Weiss, eds. &quot;A Cole Porter Companion;&quot; (U of Illinois Press, 2016). 
* Savran, David. &quot;&#x27;You&#x27;ve got that thing&#x27;: Cole Porter, Stephen Sondheim, and the Erotics of the List Song.&quot; &quot;Theatre Journal&quot; (2012): 533–548. online
* Spirou, Penny. &quot;From Night and Day to De-Lovely: cinematic representations of Cole Porter.&quot; &quot;Refractory: a journal of entertainment media&quot; 18 (2011): 1–13.
* Wells, Ira. &quot;Swinging Modernism: Porter and Sinatra beneath the Skin.&quot; &quot;University of Toronto Quarterly&quot; 79.3 (2010): 975–990.

==External links==
* Cole Porter discography at Discogs
* 
* 
* Cole Porter Birthplace &amp; Museum
* Cole Porter Festival
* Cole Porter Collection at the Library of Congress
* Cole Porter recordings at the Discography of American Historical Recordings.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215120" start="0" end="18" title="Cole Porter" label="Cole Albert Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849904" start="119" end="128" title="Standard (music)" label="standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="207" end="215" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="223" end="238" title="Hollywood films" label="Hollywood films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="269" end="276" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330969" start="995" end="1008" title="Kiss Me, Kate" label="Kiss Me, Kate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780176" start="1033" end="1060" title="Tony Award for Best Musical" label="Tony Award for Best Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411823" start="1106" end="1129" title="Fifty Million Frenchmen" label="Fifty Million Frenchmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262336" start="1143" end="1161" title="DuBarry Was a Lady" label="DuBarry Was a Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q656082" start="1175" end="1188" title="Anything Goes" label="Anything Goes"/>
<link wikidata="Q378784" start="1202" end="1209" title="Can-Can (musical)" label="Can-Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286134" start="1226" end="1240" title="Silk Stockings" label="Silk Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477068" start="1285" end="1298" title="Night and Day (song)" label="Night and Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q814327" start="1312" end="1329" title="Begin the Beguine" label="Begin the Beguine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108383" start="1343" end="1366" title="I Get a Kick Out of You" label="I Get a Kick Out of You"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981042" start="1380" end="1399" title="Well, Did You Evah!" label="Well, Did You Evah!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165861" start="1413" end="1444" title="I&amp;#x27;ve Got You Under My Skin" label="I&amp;#x27;ve Got You Under My Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137581" start="1458" end="1483" title="My Heart Belongs to Daddy" label="My Heart Belongs to Daddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056688" start="1500" end="1519" title="You&amp;#x27;re the Top" label="You&amp;#x27;re the Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q229547" start="1606" end="1619" title="Born to Dance" label="Born to Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056434" start="1664" end="1693" title="You&amp;#x27;d Be So Easy to Love" label="You&amp;#x27;d Be So Easy to Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748793" start="1707" end="1714" title="Rosalie (1937 film)" label="Rosalie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6012958" start="1750" end="1775" title="In the Still of the Night (1937 song)" label="In the Still of the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q719471" start="1789" end="1801" title="High Society (1956 film)" label="High Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q689542" start="1837" end="1846" title="True Love (Cole Porter song)" label="True Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q942086" start="1864" end="1873" title="Les Girls" label="Les Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q386657" start="1948" end="1961" title="Peru, Indiana" label="Peru, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q170384" start="2610" end="2618" title="operetta" label="operetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256922" start="3137" end="3154" title="Worcester Academy" label="Worcester Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="3199" end="3212" title="upright piano" label="upright piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416417" start="3395" end="3408" title="valedictorian" label="valedictorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599077" start="3502" end="3514" title="Yale College" label="Yale College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560506" start="3613" end="3627" title="Scroll and Key" label="Scroll and Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q975232" start="3632" end="3651" title="Delta Kappa Epsilon" label="Delta Kappa Epsilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776485" start="3711" end="3726" title="The Yale Record" label="The Yale Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415197" start="3764" end="3776" title="Whiffenpoofs" label="Whiffenpoofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="3783" end="3793" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047383" start="3913" end="3927" title="Yale Glee Club" label="Yale Glee Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="4380" end="4389" title="New Haven" label="New Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047373" start="4486" end="4511" title="Yale Dramatic Association" label="Yale Dramatic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="4864" end="4882" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q214758" start="4939" end="4951" title="Dean Acheson" label="Dean Acheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="5135" end="5147" title="counterpoint" label="counterpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426421" start="5153" end="5163" title="Pietro Yon" label="Pietro Yon"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="5283" end="5291" title="Broadway theater" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="5332" end="5337" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445471" start="5461" end="5478" title="See America First" label="See America First"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="5533" end="5553" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668472" start="5570" end="5587" title="T. Lawrason Riggs" label="T. Lawrason Riggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5784" end="5795" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q188559" start="5945" end="5966" title="French Foreign Legion" label="French Foreign Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q184047" start="6062" end="6069" title="Aubagne" label="Aubagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577872" start="6142" end="6164" title="School of Applied Artillery (France)" label="French Officers School"/>
<link wikidata="Q182872" start="6168" end="6181" title="Fontainebleau" label="Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="6250" end="6268" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q879208" start="6446" end="6454" title="Bivouac shelter" label="bivouacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17489525" start="6612" end="6626" title="Stephen Citron" label="Stephen Citron"/>
<link wikidata="Q431604" start="6887" end="6901" title="cross-dressing" label="cross-dressing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="6950" end="6968" title="recreational drugs" label="recreational drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551749" start="6992" end="7008" title="Linda Lee Thomas" label="Linda Lee Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="7018" end="7038" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q850698" start="7348" end="7369" title="lavender marriage" label="mutually advantageous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="7977" end="7992" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407107" start="8048" end="8063" title="Schola Cantorum" label="Schola Cantorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q313584" start="8127" end="8146" title="Vincent d&amp;#x27;Indy" label="Vincent d&amp;#x27;Indy"/>
<link wikidata="Q112169030" start="8254" end="8272" title="Hitchy-Koo of 1919" label="Hitchy-Koo of 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658573" start="8352" end="8363" title="A Night Out (musical)" label="A Night Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q188977" start="8482" end="8495" title="Les Invalides" label="Les Invalides"/>
<link wikidata="Q214423" start="8725" end="8739" title="Ballets Russes" label="Ballets Russes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052171" start="8784" end="8802" title="Ca&amp;#x27; Rezzonico" label="Ca&amp;#x27; Rezzonico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075284" start="9273" end="9286" title="C. B. Cochran" label="C. B. Cochran"/>
<link wikidata="Q15525667" start="9454" end="9467" title="Gerald Murphy" label="Gerald Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608836" start="9688" end="9703" title="Ballets suédois" label="Ballets suédois"/>
<link wikidata="Q72543" start="9752" end="9768" title="Charles Koechlin" label="Charles Koechlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186264" start="9806" end="9813" title="Milhaud" label="Milhaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q377294" start="9827" end="9847" title="La création du monde" label="La création du monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q123829" start="9943" end="9958" title="George Gershwin" label="George Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q722599" start="9972" end="9988" title="Rhapsody in Blue" label="Rhapsody in Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q726531" start="10097" end="10123" title="Théâtre des Champs-Élysées" label="Théâtre des Champs-Élysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q65807503" start="10522" end="10547" title="Greenwich Village Follies" label="Greenwich Village Follies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124162" start="11058" end="11063" title="Paris (1928 musical)" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322119" start="11109" end="11121" title="E. Ray Goetz" label="E. Ray Goetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424052" start="11188" end="11201" title="Irène Bordoni" label="Irène Bordoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474095" start="11218" end="11234" title="Rodgers and Hart" label="Rodgers and Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532505" start="11550" end="11570" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Misbehave" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Misbehave"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118736" start="11603" end="11612" title="list song" label="list song"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532288" start="11621" end="11662" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Do It, Let&amp;#x27;s Fall in Love" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Do It, Let&amp;#x27;s Fall in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799640" start="11706" end="11722" title="Arthur Margetson" label="Arthur Margetson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895806" start="11949" end="11965" title="Café des Ambassadeurs" label="Les Ambassadeurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="12197" end="12205" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q95024" start="12230" end="12238" title="Ziegfeld" label="Ziegfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q459294" start="12311" end="12326" title="Jessie Matthews" label="Jessie Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561967" start="12328" end="12339" title="Sonnie Hale" label="Sonnie Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q527420" start="12344" end="12355" title="Tilly Losch" label="Tilly Losch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960987" start="12374" end="12391" title="Wake Up and Dream (musical)" label="Wake Up and Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="12544" end="12561" title="Wall Street crash" label="Wall Street crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q860211" start="12695" end="12726" title="What Is This Thing Called Love?" label="What Is This Thing Called Love?"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="12806" end="12815" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="12843" end="12852" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715882" start="12866" end="12885" title="The Battle of Paris" label="The Battle of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q433053" start="12927" end="12944" title="Gertrude Lawrence" label="Gertrude Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="13120" end="13126" title="France" label="Gallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411823" start="13190" end="13213" title="Fifty Million Frenchmen" label="Fifty Million Frenchmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374281" start="13275" end="13297" title="You Do Something to Me (Cole Porter song)" label="You Do Something to Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q207515" start="13489" end="13504" title="P. G. Wodehouse" label="P. G. Wodehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q128746" start="13808" end="13821" title="Irving Berlin" label="Irving Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608254" start="14511" end="14525" title="Herbert Fields" label="Herbert Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393843" start="14572" end="14585" title="Monty Woolley" label="Monty Woolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988489" start="14603" end="14618" title="The New Yorkers" label="The New Yorkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274227" start="14688" end="14700" title="streetwalker" label="streetwalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478981" start="14708" end="14721" title="Love for Sale (song)" label="Love for Sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377022" start="14753" end="14769" title="Kathryn Crawford" label="Kathryn Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557216" start="14848" end="14863" title="Elisabeth Welch" label="Elisabeth Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977458" start="15144" end="15169" title="I Happen to Like New York" label="I Happen to Like New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q100937" start="15187" end="15199" title="Fred Astaire" label="Fred Astaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398255" start="15230" end="15241" title="Gay Divorce" label="Gay Divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477068" start="15323" end="15336" title="Night and Day (song)" label="Night and Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q354381" start="15452" end="15457" title="Adele Astaire" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q947098" start="15551" end="15567" title="The Gay Divorcee" label="The Gay Divorcee"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="15588" end="15600" title="RKO Pictures" label="RKO Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313147" start="15673" end="15685" title="Nymph Errant" label="Nymph Errant"/>
<link wikidata="Q355319" start="15728" end="15743" title="Adelphi Theatre" label="Adelphi Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762865" start="15965" end="15980" title="Vinton Freedley" label="Vinton Freedley"/>
<link wikidata="Q129087" start="16227" end="16239" title="Ethel Merman" label="Ethel Merman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009733" start="16241" end="16255" title="William Gaxton" label="William Gaxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474547" start="16269" end="16281" title="Victor Moore" label="Victor Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q924974" start="16391" end="16401" title="Guy Bolton" label="Guy Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q656082" start="16735" end="16748" title="Anything Goes" label="Anything Goes"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="16851" end="16865" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330969" start="17041" end="17054" title="Kiss Me, Kate" label="Kiss Me, Kate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108383" start="17086" end="17109" title="I Get a Kick Out of You" label="I Get a Kick Out of You"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729811" start="17123" end="17144" title="All Through the Night (Cole Porter song)" label="All Through the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056688" start="17158" end="17177" title="You&amp;#x27;re the Top" label="You&amp;#x27;re the Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778332" start="17272" end="17284" title="Anything Goes (Cole Porter song)" label="title number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054753" start="17533" end="17555" title="Robert Russell Bennett" label="Robert Russell Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5650736" start="17560" end="17572" title="Hans Spialek" label="Hans Spialek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382872" start="17772" end="17785" title="Russel Crouse" label="Russel Crouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710757" start="18094" end="18101" title="Jubilee (musical)" label="Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q728876" start="18129" end="18138" title="Moss Hart" label="Moss Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q814327" start="18297" end="18314" title="Begin the Beguine" label="Begin the Beguine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12715930" start="18331" end="18355" title="Just One of Those Things (song)" label="Just One of Those Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118554" start="18369" end="18386" title="Red, Hot and Blue" label="Red, Hot and Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q471023" start="18419" end="18432" title="Jimmy Durante" label="Jimmy Durante"/>
<link wikidata="Q94081" start="18437" end="18445" title="Bob Hope" label="Bob Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997431" start="18493" end="18512" title="It&amp;#x27;s De-Lovely" label="It&amp;#x27;s De-Lovely"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302964" start="18526" end="18569" title="Down in the Depths (on the Ninetieth Floor)" label="Down in the Depths (on the Ninetieth Floor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332915" start="18587" end="18609" title="Ridin&amp;#x27; High (song)" label="Ridin&amp;#x27; High&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="19093" end="19112" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q229547" start="19125" end="19138" title="Born to Dance" label="Born to Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q102462" start="19158" end="19171" title="James Stewart" label="James Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056434" start="19189" end="19218" title="You&amp;#x27;d Be So Easy to Love" label="You&amp;#x27;d Be So Easy to Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165861" start="19235" end="19266" title="I&amp;#x27;ve Got You Under My Skin" label="I&amp;#x27;ve Got You Under My Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748793" start="19284" end="19291" title="Rosalie (1937 film)" label="Rosalie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6012958" start="19322" end="19347" title="In the Still of the Night (1937 song)" label="In the Still of the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136683" start="19398" end="19410" title="Paree, Paree" label="Paree, Paree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435464" start="19536" end="19558" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Fence Me In (song)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Fence Me In"/>
<link wikidata="Q367129" start="19663" end="19673" title="Roy Rogers" label="Roy Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q261550" start="19705" end="19722" title="Hollywood Canteen (film)" label="Hollywood Canteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="19730" end="19741" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q972398" start="19743" end="19762" title="The Andrews Sisters" label="The Andrews Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602710" start="20425" end="20446" title="Fulco di Verdura" label="Duke Fulco di Verdura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197421" start="20450" end="20466" title="Piping Rock Club" label="Piping Rock Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q541406" start="20470" end="20493" title="Locust Valley, New York" label="Locust Valley, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123997" start="20983" end="20997" title="Waldorf Astoria New York" label="Waldorf Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057446" start="21155" end="21169" title="You Never Know (musical)" label="You Never Know"/>
<link wikidata="Q560592" start="21193" end="21205" title="Clifton Webb" label="Clifton Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q267247" start="21207" end="21217" title="Lupe Vélez" label="Lupe Vélez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237701" start="21222" end="21234" title="Libby Holman" label="Libby Holman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812366" start="21337" end="21354" title="At Long Last Love (song)" label="At Long Last Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q368830" start="21396" end="21411" title="Leave It to Me!" label="Leave It to Me!"/>
<link wikidata="Q285483" start="21446" end="21457" title="Mary Martin" label="Mary Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137581" start="21473" end="21498" title="My Heart Belongs to Daddy" label="My Heart Belongs to Daddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262336" start="21657" end="21675" title="DuBarry Was a Lady" label="DuBarry Was a Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q827411" start="21737" end="21746" title="Bert Lahr" label="Bert Lahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328714" start="21876" end="21895" title="46th Street Theatre" label="46th Street Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286041" start="21995" end="22009" title="Do I Love You?" label="Do I Love You?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981042" start="22023" end="22042" title="Well, Did You Evah!" label="Well, Did You Evah!"/>
<link wikidata="Q118150669" start="22138" end="22148" title="Friendship (Cole Porter song)" label="Friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770642" start="22223" end="22246" title="Broadway Melody of 1940" label="Broadway Melody of 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q527052" start="22271" end="22284" title="George Murphy" label="George Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q256117" start="22289" end="22303" title="Eleanor Powell" label="Eleanor Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q820961" start="22458" end="22477" title="Berkshires" label="Berkshire mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q983837" start="22484" end="22511" title="Williamstown, Massachusetts" label="Williamstown, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265449" start="22672" end="22685" title="Panama Hattie" label="Panama Hattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q711731" start="22855" end="22870" title="Arthur Treacher" label="Arthur Treacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q152713" start="22875" end="22887" title="Betty Hutton" label="Betty Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532313" start="22895" end="22914" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Face It!" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Face It!"/>
<link wikidata="Q213425" start="22938" end="22948" title="Danny Kaye" label="Danny Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560206" start="23123" end="23145" title="Something for the Boys" label="Something for the Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926191" start="23213" end="23228" title="Mexican Hayride (musical)" label="Mexican Hayride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934863" start="23252" end="23263" title="Bobby Clark (comedian)" label="Bobby Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q239864" start="23270" end="23280" title="June Havoc" label="June Havoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5414978" start="23572" end="23602" title="Ev&amp;#x27;ry Time We Say Goodbye" label="Ev&amp;#x27;ry Time We Say Goodbye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795637" start="23620" end="23636" title="Around the World (musical)" label="Around the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707931" start="23816" end="23842" title="You&amp;#x27;ll Never Get Rich" label="You&amp;#x27;ll Never Get Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q42745" start="23873" end="23886" title="Rita Hayworth" label="Rita Hayworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560273" start="23894" end="23918" title="Something to Shout About (film)" label="Something to Shout About"/>
<link wikidata="Q310413" start="23937" end="23947" title="Don Ameche" label="Don Ameche"/>
<link wikidata="Q271327" start="23949" end="23960" title="Janet Blair" label="Janet Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q584824" start="24113" end="24138" title="Night and Day (1946 film)" label="&amp;quot;Night and Day&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q83410" start="24193" end="24203" title="Cary Grant" label="Cary Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51535" start="24416" end="24433" title="Vincente Minnelli" label="Vincente Minnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q960349" start="24452" end="24462" title="The Pirate (1948 film)" label="The Pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="24482" end="24494" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q73089" start="24499" end="24509" title="Gene Kelly" label="Gene Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="24789" end="24799" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780176" start="24804" end="24816" title="Tony Award for Best Musical" label="Best Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q16466453" start="24932" end="24971" title="Another Op&amp;#x27;nin&amp;#x27;, Another Show" label="Another Op&amp;#x27;nin&amp;#x27;, Another Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549717" start="25008" end="25018" title="So In Love" label="So In Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814707" start="25063" end="25081" title="Tom, Dick or Harry (song)" label="Tom, Dick or Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823812" start="25153" end="25165" title="Too Darn Hot" label="Too Darn Hot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738451" start="25179" end="25213" title="Always True to You in My Fashion" label="Always True to You (in My Fashion)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455642" start="25299" end="25316" title="Out of This World (musical)" label="Out of This World"/>
<link wikidata="Q857784" start="25372" end="25376" title="Camp (style)" label="camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q378784" start="25445" end="25452" title="Can-Can (musical)" label="Can-Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439817" start="25483" end="25504" title="C&amp;#x27;est Magnifique" label="C&amp;#x27;est Magnifique"/>
<link wikidata="Q241580" start="25521" end="25548" title="It&amp;#x27;s All Right with Me" label="It&amp;#x27;s All Right with Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286134" start="25658" end="25672" title="Silk Stockings" label="Silk Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730061" start="25703" end="25713" title="All of You (Cole Porter song)" label="All of You"/>
<link wikidata="Q719471" start="25894" end="25906" title="High Society (1956 film)" label="High Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="25943" end="25956" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925" start="25961" end="25972" title="Grace Kelly" label="Grace Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q689542" start="26023" end="26032" title="True Love (Cole Porter song)" label="True Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975689" start="26074" end="26090" title="High Society (musical)" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q942086" start="26137" end="26146" title="Les Girls" label="Les Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705490" start="26244" end="26251" title="Aladdin (TV special)" label="Aladdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188605" start="26340" end="26349" title="emphysema" label="emphysema"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452285" start="26410" end="26416" title="Ulcer (dermatology)" label="ulcers"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="26528" end="26539" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="27181" end="27193" title="Santa Monica" label="Santa Monica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768" start="27444" end="27459" title="Ella Fitzgerald" label="Ella Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317668" start="27475" end="27521" title="Ella Fitzgerald Sings the Cole Porter Songbook" label="Ella Fitzgerald Sings the Cole Porter Songbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813231" start="27577" end="27592" title="Ella Loves Cole" label="Ella Loves Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106186" start="27674" end="27719" title="Oscar Peterson Plays the Cole Porter Songbook" label="Oscar Peterson Plays the Cole Porter Songbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765599" start="27740" end="27790" title="Anita O&amp;#x27;Day Swings Cole Porter with Billy May" label="Anita O&amp;#x27;Day Swings Cole Porter with Billy May"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27811" end="27880" title="All Through the Night: Julie London Sings the Choicest of Cole Porter" label="All Through the Night: Julie London Sings the Choicest of Cole Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368332" start="27901" end="27948" title="Rosemary Clooney Sings the Music of Cole Porter" label="Rosemary Clooney Sings the Music of Cole Porter"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27969" end="28043" title="Anything Goes: Stephane Grappelli &amp;amp; Yo-Yo Ma Play (Mostly) Cole Porter" label="Anything Goes: Stephane Grappelli &amp;amp; Yo-Yo Ma Play (Mostly) Cole Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q107821953" start="28067" end="28080" title="Love for Sale (Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga album)" label="Love for Sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q296729" start="28088" end="28100" title="Tony Bennett" label="Tony Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="28105" end="28114" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q234695" start="28131" end="28145" title="Dionne Warwick" label="Dionne Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136007" start="28218" end="28232" title="Red Hot + Blue" label="Red Hot + Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="28348" end="28350" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q151231" start="28355" end="28367" title="Annie Lennox" label="Annie Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489625" start="28417" end="28459" title="Frank Sinatra Sings the Select Cole Porter" label="Frank Sinatra Sings the Select Cole Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q24632" start="28483" end="28497" title="John Barrowman" label="John Barrowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q595612" start="28588" end="28597" title="De-Lovely" label="De-Lovely"/>
<link wikidata="Q764073" start="28687" end="28700" title="Gyllene Tider" label="Gyllene Tider"/>
<link wikidata="Q582174" start="28737" end="28766" title="Puls (album)" label="Flickan i en Cole Porter-sång"/>
<link wikidata="Q282131" start="28856" end="28864" title="Merengue music" label="merengue"/>
<link wikidata="Q336640" start="28906" end="28917" title="David Byrne" label="David Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5848055" start="28942" end="28950" title="Rei Momo" label="Rei Momo"/>
<link wikidata="Q583344" start="29022" end="29033" title="Mercury Rev" label="Mercury Rev"/>
<link wikidata="Q904278" start="29060" end="29081" title="Deserter&amp;#x27;s Songs" label="Deserter&amp;#x27;s Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031821" start="29119" end="29136" title="Can-Can (film)" label="adapted as a film"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29166" end="29205" title="Grammy Award for Best Sound Track Album or Recording of Original Cast From a Motion Picture or Television#1960s" label="Grammy Award for Best Sound Track Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q917138" start="29279" end="29298" title="37th Academy Awards" label="37th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q239261" start="29395" end="29406" title="Benny Green (saxophonist)" label="Benny Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819864" start="29460" end="29475" title="Mermaid Theatre" label="Mermaid Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5652949" start="29538" end="29552" title="Happy New Year (musical)" label="Happy New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q711063" start="29573" end="29585" title="Philip Barry" label="Philip Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3986215" start="29630" end="29652" title="The Carol Burnett Show" label="The Carol Burnett Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q595612" start="30162" end="30171" title="De-Lovely" label="De-Lovely"/>
<link wikidata="Q950428" start="30186" end="30199" title="Irwin Winkler" label="Irwin Winkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q105817" start="30214" end="30225" title="Kevin Kline" label="Kevin Kline"/>
<link wikidata="Q228645" start="30240" end="30251" title="Ashley Judd" label="Ashley Judd"/>
<link wikidata="Q130742" start="30332" end="30349" title="Alanis Morissette" label="Alanis Morissette"/>
<link wikidata="Q200586" start="30351" end="30362" title="Sheryl Crow" label="Sheryl Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q206939" start="30364" end="30378" title="Elvis Costello" label="Elvis Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q155879" start="30380" end="30391" title="Diana Krall" label="Diana Krall"/>
<link wikidata="Q231942" start="30396" end="30408" title="Natalie Cole" label="Natalie Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="30462" end="30473" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q206124" start="30497" end="30514" title="Midnight in Paris" label="Midnight in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028075" start="30626" end="30637" title="Orange Bowl" label="Orange Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q316641" start="30639" end="30648" title="Joel Grey" label="Joel Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q654387" start="30846" end="30877" title="Indianapolis Symphony Orchestra" label="Indianapolis Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5761189" start="30926" end="30940" title="Hilbert Circle Theater" label="Circle Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="30944" end="30956" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="31087" end="31100" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608367" start="31318" end="31336" title="Indiana University" label="Indiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q490385" start="31400" end="31420" title="Bloomington, Indiana" label="Bloomington, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="31450" end="31472" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147601" start="31592" end="31611" title="Governor of Indiana" label="Governor of Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284692" start="31709" end="31735" title="Seattle Symphony Orchestra" label="Seattle Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q337206" start="31742" end="31757" title="Marvin Hamlisch" label="Marvin Hamlisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263983" start="31779" end="31789" title="Boston Pops Orchestra" label="Boston Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q597572" start="31859" end="31884" title="Dallas Symphony Orchestra" label="Dallas Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023236" start="32138" end="32164" title="Indiana Historical Society" label="Indiana Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059456" start="32359" end="32386" title="New York Historical Society" label="New York Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q156391" start="32397" end="32405" title="Steinway" label="Steinway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123997" start="32529" end="32550" title="Waldorf-Astoria Hotel" label="Waldorf-Astoria Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q467050" start="32578" end="32607" title="American Theater Hall of Fame" label="American Theater Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151397" start="32612" end="32635" title="Great American Songbook" label="Great American Songbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031265" start="32785" end="32796" title="Legacy Walk" label="Legacy Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="32826" end="32830" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640137" start="33001" end="33037" title="List of songs written by Cole Porter" label="complete list of Porter&amp;#x27;s works"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445471" start="33114" end="33131" title="See America First" label="See America First"/>
<link wikidata="Q112169030" start="33153" end="33171" title="Hitchy-Koo of 1919" label="Hitchy-Koo of 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124162" start="33228" end="33233" title="Paris (1928 musical)" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532288" start="33248" end="33289" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Do It, Let&amp;#x27;s Fall in Love" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Do It, Let&amp;#x27;s Fall in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960987" start="33311" end="33328" title="Wake Up and Dream (musical)" label="Wake Up and Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q860211" start="33343" end="33374" title="What Is This Thing Called Love?" label="What Is This Thing Called Love?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411823" start="33396" end="33419" title="Fifty Million Frenchmen" label="Fifty Million Frenchmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374281" start="33434" end="33456" title="You Do Something to Me (Cole Porter song)" label="You Do Something to Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988489" start="33478" end="33493" title="The New Yorkers" label="The New Yorkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478981" start="33508" end="33521" title="Love for Sale (song)" label="Love for Sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977458" start="33535" end="33560" title="I Happen to Like New York" label="I Happen to Like New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398255" start="33616" end="33627" title="Gay Divorce" label="Gay Divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690590" start="33642" end="33657" title="After You, Who?" label="After You, Who?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477068" start="33671" end="33684" title="Night and Day (song)" label="Night and Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q947098" start="33709" end="33725" title="The Gay Divorcee" label="The Gay Divorcee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313147" start="33754" end="33766" title="Nymph Errant" label="Nymph Errant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877232" start="33913" end="33930" title="Miss Otis Regrets" label="Miss Otis Regrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q656082" start="33952" end="33965" title="Anything Goes" label="Anything Goes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729811" start="33980" end="34001" title="All Through the Night (Cole Porter song)" label="All Through the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778332" start="34015" end="34028" title="Anything Goes (Cole Porter song)" label="Anything Goes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108383" start="34042" end="34065" title="I Get a Kick Out of You" label="I Get a Kick Out of You"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056688" start="34079" end="34098" title="You&amp;#x27;re the Top" label="You&amp;#x27;re the Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435464" start="34169" end="34191" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Fence Me In (song)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Fence Me In"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710757" start="34213" end="34220" title="Jubilee (musical)" label="Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q814327" start="34235" end="34252" title="Begin the Beguine" label="Begin the Beguine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12715930" start="34266" end="34290" title="Just One of Those Things (song)" label="Just One of Those Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118554" start="34312" end="34329" title="Red, Hot and Blue" label="Red, Hot and Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302964" start="34344" end="34387" title="Down in the Depths (on the Ninetieth Floor)" label="Down in the Depths (on the Ninetieth Floor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332915" start="34401" end="34417" title="Ridin&amp;#x27; High (song)" label="Ridin&amp;#x27; High"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997431" start="34431" end="34450" title="It&amp;#x27;s De-Lovely" label="It&amp;#x27;s De-Lovely"/>
<link wikidata="Q229547" start="34472" end="34485" title="Born to Dance" label="Born to Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056434" start="34507" end="34536" title="You&amp;#x27;d Be So Easy to Love" label="You&amp;#x27;d Be So Easy to Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165861" start="34550" end="34581" title="I&amp;#x27;ve Got You Under My Skin" label="I&amp;#x27;ve Got You Under My Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748793" start="34603" end="34610" title="Rosalie (1937 film)" label="Rosalie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6012958" start="34633" end="34658" title="In the Still of the Night (1937 song)" label="In the Still of the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057446" start="34680" end="34694" title="You Never Know (musical)" label="You Never Know"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812366" start="34709" end="34726" title="At Long Last Love (song)" label="At Long Last Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532505" start="34773" end="34793" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Misbehave" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Misbehave"/>
<link wikidata="Q368830" start="34815" end="34830" title="Leave It to Me!" label="Leave It to Me!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554093" start="34870" end="34885" title="Get Out of Town" label="Get Out of Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137581" start="34899" end="34924" title="My Heart Belongs to Daddy" label="My Heart Belongs to Daddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770642" start="34946" end="34969" title="Broadway Melody of 1940" label="Broadway Melody of 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976661" start="35023" end="35043" title="I Concentrate on You" label="I Concentrate on You"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967243" start="35057" end="35085" title="I&amp;#x27;ve Got My Eyes on You (1939 song)" label="I&amp;#x27;ve Got My Eyes on You"/>
<link wikidata="Q814327" start="35135" end="35152" title="Begin the Beguine" label="Begin the Beguine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262336" start="35174" end="35192" title="DuBarry Was a Lady" label="DuBarry Was a Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286041" start="35242" end="35256" title="Do I Love You?" label="Do I Love You?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981042" start="35270" end="35289" title="Well, Did You Evah!" label="Well, Did You Evah!"/>
<link wikidata="Q118150669" start="35303" end="35313" title="Friendship (Cole Porter song)" label="Friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265449" start="35336" end="35349" title="Panama Hattie" label="Panama Hattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707931" start="35450" end="35476" title="You&amp;#x27;ll Never Get Rich" label="You&amp;#x27;ll Never Get Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306351" start="35498" end="35511" title="Dream Dancing (Cole Porter song)" label="Dream Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549453" start="35525" end="35547" title="So Near and Yet So Far" label="So Near and Yet So Far"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532313" start="35569" end="35588" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Face It!" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Face It!"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673024" start="35636" end="35651" title="Ace in the Hole (Cole Porter song)" label="Ace in the Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560206" start="35673" end="35695" title="Something for the Boys" label="Something for the Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560273" start="35747" end="35771" title="Something to Shout About (film)" label="Something to Shout About"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601445" start="35786" end="35823" title="You&amp;#x27;d Be So Nice to Come Home To" label="You&amp;#x27;d Be So Nice to Come Home To"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926191" start="35845" end="35860" title="Mexican Hayride (musical)" label="Mexican Hayride"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978223" start="35875" end="35885" title="I Love You (Cole Porter song)" label="I Love You"/>
<link wikidata="Q5414978" start="35939" end="35969" title="Ev&amp;#x27;ry Time We Say Goodbye" label="Ev&amp;#x27;ry Time We Say Goodbye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795637" start="35991" end="36007" title="Around the World (musical)" label="Around the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q960349" start="36061" end="36071" title="The Pirate (1948 film)" label="The Pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637146" start="36093" end="36103" title="Be a Clown" label="Be a Clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330969" start="36186" end="36199" title="Kiss Me, Kate" label="Kiss Me, Kate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738451" start="36214" end="36246" title="Always True to You in My Fashion" label="Always True to You in My Fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997742" start="36376" end="36402" title="Why Can&amp;#x27;t You Behave?" label="Why Can&amp;#x27;t You Behave?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549717" start="36416" end="36426" title="So in Love" label="So in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814707" start="36440" end="36458" title="Tom, Dick or Harry (song)" label="Tom, Dick or Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823812" start="36472" end="36484" title="Too Darn Hot" label="Too Darn Hot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455642" start="36529" end="36546" title="Out of This World (Broadway)" label="Out of This World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505534" start="36561" end="36580" title="From This Moment On (Cole Porter song)" label="From This Moment On"/>
<link wikidata="Q502530" start="36626" end="36638" title="Stage Fright (1950 film)" label="Stage Fright"/>
<link wikidata="Q378784" start="36705" end="36712" title="Can-Can (musical)" label="Can-Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976175" start="36727" end="36739" title="I Am in Love" label="I Am in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3790314" start="36753" end="36765" title="I Love Paris" label="I Love Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439817" start="36779" end="36800" title="C&amp;#x27;est Magnifique" label="C&amp;#x27;est Magnifique"/>
<link wikidata="Q241580" start="36814" end="36841" title="It&amp;#x27;s All Right With Me" label="It&amp;#x27;s All Right With Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286134" start="36863" end="36877" title="Silk Stockings" label="Silk Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730061" start="36892" end="36902" title="All of You (Cole Porter song)" label="All of You"/>
<link wikidata="Q719471" start="36956" end="36968" title="High Society (1956 film)" label="High Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q16908578" start="36990" end="37017" title="Mind if I Make Love to You?" label="Mind if I Make Love to You?"/>
<link wikidata="Q689542" start="37031" end="37040" title="True Love (Cole Porter song)" label="True Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997399" start="37054" end="37084" title="Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? (song)" label="Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056589" start="37098" end="37121" title="You&amp;#x27;re Sensational" label="You&amp;#x27;re Sensational"/>
<link wikidata="Q942086" start="37143" end="37152" title="Les Girls" label="Les Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015147" start="37174" end="37201" title="Ça, C&amp;#x27;est L&amp;#x27;amour" label="Ça, C&amp;#x27;est L&amp;#x27;amour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705490" start="37262" end="37269" title="Aladdin (TV special)" label="Aladdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q504063" start="38891" end="38898" title="Discogs" label="Discogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="38998" end="39017" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800691" start="39050" end="39095" title="Discography of American Historical Recordings" label="Discography of American Historical Recordings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53366" wikidata="Q466421" url="?curid=53366" title="Reconnaissance satellite">
<text>A reconnaissance satellite or intelligence satellite (commonly, although unofficially, referred to as a spy satellite) is an Earth observation satellite or communications satellite deployed for military or intelligence applications.

The first generation type (i.e., Corona and Zenit) took photographs, then ejected canisters of photographic film which would descend back down into Earth&#x27;s atmosphere. Corona capsules were retrieved in mid-air as they floated down on parachutes. Later, spacecraft had digital imaging systems and downloaded the images via encrypted radio links.

In the United States, most information available about reconnaissance satellites is on programs that existed up to 1972, as this information has been declassified due to its age. Some information about programs before that time is still classified information, and a small amount of information is available on subsequent missions.

A few up-to-date reconnaissance satellite images have been declassified on occasion, or leaked, as in the case of KH-11 photographs which were sent to &quot;Jane&#x27;s Defence Weekly&quot; in 1984, or US President Donald Trump tweeting a classified image of the aftermath of a failed test of Iran&#x27;s Safir rocket in 2019.

== History ==
On 16 March 1955, the United States Air Force officially ordered the development of an advanced reconnaissance satellite to provide continuous surveillance of &quot;preselected areas of the Earth&quot; in order &quot;to determine the status of a potential enemy&#x27;s war-making capability&quot;.

During the mid-late 1950s, both the United States and the Soviet Union took interest into reconnaissance satellites. The United States began the CORONA project, which encompassed several series of launches starting in 1959 and ending in 72. This program was made a priority to photograph denied areas, replace the U-2, and due to public concern about a technological gap between the West and the Soviet Union. It was expedited significantly after the shooting of a U-2 in 1960.

Meanwhile, in the Soviet Union, a decree that authorized the development of sputnik apparently authorized a program for a satellite to be used for photo reconnaissance. This design evolved into Vostok, while another version became Zenit, which was an unmanned reconnaissance satellite. Zenit was launched from 1961 to 1994, however the last flight in 1994 was as a test payload.

Both the CORONA and Zenit satellites had to be recovered in order to access the used film, making them distinct from future reconnaissance satellites that could transmit photos without returning film to earth.

== Types ==
There are several major types of reconnaissance satellite.

;Missile early warning

:Provides warning of an attack by detecting ballistic missile launches. Earliest known are Missile Defense Alarm System.

;Nuclear explosion detection
:Detects nuclear detonation from space. Vela is the earliest known.

;Electronic reconnaissance
:Signals intelligence, intercepts stray radio waves. SOLRAD is the earliest known.

;Optical imaging surveillance
:Earth imaging satellites. Satellite images can be a survey or close-look telephoto. Corona is the earliest known. Spectral imaging is commonplace.

;Radar imaging surveillance
:Most space-based radars use synthetic-aperture radar. Can be used at night or through cloud cover. Earliest known are the Soviet US-A series.

==Missions==
Examples of reconnaissance satellite missions:
* High resolution photography (IMINT)
* Measurement and Signature Intelligence (MASINT)
* Communications eavesdropping (SIGINT)
* Covert communications
* Monitoring of nuclear test ban compliance (see National Technical Means)
* Detection of missile launches

On 28 August 2013, it was thought that &quot;a $1-billion high-powered spy satellite capable of snapping pictures detailed enough to distinguish the make and model of an automobile hundreds of miles below&quot; was launched from California&#x27;s Vandenberg Air Force Base using a Delta IV Heavy launcher, America&#x27;s highest-payload space launch vehicle at the time.

On 17 February 2014, a Russian Kosmos-1220 originally launched in 1980 and used for naval missile targeting until 1982, made an uncontrolled atmospheric entry.

==Benefits==
During the 1950s, a Soviet hoax had led to American fears of a bomber gap. In 1968, after gaining satellite photography, the United States&#x27; intelligence agencies were able to state with certainty that &quot;No new ICBM complexes have been established in the USSR during the past year&quot;. President Lyndon B. Johnson told a gathering in 1967:

During his 1980 State of the Union Address, President Jimmy Carter argued that all of humanity benefited from the presence of American spy satellites:

Reconnaissance satellites have been used to enforce human rights, through the Satellite Sentinel Project, which monitors atrocities in Sudan and South Sudan.

Additionally, companies such as GeoEye and DigitalGlobe have provided commercial satellite imagery in support of natural disaster response and humanitarian missions.

==In fiction==
Spy satellites are commonly seen in spy fiction and military fiction. Some works of fiction that focus specifically on spy satellites include:
* &quot;Body of Lies&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Enemy of the State&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Ice Station Zebra&quot; (1968)
* &quot;The OMAC Project&quot; (2005)
* &quot;&quot; (2018)
* &quot;Patriot Games&quot; (1987)

==See also==

* Aerial reconnaissance
* Defense Support Program (U.S.)
* European Union Satellite Centre
* List of intelligence gathering disciplines
* List of Kosmos satellites
* National Reconnaissance Office (U.S.)
* Satcom on the Move

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==
* FAS Intelligence Resource Program – Imagery Intelligence (IMINT)
* Iran to Launch first spy satellite 
* Egyptsat1 (MisrSat 1)
* Spaceports Around the World: Iraq&#x27;s Al-Anbar Space Research Center
* Military Intelligence Satellites (NASA, remote sensing tutorial)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q466421" start="2" end="26" title="Reconnaissance satellite" label="reconnaissance satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q466421" start="30" end="52" title="Reconnaissance satellite" label="intelligence satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q466421" start="104" end="117" title="Reconnaissance satellite" label="spy satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q854845" start="125" end="152" title="Earth observation satellite" label="Earth observation satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="156" end="180" title="communications satellite" label="communications satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="194" end="202" title="Military intelligence" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="206" end="218" title="espionage" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q256812" start="267" end="273" title="Corona (satellite)" label="Corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q189576" start="278" end="283" title="Zenit (satellite)" label="Zenit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293" start="329" end="346" title="photographic film" label="photographic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840854" start="428" end="448" title="mid-air retrieval" label="retrieved in mid-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q482816" start="473" end="482" title="parachute" label="parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="561" end="570" title="encrypted" label="encrypted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249498" start="735" end="747" title="Declassification" label="declassified"/>
<link wikidata="Q846498" start="822" end="844" title="classified information" label="classified information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039527" start="1032" end="1037" title="KH-11" label="KH-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446733" start="1075" end="1101" title="Jane&amp;#x27;s Defence Weekly" label="Jane&amp;#x27;s Defence Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="1133" end="1145" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q30099997" start="1146" end="1154" title="Donald Trump on social media" label="tweeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q142596" start="1223" end="1228" title="Safir (rocket)" label="Safir"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="1282" end="1305" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q256812" start="1704" end="1710" title="CORONA (satellite)" label="CORONA"/>
<link wikidata="Q189064" start="1873" end="1876" title="Lockheed U-2" label="U-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q179348" start="2769" end="2786" title="ballistic missile" label="ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160983" start="2816" end="2844" title="Missile Defense Alarm System" label="Missile Defense Alarm System"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324800" start="2877" end="2903" title="nuclear detonation detection system" label="Detects nuclear detonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q284849" start="2916" end="2920" title="Vela (satellite)" label="Vela"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="2973" end="2993" title="Signals intelligence" label="Signals intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="3012" end="3017" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738906" start="3025" end="3031" title="SOLRAD" label="SOLRAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q854845" start="3087" end="3110" title="Earth imaging satellite" label="Earth imaging satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q725252" start="3113" end="3129" title="Satellite images" label="Satellite images"/>
<link wikidata="Q516461" start="3160" end="3169" title="Telephoto lens" label="telephoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q256812" start="3171" end="3177" title="Corona (satellite)" label="Corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575196" start="3201" end="3217" title="Spectral imaging" label="Spectral imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572176" start="3269" end="3286" title="space-based radar" label="space-based radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q740686" start="3292" end="3316" title="synthetic-aperture radar" label="synthetic-aperture radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q830457" start="3350" end="3361" title="cloud cover" label="cloud cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542629" start="3393" end="3397" title="US-A" label="US-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654126" start="3498" end="3503" title="IMINT" label="IMINT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322258" start="3547" end="3553" title="MASINT" label="MASINT"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="3587" end="3593" title="Signals intelligence" label="SIGINT"/>
<link wikidata="Q521306" start="3635" end="3651" title="Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty" label="nuclear test ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979738" start="3668" end="3692" title="National Technical Means" label="National Technical Means"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="4240" end="4257" title="atmospheric entry" label="atmospheric entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940633" start="4336" end="4346" title="bomber gap" label="bomber gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="4492" end="4496" title="ICBM" label="ICBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="4579" end="4596" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579411" start="4635" end="4666" title="1980 State of the Union Address" label="1980 State of the Union Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="4678" end="4690" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q585812" start="4854" end="4880" title="Satellite Sentinel Project" label="Satellite Sentinel Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="4911" end="4916" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="4921" end="4932" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892482" start="4967" end="4973" title="GeoEye" label="GeoEye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224697" start="4978" end="4990" title="DigitalGlobe" label="DigitalGlobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q20664331" start="5153" end="5164" title="spy fiction" label="spy fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q21803247" start="5169" end="5185" title="military fiction" label="military fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q578312" start="5268" end="5280" title="Body of Lies (film)" label="Body of Lies"/>
<link wikidata="Q177930" start="5302" end="5320" title="Enemy of the State (film)" label="Enemy of the State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320705" start="5342" end="5359" title="Ice Station Zebra" label="Ice Station Zebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347601" start="5381" end="5397" title="The OMAC Project" label="The OMAC Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q396204" start="5441" end="5454" title="Patriot Games" label="Patriot Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306321" start="5485" end="5506" title="Aerial reconnaissance" label="Aerial reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182623" start="5509" end="5532" title="Defense Support Program" label="Defense Support Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388519" start="5542" end="5573" title="European Union Satellite Centre" label="European Union Satellite Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624136" start="5576" end="5618" title="List of intelligence gathering disciplines" label="List of intelligence gathering disciplines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347832" start="5621" end="5646" title="List of Kosmos satellites" label="List of Kosmos satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q427818" start="5649" end="5679" title="National Reconnaissance Office" label="National Reconnaissance Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425987" start="5689" end="5707" title="Satcom on the Move" label="Satcom on the Move"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53368" wikidata="Q114884" url="?curid=53368" title="Clinton County, New York">
<text>Clinton County is the northeasternmost county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 United States Census, the population was 79,843. Its county seat is the city of Plattsburgh. The county lies just south of the border with the Canadian province of Quebec, and to the west of the State of Vermont. The county is named for George Clinton, the first Governor of New York, who later was elected as Vice President. He had been a Founding Father who represented New York in the Continental Congress. Clinton County comprises the Plattsburgh, New York micropolitan statistical area. The county is part of the North Country region of the state.

==History==

When counties were established in New York State in 1683, the present Clinton County was part of Albany County. This was an enormous county, including the northern part of New York State as well as all of the present state of Vermont and, in theory, extending westward to the Pacific Ocean. This county was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and further on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in Vermont. On March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. One of the other pieces, Charlotte County, contained the eastern portion.

In 1784, the name &quot;Charlotte County&quot; was changed to Washington County to honor George Washington, the American Revolutionary War General and later the first President of the United States of America.

In 1788, Clinton County split off from Washington County.

In 1799, Essex County split off from Clinton County.

In 1802, parts of Clinton, Herkimer, and Montgomery counties formed the new St. Lawrence County.

In 1808, Franklin County split off from Clinton County.

==Geography==
Clinton County lies at the northeast corner of New York state. Its northern border abuts the Canadian province of Quebec. Its eastern border abuts the state of Vermont (across Lake Champlain). The encompassing region is referred to as the &quot;Adirondack Coast&quot;.

The Saranac River flows easterly through the central part of the county, discharging into Lake Champlain at Plattsburgh, and the Great Chazy River flows northeastward through the upper part of the county, discharging into Lake Champlain at Coopersville. The Ausable River forms a large part of the southern county line. The county&#x27;s highest point is Lyon Mountain, in the town of Dannemora, at ASL. According to the US Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (7.1%) is water.

===Adjacent counties and municipalities===

* Grand Isle County, Vermont — east
* Chittenden County, Vermont — southeast
* Essex County — south
* Franklin County — west
* Le Haut-Richelieu Regional County Municipality, Quebec — north
* Le Haut-Saint-Laurent Regional County Municipality, Quebec — north
* Les Jardins-de-Napierville Regional County Municipality, Quebec — north
===Protected areas===

* Adirondack Park (part)
* Ausable Marsh Wildlife Management Area
* Cadyville State Forest
* Chazy Fossil Reef National Natural Landmark (part)
* Dannemora State Forest
* Dunkin&#x27;s Reserve State Forest
* Flat Rock State Forest
* Kings Bay Wildlife Management Area
* Macomb State Forest
* Miner Lake State Park
* Monty&#x27;s Bay Wildlife Management Area
* Point au Roche State Park
* Valcour Island
** Valcour Island Primitive Area
===Lakes===

* Chazy Lake
* Fern Lake
* Lake Champlain (along east border)
* Mead Reservoir
* Military Pond
* Miner Lake
* Mud Pond
* Newberry Pond
* Patterson Reservoir
* Silver Lake
* Slush Pond
* Taylor Pond
* Union Falls Pond (part)
* Upper Chateaugay Lake
==Government and politics==












|}

Like much of the North Country region, Clinton County has historically been a Republican county. However, it has voted for Democratic candidates at the state and national level in recent times. Beginning in 1996, it voted for the Democratic candidate for president in every election until 2024. In the 2008 U.S. presidential election, Barack Obama carried the county by a 22.9% margin over John McCain (Obama won every municipality in the county), and won by a 26.9% margin over McCain statewide. In 2006, both Eliot Spitzer and Hillary Clinton carried the county, respectively winning 63% and 64% of the vote. In 2010, Governor Andrew Cuomo and Senators Chuck Schumer and Kirsten Gillibrand won in the county, each receiving more than 60% of the vote. In the 2024 U.S. presidential election, Donald Trump flipped the county by a 2.1% margin over Kamala Harris, despite previously losing the county to Joe Biden by a 5.2% margin in the 2020 U.S. presidential election.

Republicans continue to win most local races. The county&#x27;s Congressional district did not elect a Democrat to Congress until 2009 when Bill Owens defeated Doug Hoffman in the special election to replace John McHugh, who resigned to serve as the Obama Administration&#x27;s Secretary of the Army. The special election received nationwide attention due to Hoffman, a third-party candidate and Tea Party favorite, polling higher than the Republican nominee, Dede Scozzafava, which ultimately led to her dropping out of the race and supporting Owens. It had not elected a Democrat to the State Senate or State Assembly in over a half-century until Billy Jones was elected to the State Assembly in 2016.

The Clinton County Legislature is the lawmaking body of the county. It consists of 10 members, each elected from single member districts. As of 2021, the County Legislature consisted of five Republicans, four Democrats, and a vacancy.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States Census, there were 79,894 people, 29,423 households, and 19,272 families in the county. The population density was . There were 33,091 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 93.33% White, 3.58% Black or African American, 0.36% Native American, 0.67% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 1.10% from other races, and 0.93% from two or more races. 2.46% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 23.7% were of French, 15.0% French Canadian, 12.5% American, 11.8% Irish, 7.6% English and 5.5% German ancestry according to Census 2000. 94.1% spoke English, 2.8% French and 1.7% Spanish as their first language.

There were 29,423 households, out of which 32.00% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.00% were married couples living together, 10.20% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.50% were non-families. 26.30% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.47 and the average family size was 2.98.

The county population contained 23.00% under the age of 18, 12.40% from 18 to 24, 30.60% from 25 to 44, 22.10% from 45 to 64, and 11.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females there were 104.90 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 104.60 males.

The median household income was $37,028, and the median income for a family was $45,732. Males had a median income of $33,788 versus $25,520 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,946. About 9.40% of families and 13.90% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.30% of those under age 18 and 11.40% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
School districts include:

* AuSable Valley Central School District
* Beekmantown Central School District
* Chateaugay Central School District
* Chazy Union Free School District
* Northeastern Clinton Central School District
* Northern Adirondack Central School District
* Peru Central School District
* Plattsburgh City School District
* Saranac Central School District
* Saranac Lake Central School District
The State University of New York at Plattsburgh is located in the City of Plattsburgh. The county is also served by Clinton Community College, which is located in the Town of Plattsburgh.

==Infrastructure==
Clinton Correctional Facility, a maximum-security prison is located in the village of Dannemora. Altona Correctional Facility is a medium-security prison in the town of Altona.

==Transportation==

===Highways===

* Interstate 87 - runs N-S, to the Canada–United States border
* US-2
* US-9
* US-11
* NY-3
* NY-9N
* NY-22
* NY-22B
* NY-190
* NY-191
* NY-374
* NY-442
* NY-456
===Airports===
* Plattsburgh International Airport (PBG) – Plattsburgh
* Clinton County Airport (PLB) – Plattsburgh
* Rouses Point Seaplane Base (K21) – Rouses Point

===Rail===
Amtrak&#x27;s Adirondack Train travels through the county, connecting Montreal to New York City. Two trains a day (one north and one south) stop in the county in Plattsburgh and Rouses Point.

===Mass transit===
The Clinton County Public Transit runs bus routes that branch from Plattsburgh to towns in the county.

==Communities==
===Larger settlements===
† - County seat

†† - Former village

‡ - Not wholly in this county

===Towns===

* Altona
* Au Sable
* Beekmantown
* Black Brook
* Champlain
* Chazy
* Clinton
* Dannemora
* Ellenburg
* Mooers
* Peru
* Plattsburgh
* Saranac
* Schuyler Falls
===Hamlets===
* Churubusco
* Coopersville
* Swastika
* Morrisonville

==See also==

* Lake Champlain
* Cumberland Head
* SUNY Plattsburgh
* List of counties in New York
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Clinton County, New York

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==

* Clinton County, NY webpage
* Summary early history of Clinton County and its towns
* Clinton County Historical Association Museum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q114884" start="0" end="14" title="Clinton County, New York" label="Clinton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="39" end="45" title="County (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="53" end="63" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="67" end="75" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="87" end="112" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="145" end="156" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q998669" start="172" end="183" title="Plattsburgh, New York" label="Plattsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="215" end="225" title="Canada–United States border" label="the border"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="235" end="252" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="Canadian province"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="256" end="262" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="287" end="292" title="US State" label="State"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="296" end="303" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q201646" start="329" end="343" title="George Clinton (vice president)" label="George Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q845547" start="355" end="375" title="List of Governors of New York" label="Governor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="402" end="416" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="432" end="447" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="480" end="500" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270419" start="553" end="582" title="micropolitan statistical area" label="micropolitan statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054928" start="610" end="623" title="North Country (New York)" label="North Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q108408" start="756" end="769" title="Albany County, New York" label="Albany County"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="885" end="892" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193860" start="1018" end="1035" title="Cumberland County, New York" label="Cumberland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572034" start="1087" end="1104" title="Gloucester County, New York" label="Gloucester County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085894" start="1295" end="1311" title="Charlotte County, Province of New York" label="Charlotte County"/>
<link wikidata="Q56149" start="1407" end="1424" title="Washington County, New York" label="Washington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="1434" end="1451" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1457" end="1483" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="1512" end="1553" title="President of the United States of America" label="President of the United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q114992" start="1624" end="1636" title="Essex County, New York" label="Essex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q487564" start="1696" end="1704" title="Herkimer County, New York" label="Herkimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q487572" start="1710" end="1729" title="Montgomery County, New York" label="Montgomery counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q500569" start="1745" end="1764" title="St. Lawrence County, New York" label="St. Lawrence County"/>
<link wikidata="Q115247" start="1776" end="1791" title="Franklin County, New York" label="Franklin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054928" start="1865" end="1899" title="North Country (New York)" label="northeast corner of New York state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="1931" end="1948" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="Canadian province"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="1952" end="1958" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3950382" start="2112" end="2125" title="Saranac River" label="Saranac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q998669" start="2216" end="2227" title="Plattsburgh, New York" label="Plattsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088693" start="2237" end="2254" title="Great Chazy River" label="Great Chazy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167961" start="2348" end="2360" title="Coopersville, Clinton County, New York" label="Coopersville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935995" start="2366" end="2379" title="Ausable River (New York)" label="Ausable River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321929" start="2463" end="2476" title="Lyon Mountain (Clinton County, New York)" label="Lyon Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124720" start="2665" end="2691" title="Grand Isle County, Vermont" label="Grand Isle County, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q509770" start="2701" end="2727" title="Chittenden County, Vermont" label="Chittenden County, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q114992" start="2742" end="2754" title="Essex County, New York" label="Essex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q115247" start="2765" end="2780" title="Franklin County, New York" label="Franklin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517613" start="2790" end="2844" title="Le Haut-Richelieu Regional County Municipality, Quebec" label="Le Haut-Richelieu Regional County Municipality, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518812" start="2855" end="2913" title="Le Haut-Saint-Laurent Regional County Municipality, Quebec" label="Le Haut-Saint-Laurent Regional County Municipality, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q528670" start="2924" end="2987" title="Les Jardins-de-Napierville Regional County Municipality, Quebec" label="Les Jardins-de-Napierville Regional County Municipality, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q357550" start="3021" end="3036" title="Adirondack Park" label="Adirondack Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3087" end="3109" title="New York State Forests#List of New York State Forests" label="Cadyville State Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q28186650" start="3112" end="3155" title="Chazy Fossil Reef" label="Chazy Fossil Reef National Natural Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3165" end="3187" title="New York State Forests#List of New York State Forests" label="Dannemora State Forest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3190" end="3224" title="New York State Forests#List of New York State Forests" label="Dunkin&amp;#x27;s Reserve State Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457796" start="3227" end="3249" title="Flat Rock State Forest" label="Flat Rock State Forest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3289" end="3308" title="New York State Forests#List of New York State Forests" label="Macomb State Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207944" start="3379" end="3404" title="Point au Roche State Park" label="Point au Roche State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q385294" start="3407" end="3421" title="Valcour Island" label="Valcour Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3425" end="3454" title="Valcour Island#History" label="Valcour Island Primitive Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q68467" start="3495" end="3509" title="Lake Champlain" label="Lake Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="3838" end="3848" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="3883" end="3893" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="4062" end="4093" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="4095" end="4107" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="4150" end="4161" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11675" start="4271" end="4284" title="Eliot Spitzer" label="Eliot Spitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="4289" end="4304" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11673" start="4389" end="4401" title="Andrew Cuomo" label="Andrew Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q380900" start="4415" end="4428" title="Chuck Schumer" label="Chuck Schumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22222" start="4433" end="4451" title="Kirsten Gillibrand" label="Kirsten Gillibrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="4520" end="4551" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="4553" end="4565" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="4607" end="4620" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="4662" end="4671" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="4696" end="4727" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q862349" start="4870" end="4880" title="Bill Owens (New York politician)" label="Bill Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300573" start="4890" end="4902" title="Doug Hoffman" label="Doug Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012824" start="4910" end="4926" title="2009 New York&amp;#x27;s 23rd congressional district special election" label="special election"/>
<link wikidata="Q457729" start="4938" end="4949" title="John M. McHugh" label="John McHugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379733" start="4980" end="5000" title="Obama Administration" label="Obama Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591470" start="5008" end="5029" title="Secretary of the Army" label="Secretary of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q19042" start="5126" end="5135" title="Tea Party movement" label="Tea Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249742" start="5190" end="5205" title="Dede Scozzafava" label="Dede Scozzafava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722258" start="5319" end="5331" title="New York State Senate" label="State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="5335" end="5349" title="New York State Assembly" label="State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q28204464" start="5379" end="5390" title="Billy Jones (New York politician)" label="Billy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052894" start="5548" end="5570" title="single member district" label="single member district"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="5734" end="5759" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="5845" end="5863" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5972" end="5977" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5985" end="5990" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5994" end="6010" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6018" end="6033" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6041" end="6046" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6054" end="6070" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6083" end="6094" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6159" end="6167" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6171" end="6177" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="6219" end="6234" title="French Canadian" label="French Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="6316" end="6327" title="Census 2000" label="Census 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="6518" end="6533" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="7308" end="7325" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="7422" end="7434" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7555" end="7593" title="AuSable Valley Central School District" label="AuSable Valley Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7596" end="7631" title="Beekmantown Central School District" label="Beekmantown Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7634" end="7668" title="Chateaugay Central School District" label="Chateaugay Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7671" end="7703" title="Chazy Union Free School District" label="Chazy Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7706" end="7750" title="Northeastern Clinton Central School District" label="Northeastern Clinton Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7753" end="7796" title="Northern Adirondack Central School District" label="Northern Adirondack Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q48743814" start="7799" end="7827" title="Peru Central School District" label="Peru Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7830" end="7862" title="Plattsburgh City School District" label="Plattsburgh City School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q104876005" start="7865" end="7896" title="Saranac Central School District" label="Saranac Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7899" end="7935" title="Saranac Lake Central School District" label="Saranac Lake Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603626" start="7940" end="7983" title="State University of New York at Plattsburgh" label="State University of New York at Plattsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q998669" start="8002" end="8021" title="Plattsburgh, New York" label="City of Plattsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134090" start="8052" end="8077" title="Clinton Community College (New York)" label="Clinton Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890091" start="8103" end="8122" title="Plattsburgh (town), New York" label="Town of Plattsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637388" start="8144" end="8173" title="Clinton Correctional Facility" label="Clinton Correctional Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736935" start="8241" end="8269" title="Altona Correctional Facility" label="Altona Correctional Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q94940" start="8360" end="8373" title="Interstate 87 (New York)" label="Interstate 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="8393" end="8420" title="Canada–United States border" label="Canada–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488332" start="8423" end="8427" title="U.S. Route 2 in New York" label="US-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487028" start="8430" end="8434" title="U.S. Route 9 in New York" label="US-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486974" start="8437" end="8442" title="U.S. Route 11 in New York" label="US-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485880" start="8445" end="8449" title="New York State Route 3" label="NY-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487028" start="8452" end="8457" title="U.S. Route 9 in New York" label="NY-9N"/>
<link wikidata="Q451274" start="8460" end="8465" title="New York State Route 22" label="NY-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q27880644" start="8468" end="8474" title="New York State Route 22B" label="NY-22B"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486399" start="8477" end="8483" title="New York State Route 190" label="NY-190"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486402" start="8486" end="8492" title="New York State Route 191" label="NY-191"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486760" start="8495" end="8501" title="New York State Route 374" label="NY-374"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486867" start="8504" end="8510" title="New York State Route 442" label="NY-442"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486880" start="8513" end="8519" title="New York State Route 456" label="NY-456"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876075" start="8537" end="8570" title="Plattsburgh International Airport" label="Plattsburgh International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q998669" start="8579" end="8590" title="Plattsburgh, New York" label="Plattsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655515" start="8593" end="8615" title="Clinton County Airport" label="Clinton County Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707247" start="8638" end="8664" title="Rouses Point Seaplane Base" label="Rouses Point Seaplane Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123210" start="8673" end="8685" title="Rouses Point, New York" label="Rouses Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="8698" end="8711" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q504115" start="8712" end="8728" title="Adirondack (train)" label="Adirondack Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="8768" end="8776" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="8780" end="8793" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097280" start="8860" end="8871" title="Plattsburgh station" label="Plattsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097453" start="8876" end="8888" title="Rouses Point station" label="Rouses Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976315" start="9139" end="9145" title="Altona, New York" label="Altona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708632" start="9148" end="9156" title="Au Sable, New York" label="Au Sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708764" start="9159" end="9170" title="Beekmantown, New York" label="Beekmantown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710650" start="9173" end="9184" title="Black Brook, New York" label="Black Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q692297" start="9187" end="9196" title="Champlain, New York" label="Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708310" start="9199" end="9204" title="Chazy, New York" label="Chazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134022" start="9207" end="9214" title="Clinton, Clinton County, New York" label="Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164416" start="9217" end="9226" title="Dannemora, New York" label="Dannemora"/>
<link wikidata="Q284893" start="9229" end="9238" title="Ellenburg, New York" label="Ellenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595447" start="9241" end="9247" title="Mooers, New York" label="Mooers"/>
<link wikidata="Q170254" start="9250" end="9254" title="Peru, New York" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890091" start="9257" end="9268" title="Plattsburgh (town), New York" label="Plattsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708778" start="9271" end="9278" title="Saranac, New York" label="Saranac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917727" start="9281" end="9295" title="Schuyler Falls, New York" label="Schuyler Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q949805" start="9312" end="9322" title="Churubusco, New York" label="Churubusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167961" start="9325" end="9337" title="Coopersville, Clinton County, New York" label="Coopersville"/>
<link wikidata="Q18158928" start="9340" end="9348" title="Swastika, New York" label="Swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q68467" start="9382" end="9396" title="Lake Champlain" label="Lake Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461218" start="9399" end="9414" title="Cumberland Head" label="Cumberland Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603626" start="9417" end="9433" title="State University of New York at Plattsburgh" label="SUNY Plattsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q762726" start="9436" end="9464" title="List of counties in New York" label="List of counties in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975759" start="9467" end="9540" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Clinton County, New York" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Clinton County, New York"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53369" wikidata="Q1136448" url="?curid=53369" title="Costantino Nivola">
<text>Costantino (also known as Antine, in Sardinia, or Tino, in the US) Nivola (July 5, 1911 – May 6, 1988) was a Sardinian and Italian sculptor, architectural sculptor, muralist, designer, and teacher.

Born in Orani, a town in the region of Sardinia, Nivola had already started his career when he fled Fascism for Paris in 1938, going to the U.S. in 1939. His major sculptural work is abstract, large-scale architectural reliefs in concrete, made in his own sandcasting and cement carving processes. These were erected in and on American buildings between the late 1950s and early 1970s. Creatively busy and while remaining active in Italy, Nivola also taught at the Harvard Graduate School of Design, Columbia University, UC Berkeley, and elsewhere.

The Nivola Museum in Orani, Sardinia is dedicated to his life and sculpture, and hosts the largest collection of his smaller scale work.

== Early career ==

Nivola was born and grew up poor in Orani, a village in Sardinia. As an adolescent, he worked as an apprentice stonemason. In Sassari in 1926, Nivola served as apprentice to fellow painter Mario Delitala, executing frescoes for the &quot;aula magna&quot; of the local university.

In 1931 Nivola enrolled in the ISIA (&quot;Istituto superiore per le industrie artistiche&quot;, the State Institute of Industrial Arts) in Monza. Through one of his teachers, the architect Giuseppe Pagano, he contributed work to the 1936 Milan Triennial VI and the Italian Pavilion at the 1937 Paris Exposition. This drew the attention of Adriano Olivetti, who named him art director of his company&#x27;s Publicity Department, where Nivola &quot;made a significant contribution to... &#x27;the Olivetti style&#x27;.

== United States ==

Nivola married fellow ISIA student Ruth Guggenheim in 1938, and left together for the United States via Paris in 1939. He established a home in Greenwich Village (first at Waverly Place, then at No. 47 West Eighth Street) to rebuild a social circle and a career despite speaking no English.

Nivola resumed a close friendship with artist Saul Steinberg from Milan, attended meetings of the anti-fascist Italian-American Mazzini Society in 1941, and by the 1940s Nivola was presiding over a weekly gathering of artists at Del Pezzo&#x27;s restaurant described by as comparable to the Algonquin Round Table. One key friendship was Le Corbusier. Introduced in 1945 by Josep Lluís Sert, Nivola became warm lifelong friends with the Swiss architect, his houseguest on Corbu&#x27;s rare trips to America.

Supported by small exhibitions and a progression of jobs in factories, for Bonwit Teller, and for architectural magazines, the Nivolas bought a modest property in Springs, East Hampton, Long Island. It would expand to 35 acres. Their garden landscape, a series of outdoor rooms and a roofless solarium, was co-designed by the Nivolas and architect Bernard Rudofsky; in 1950 Le Corbusier impulsively painted murals on two walls of their kitchen. On the nearby beach Nivola developed the principle of his distinctive concrete sandcasting technique while playing with his children. They sculpted wet sand, then poured a slurry of plaster or concrete into the form.

In 1951 Nivola was one of the artists shown in the pivotal 9th Street Art Exhibition, hung by Leo Castelli.

Once more Olivetti provided the sculptor with a major commission, for an interior wall in their stylish Fifth Avenue showroom in 1953. Nivola executed it with a refined, scaled-up version of the beach process, in a sequence of panels. The resulting attention and publicity started a successful career in large-scale architecture work which lasted for decades. One project, involving two thousand and ten cast-concrete panels for the McCormick Place Exposition Center in Chicago in 1959, was touted as the largest such installation ever.

In 1954 Nivola was named to direct the Design Workshop at the Harvard Graduate School of Design, where he stayed until 1957. He was also visiting professor or artist in residence at Columbia University (1961), Harvard (1970 and 1973), Dartmouth (1978), UC Berkeley (1978–79 and 1982), and the Royal Academy of Art, The Hague (1982). The American Institute of Graphic Arts awarded him its Certificate of Excellence. In 1972 the American Academy of Arts and Letters admitted Nivola as its first non-American member.

Nivola died of a heart attack in Southampton Hospital, Long Island, in May 1988. He was the father of children&#x27;s book author Claire Nivola, and the grandfather of actor Alessandro Nivola. A foundation and museum dedicated to Nivola&#x27;s work opened in his hometown in 1995, in a building partly designed by architect Peter Chermayeff.

== Work ==

The Sardinian town of Ulassai decided, in the early 1980s, to rehabilitate its neglected municipal laundry building dating from 1903. It was turned into an open-air contemporary museum with a number of artists represented – Maria Lai, Luigi Veronesi, Guido Strazza. Nivola&#x27;s contribution, a sculptural sound fountain, was completed in 1987 as his final work. 


Nivola&#x27;s public work includes:

* sgraffito exterior mural wall, Gagarin House I, Litchfield, Connecticut, with architect Marcel Breuer, 1952
* interior sand-cast relief wall, Olivetti showroom, Fifth Avenue, New York City, with architects BBPR, 1953 (razed)
* exterior panel for the William E. Grady CTE High School, Brooklyn, New York, 1957 
* &quot;Untitled&quot;, an interior cast-concrete mural of 132 panels in the former Mutual Insurance Company of Hartford (later Covenant Mutual Insurance Company), 95 Woodland Street, Hartford, Connecticut, with Sherwood, Mills &amp; Smith, architects, 1957
* over 2000 cast-concrete panels for the exterior of McCormick Place Exposition Center, Chicago, for Shaw, Metz &amp; Associates, 1959 (destroyed 1967)
* &quot;Untitled&quot;, a cast-concrete abstract exterior wall for the Mutual Insurance Company of Hartford, with Sherwood, Mills &amp; Smith, architects, 1960
* 18 polychrome cast stone horses and an 80-foot sgraffito mural wall, for the Stephen Wise Towers housing development play area, with architect Richard G. Stein for the New York City Housing Authority, 1964
* 20 concrete panels for the Connecticut Post Building, Bridgeport, Connecticut, 1966
* monument to poet Sebastiano Satta, Nuoro, Sardinia, 1966
* &quot;Family of Man&quot;, two cast-concrete abstract bas-reliefs with forms suggesting family groupings, entry to the Van Pelt Library, University of Pennsylvania, Harbeson, Hough, Livingston &amp; Larson architects. Building, 1962; sculpture, 1969
* &quot;Dedicated to the American Secretary&quot;, 14 abstract panels of sand-cast steel-reinforced concrete in the lobby, with a companion free-standing figure in the courtyard, Continental Bank, 400 Market Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 1970
* 33 sculpted panels on the history of communications theme, Janesville Gazette Building, Janesville, Wisconsin, 1970
* work at the Palazzo del Consiglio Regionale (House of the Regional Council), Cagliari, with architect Mario Fiorentino, 1987

== References ==
==External links==
* Website of the Nivola Foundation and Museum Museo Nivola
* Article in &quot;Metropolis&quot;: Nivola on Nivola Costantino Nivola Reconsidered | Metropolis Magazine | March 2002

==Books==
* G. Altea e A. Camarda, “Formal Autonomy versus Public Participation: The Modernist Monument in Costantino Nivola’s work”, in I. Ben-Asher Gitler (ed.), Monuments, Site-Specific Sculpture and Urban Space, Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2017, pp. 134–162
* G. Altea and A. Camarda, Costantino Nivola. La sintesi delle arti, Ilisso, 2015
* A. Mereu, Il Nivola ritrovato. Un artista tra l’America e il Mugello, Firenze, Nardini editore, 2012.
* Renato Miracco (ed.), Costantino Nivola. 100 Years of Creativity, Milano, Charta, 2012.
* Maddalena Mameli, Le Corbusier e Costantino Nivola. New York 1946–1953, Franco Angeli, Milano 2012.
* G. Altea (a cura di), Seguo la traccia nera e sottile. I disegni di Costantino Nivola, Agave, Sassari 2011.
* Nivola. L’investigazione dello spazio, ed. by C. Pirovano, Nuoro, Ilisso, 2010.
* G. Altea, Costantino Nivola, Ilisso, Nuoro 2004.
* U. Collu et al., Museo Nivola, Nuoro, Ilisso, 2004.
* S. Forrestier, Nivola Terrecotte. Opere dello studio Nivola, Amagansett, USA, Milano, Jaca Book, 2004.
* R. Cassanelli, U. Collu, O.Selvafolta (eds), Nivola Fancello Pintori. Percorsi del moderno, Jaca Book, Milano 2003.
* Costantino Nivola in Springs, ed. by M. Martegani, New York-Nuoro, The Parrish Art Museum-Ilisso, 2003.
* Nivola, Fancello, Pintori. Percorsi del moderno, eds R. Cassanelli, U. Collu, O. Selvafolta, Milano, Jaca Book, 2003.
* Nivola. Biografia per immagini, with texts by R. Venturi, D. Ashton and D. Mormorio, Nuoro, Ilisso, 2001
* Marika Herskovic, &quot;New York School Abstract Expressionists Artists Choice by Artists,&quot; (New York School Press, 2000.) . p. 18; p. 38; p. 266–269.
* Costantino Nivola. Sculture dipinti disegni, a cura di L. Caramel, C. Pirovano, Milano, Electa, 1999.
* A. Crespi, F. Licht, S. Naitza, Nivola. Dipinti e grafica, Milano, Jaca Book, 1995.
* U. Collu et al., Nivola dipinti e grafica, Milano, Jaca Book, 1995.
* Museo Nivola, Nuoro, Ilisso, 1995.
* S. Naitza (ed. by), Nivola, Nuoro, Ilisso, 1994.
* F. Licht, A. Satta, R. Ingersoll, &quot;Nivola: sculture&quot;, Milano, Jaca Book, 1991.
* R. Bossaglia, P. Cherchi, Nivola, Nuoro, Ilisso, 1990.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1136448" start="0" end="10" title="Costantino Nivola" label="Costantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136448" start="26" end="32" title="Costantino Nivola" label="Antine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="37" end="45" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136448" start="50" end="54" title="Costantino Nivola" label="Tino"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="63" end="65" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136448" start="66" end="66" title="Costantino Nivola" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1136448" start="67" end="73" title="Costantino Nivola" label="Nivola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140968" start="109" end="118" title="Sardinian people" label="Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q295414" start="207" end="212" title="Orani, Sardinia" label="Orani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128016" start="664" end="697" title="Harvard Graduate School of Design" label="Harvard Graduate School of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="699" end="718" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="720" end="731" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="UC Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867630" start="753" end="766" title="Nivola Museum" label="Nivola Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q295414" start="770" end="785" title="Orani, Sardinia" label="Orani, Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q295414" start="943" end="948" title="Orani, Italy" label="Orani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="963" end="971" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794820" start="1018" end="1028" title="stonemason" label="stonemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="1033" end="1040" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1096" end="1110" title=":it:Mario Delitala" label="Mario Delitala"/>
<link wikidata="Q532822" start="1169" end="1185" title="University of Sassari" label="local university"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1225" end="1283" title=":it:Istituto superiore per le industrie artistiche (Monza)" label="&amp;quot;Istituto superiore per le industrie artistiche&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252" start="1328" end="1333" title="Monza" label="Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q552423" start="1378" end="1393" title="Giuseppe Pagano" label="Giuseppe Pagano"/>
<link wikidata="Q11185518" start="1427" end="1445" title="Milan Triennial VI" label="Milan Triennial VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165755" start="1478" end="1499" title="Exposition Internationale des Arts et Techniques dans la Vie Moderne" label="1937 Paris Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755047" start="1528" end="1544" title="Adriano Olivetti" label="Adriano Olivetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q673267" start="1684" end="1692" title="Olivetti" label="Olivetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993391" start="1900" end="1913" title="Waverly Place" label="Waverly Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q432856" start="2066" end="2080" title="Saul Steinberg" label="Saul Steinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="2118" end="2130" title="Anti-fascism" label="anti-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853286" start="2148" end="2163" title="Mazzini Society" label="Mazzini Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252964" start="2249" end="2276" title="Del Pezzo Restaurant" label="Del Pezzo&amp;#x27;s restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376047" start="2311" end="2332" title="Algonquin Round Table" label="Algonquin Round Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724" start="2357" end="2369" title="Le Corbusier" label="Le Corbusier"/>
<link wikidata="Q467712" start="2393" end="2409" title="Josep Lluís Sert" label="Josep Lluís Sert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942680" start="2603" end="2616" title="Bonwit Teller" label="Bonwit Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111100" start="2691" end="2698" title="Springs, New York" label="Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q994372" start="2700" end="2712" title="East Hampton (town), New York" label="East Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q85661" start="2876" end="2892" title="Bernard Rudofsky" label="Bernard Rudofsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q277504" start="3250" end="3275" title="9th Street Art Exhibition" label="9th Street Art Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q553617" start="3285" end="3297" title="Leo Castelli" label="Leo Castelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072805" start="3733" end="3748" title="McCormick Place" label="McCormick Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128016" start="3900" end="3933" title="Harvard Graduate School of Design" label="Harvard Graduate School of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q511291" start="4131" end="4162" title="Royal Academy of Art, The Hague" label="Royal Academy of Art, The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622004" start="4175" end="4209" title="American Institute of Graphic Arts" label="American Institute of Graphic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="4265" end="4301" title="American Academy of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q350424" start="4527" end="4544" title="Alessandro Nivola" label="Alessandro Nivola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867630" start="4563" end="4569" title="Nivola Museum" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074328" start="4677" end="4693" title="Peter Chermayeff" label="Peter Chermayeff"/>
<link wikidata="Q340613" start="4730" end="4737" title="Ulassai" label="Ulassai"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4797" end="4823" title=":it:Lavatoio comunale di Ulassai" label="municipal laundry building"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4932" end="4941" title=":it:Maria Lai" label="Maria Lai"/>
<link wikidata="Q519428" start="4943" end="4957" title="Luigi Veronesi" label="Luigi Veronesi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4959" end="4972" title=":it:Guido Strazza" label="Guido Strazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q471835" start="5114" end="5123" title="sgraffito" label="sgraffito"/>
<link wikidata="Q57588" start="5202" end="5215" title="Marcel Breuer" label="Marcel Breuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q320788" start="5320" end="5324" title="BBPR" label="BBPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008243" start="5364" end="5396" title="William E. Grady CTE High School" label="William E. Grady CTE High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q120448720" start="5636" end="5663" title="Sherwood, Mills &amp;amp; Smith" label="Sherwood, Mills &amp;amp; Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072805" start="5735" end="5750" title="McCormick Place" label="McCormick Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q120448720" start="5948" end="5975" title="Sherwood, Mills &amp;amp; Smith" label="Sherwood, Mills &amp;amp; Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q471835" start="6043" end="6052" title="sgraffito" label="sgraffito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983035" start="6164" end="6195" title="New York City Housing Authority" label="New York City Housing Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161578" start="6231" end="6247" title="Connecticut Post" label="Connecticut Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953793" start="6307" end="6323" title="Sebastiano Satta" label="Sebastiano Satta"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649" start="6325" end="6330" title="Nuoro" label="Nuoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405995" start="6468" end="6484" title="Van Pelt Library" label="Van Pelt Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628818" start="6514" end="6554" title="Harbeson, Hough, Livingston &amp;amp; Larson" label="Harbeson, Hough, Livingston &amp;amp; Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q257536" start="6938" end="6959" title="Janesville, Wisconsin" label="Janesville, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="7045" end="7053" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53371" wikidata="Q487616" url="?curid=53371" title="Chenango County, New York">
<text>Chenango County is a county located in the south-central section of the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 47,220. Its county seat is Norwich. The county&#x27;s name originates from an Oneida word meaning &#x27;large bull-thistle&#x27;. The county is part of the Southern Tier region of the state.

==History==
This was long the territory of the Oneida people, one of the first Five Nations of the Iroquois Confederacy or &quot;Haudenosaunee&quot;. They occupied the area until after the Revolutionary War, when they were forced off the land, although they had been allies of the patriot colonists. They were granted a small reservation, which settlers continued to encroach on.

When English colonists organized counties in 1683 in what is now New York, the present Chenango County was part of Albany County. This was an enormous county, including the northern part of New York State as well as all of the present State of Vermont and, in theory, extending westward to the Pacific Ocean. However, territories located to the west of present-day Pennsylvania were under effective French control as part of New France. Albany County was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and further on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in Vermont.

On March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. One of the other pieces, Tryon County, contained the western portion (and thus, since no western boundary was specified, theoretically still extended west to the Pacific). The eastern boundary of Tryon County was approximately five miles west of the present city of Schenectady, and the county included the western part of the Adirondack Mountains and the area west of the West Branch of the Delaware River. The area then designated as Tryon County has since been organized as 37 counties of New York State. The county was named for William Tryon, the British colonial governor of New York.

In the years prior to 1776, during the increasing tensions most of the Loyalists in Tryon County fled to Fort Niagara on the Western Frontier. In 1784, following the peace treaty that ended the American Revolutionary War, the Americans renamed Tryon County as Montgomery County in honor of the US general Richard Montgomery. He had captured several places in Canada and died attempting to capture the city of Quebec. The US residents replaced the name of the former British governor.

In 1788, the Oneida Reservation was considerably reduced by what is known as Clinton&#x27;s Purchase, when land was sold off west of the Unadilla River to create what are now 20 towns. (See map to the right.) Settlers from eastern New York and New England entered the area and began farming.

In 1789, Montgomery County was reduced in size by the splitting-off of Ontario County. The area split off from Montgomery County was much larger than the present Ontario County, as it included the present Allegany, Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, Erie, Genesee, Livingston, Monroe, Niagara, Orleans, Steuben, Wyoming, Yates, and part of Schuyler and Wayne counties. It was the practice to establish a large geographic county and divide it as settlement increased.

In 1791, Herkimer, Otsego and Tioga counties were organized from land separated from Montgomery County.

Chenango County was formed on March 15, 1798, from of Tioga and Herkimer counties. Its eastern border is formed by the Unadilla River. The land had been purchased the previous year from the Oneida, who were forced into a smaller reservation to the north.

On April 4, 1804, of Chenango County was partitioned to expand Oneida County; the communities of Waterville and Sangerfield were assigned to the new Oneida County.

On March 21, 1806, of Chenango County was partitioned to produce Madison County. This established the current borders of Chenango County, which have been maintained to the early 21st century. This area was developed for agriculture in the nineteenth century and is still largely rural.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.6%) is water.

Chenango County is in the approximate center of the state, located west of Albany, north of Binghamton, and southeast of Syracuse. The county is considered to be in the Southern Tier region of New York State.

The Chenango River, a tributary of the Susquehanna River, flows southward through the county.

===Adjacent counties===
* Madison County - north
* Otsego County - northeast
* Delaware County - southeast
* Broome County - south
* Cortland County - west

==Demographics==

=== 2020 Census ===
=== 2000 Census ===
As of the census of 2000, there were 51,401 people, 19,926 households, and 13,549 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 23,890 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 97.65% White, 0.82% Black or African American, 0.27% Native American, 0.28% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.22% from other races, and 0.74% from two or more races. 1.07% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 20.2% were of English, 14.5% German, 13.8% Irish, 12.3% American and 8.9% Italian ancestry according to Census 2000. 96.7% spoke English and 1.3% Spanish as their first language.

There were 19,926 households, out of which 32.50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.10% were married couples living together, 9.80% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.00% were non-families. 26.10% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.40% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.52 and the average family size was 3.01.

In the county, the population was spread out, with 26.20% under the age of 18, 7.00% from 18 to 24, 27.50% from 25 to 44, 24.40% from 45 to 64, and 14.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 97.00 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.70 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $33,679, and the median income for a family was $39,711. Males had a median income of $30,363 versus $22,429 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,427. About 10.70% of families and 14.40% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.50% of those under age 18 and 8.70% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==












|}

Chenango County has a Board of Supervisors that consists of 23 Town/City elected officials, serving as representatives at the County level. The term for each Supervisor is based on the term set by each particular Town. A Supervisor holds office for either two or four years.

In 21st-century United States politics, Chenango County is considered to be a Republican-leaning county, where the majority of voters elect national Republican candidates. In 2004, Republican George Bush won by an 11% margin over Democrat John Kerry. For state and congressional offices, voters sometimes elect Democratic candidates. In 2006 both Eliot Spitzer and Hillary Clinton carried it, winning 57% and 54% of the vote for governor and US Senator, respectively. In 2008, John McCain carried Chenango County over Barack Obama in the presidential election by a close margin of 49.59%-48.45% or a difference of 237 votes. In 2010, Democrat Andrew Cuomo for governor, and Democrats Chuck Schumer and Kirsten Gillibrand for the US Senate each carried it. In 2012, Republican Mitt Romney narrowly won the county over Obama, but like most of the Upstate, swung sharply towards the Republicans in 2016 and 2020, with Donald Trump receiving over 60% of the vote in 2020 making him the first Republican to do so since 1984.

==Education==
Morrisville State College has a branch in Norwich.

==Communities==
Norwich, the county seat, is the only city in Chenango County.

In addition to the city of Norwich, the county has the following named settlements:

===Towns===
In New York, a &quot;town&quot; is a political subdivision (synonymous with township). The towns in northern Chenango County originated from the Twenty Townships ceded by the Oneida tribe to the State of New York.

* Afton
* Bainbridge
* Columbus
* Coventry
* German
* Greene
* Guilford
* Lincklaen
* McDonough
* New Berlin
* North Norwich
* Norwich
* Otselic
* Oxford
* Pharsalia
* Pitcher
* Plymouth
* Preston
* Sherburne
* Smithville
* Smyrna
===Villages===

* Afton
* Bainbridge
* Earlville
* Greene
* New Berlin
* Oxford
* Sherburne
* Smyrna
===Census-designated places===
* Guilford
* Smithville Flats

===Hamlets===
* Holmesville
* Mount Upton
* Rockdale
* South Plymouth

==Notable people==
* Allen Aaron Cook, an architect, was born here in 1832
* Nancy Matthews Elliott was born here in 1810 and became the mother of Thomas Edison.
* Serranus Clinton Hastings, U.S. Congressman and founder of the Hastings College of the Law at University of California

==See also==

* List of counties in New York
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Chenango County, New York

==References==
===Further reading===
* NEW YORK: Atlas of Historical County Boundaries; Compiled by Kathryn Ford Thorne; Edited by John H. Long.

==External links==
* Chenango County, NY government 
* Chenango County &quot;Online Visitors Travel Guide&quot;
* Chenango County GenWeb
* Chenango County Chamber of Commerce
* Chenango County Democratic Committee
* &quot;&quot;The Evening Sun,&quot; Chenango County newspaper
* &quot;Chenango Semi-Weekly Telegraph,&quot; Google news archive. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q487616" start="0" end="15" title="Chenango County, New York" label="Chenango County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="21" end="27" title="County (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="72" end="82" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="86" end="94" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="106" end="117" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="150" end="161" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380484" start="165" end="172" title="Norwich, New York" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q857858" start="216" end="222" title="Oneida language" label="Oneida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570547" start="294" end="307" title="Southern Tier" label="Southern Tier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572875" start="377" end="390" title="Oneida people" label="Oneida people"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="459" end="472" title="Haudenosaunee" label="Haudenosaunee"/>
<link wikidata="Q108408" start="826" end="839" title="Albany County, New York" label="Albany County"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="955" end="962" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="1005" end="1018" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="1076" end="1088" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="1136" end="1146" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193860" start="1218" end="1235" title="Cumberland County, New York" label="Cumberland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572034" start="1287" end="1304" title="Gloucester County, New York" label="Gloucester County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684631" start="1496" end="1508" title="Tryon County, New York" label="Tryon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q331380" start="1737" end="1748" title="Schenectady, New York" label="Schenectady"/>
<link wikidata="Q357546" start="1798" end="1818" title="Adirondack Mountains" label="Adirondack Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="1863" end="1877" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580817" start="2004" end="2017" title="William Tryon" label="William Tryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q362553" start="2168" end="2180" title="Fort Niagara" label="Fort Niagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="2257" end="2283" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q487572" start="2323" end="2340" title="Montgomery County, New York" label="Montgomery County"/>
<link wikidata="Q444947" start="2368" end="2386" title="Richard Montgomery" label="Richard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="2472" end="2478" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882224" start="2685" end="2699" title="Unadilla River" label="Unadilla River"/>
<link wikidata="Q115025" start="2912" end="2926" title="Ontario County, New York" label="Ontario County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47944" start="3046" end="3054" title="Allegany County, New York" label="Allegany"/>
<link wikidata="Q114923" start="3056" end="3067" title="Cattaraugus County, New York" label="Cattaraugus"/>
<link wikidata="Q115061" start="3069" end="3079" title="Chautauqua County, New York" label="Chautauqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q114843" start="3081" end="3085" title="Erie County, New York" label="Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q115014" start="3087" end="3094" title="Genesee County, New York" label="Genesee"/>
<link wikidata="Q487578" start="3096" end="3106" title="Livingston County, New York" label="Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q115104" start="3108" end="3114" title="Monroe County, New York" label="Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q114969" start="3116" end="3123" title="Niagara County, New York" label="Niagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q115125" start="3125" end="3132" title="Orleans County, New York" label="Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q71100" start="3134" end="3141" title="Steuben County, New York" label="Steuben"/>
<link wikidata="Q56145" start="3143" end="3150" title="Wyoming County, New York" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q56144" start="3152" end="3157" title="Yates County, New York" label="Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q71190" start="3171" end="3179" title="Schuyler County, New York" label="Schuyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q56146" start="3184" end="3198" title="Wayne County, New York" label="Wayne counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q487564" start="3308" end="3316" title="Herkimer County, New York" label="Herkimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q114862" start="3318" end="3324" title="Otsego County, New York" label="Otsego"/>
<link wikidata="Q56154" start="3329" end="3334" title="Tioga County, New York" label="Tioga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882224" start="3523" end="3537" title="Unadilla River" label="Unadilla River"/>
<link wikidata="Q115043" start="3723" end="3736" title="Oneida County, New York" label="Oneida County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452971" start="3757" end="3767" title="Waterville, New York" label="Waterville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708718" start="3772" end="3783" title="Sangerfield, New York" label="Sangerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q115166" start="3890" end="3904" title="Madison County, New York" label="Madison County"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="4143" end="4161" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="4310" end="4316" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q213814" start="4327" end="4337" title="Binghamton, New York" label="Binghamton"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="4356" end="4364" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570547" start="4404" end="4417" title="Southern Tier" label="Southern Tier"/>
<link wikidata="Q681278" start="4449" end="4463" title="Chenango River" label="Chenango River"/>
<link wikidata="Q27538" start="4484" end="4501" title="Susquehanna River" label="Susquehanna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q115166" start="4566" end="4580" title="Madison County, New York" label="Madison County"/>
<link wikidata="Q114862" start="4591" end="4604" title="Otsego County, New York" label="Otsego County"/>
<link wikidata="Q115289" start="4619" end="4634" title="Delaware County, New York" label="Delaware County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47894" start="4649" end="4662" title="Broome County, New York" label="Broome County"/>
<link wikidata="Q487610" start="4673" end="4688" title="Cortland County, New York" label="Cortland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="4765" end="4771" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="4874" end="4892" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5001" end="5006" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5014" end="5019" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5023" end="5039" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5047" end="5062" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5070" end="5075" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5083" end="5099" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5112" end="5123" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="5188" end="5196" title="Hispanics in the United States" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5200" end="5206" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="5234" end="5241" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="5249" end="5255" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="5263" end="5268" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5276" end="5284" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="5294" end="5301" title="Italian people" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="5324" end="5335" title="Census 2000" label="Census 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="5349" end="5356" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="5366" end="5373" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="5513" end="5528" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="6338" end="6355" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6453" end="6465" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q11675" start="7196" end="7209" title="Eliot Spitzer" label="Eliot Spitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="7214" end="7229" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="7326" end="7337" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="7367" end="7379" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q11673" start="7492" end="7504" title="Andrew Cuomo" label="Andrew Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q380900" start="7533" end="7546" title="Chuck Schumer" label="Chuck Schumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22222" start="7551" end="7569" title="Kirsten Gillibrand" label="Kirsten Gillibrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="7625" end="7636" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="7764" end="7776" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914146" start="7884" end="7909" title="Morrisville State College" label="Morrisville State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380484" start="7952" end="7959" title="Norwich (city), New York" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7990" end="7994" title="Administrative divisions of New York#City" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8134" end="8138" title="Administrative divisions of New York#Town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610511" start="8189" end="8197" title="township" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857814" start="8258" end="8274" title="Twenty Townships" label="Twenty Townships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572875" start="8288" end="8300" title="Oneida tribe" label="Oneida tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895518" start="8330" end="8335" title="Afton, New York" label="Afton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879945" start="8338" end="8348" title="Bainbridge, New York" label="Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708769" start="8351" end="8359" title="Columbus, New York" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505448" start="8362" end="8370" title="Coventry, New York" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708826" start="8373" end="8379" title="German, New York" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603833" start="8382" end="8388" title="Greene, New York" label="Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887275" start="8391" end="8399" title="Guilford, New York" label="Guilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708256" start="8402" end="8411" title="Lincklaen, New York" label="Lincklaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708755" start="8414" end="8423" title="McDonough, New York" label="McDonough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624967" start="8426" end="8436" title="New Berlin, New York" label="New Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708351" start="8439" end="8452" title="North Norwich, New York" label="North Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061467" start="8455" end="8462" title="Norwich (town), New York" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708713" start="8465" end="8472" title="Otselic, New York" label="Otselic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708820" start="8475" end="8481" title="Oxford, New York" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708259" start="8484" end="8493" title="Pharsalia, New York" label="Pharsalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708468" start="8496" end="8503" title="Pitcher, New York" label="Pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708543" start="8506" end="8514" title="Plymouth, New York" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501561" start="8517" end="8524" title="Preston, New York" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494770" start="8527" end="8536" title="Sherburne, New York" label="Sherburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708326" start="8539" end="8549" title="Smithville, New York" label="Smithville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546719" start="8552" end="8558" title="Smyrna, New York" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q614477" start="8577" end="8582" title="Afton (village), New York" label="Afton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461688" start="8585" end="8595" title="Bainbridge (village), New York" label="Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453106" start="8598" end="8607" title="Earlville, New York" label="Earlville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461035" start="8610" end="8616" title="Greene (village), New York" label="Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461896" start="8619" end="8629" title="New Berlin (village), New York" label="New Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461644" start="8632" end="8638" title="Oxford (village), New York" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461866" start="8641" end="8650" title="Sherburne (village), New York" label="Sherburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462048" start="8653" end="8659" title="Smyrna (village), New York" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q18694422" start="8693" end="8701" title="Guilford (CDP), New York" label="Guilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130492" start="8704" end="8720" title="Smithville Flats, New York" label="Smithville Flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706387" start="8738" end="8749" title="Holmesville, New York" label="Holmesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924270" start="8752" end="8763" title="Mount Upton, New York" label="Mount Upton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355013" start="8766" end="8774" title="Rockdale, New York" label="Rockdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q48740518" start="8777" end="8791" title="South Plymouth, New York" label="South Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q27734060" start="8814" end="8830" title="Allen Aaron Cook" label="Allen Aaron Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="8940" end="8953" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735726" start="8957" end="8982" title="Serranus Clinton Hastings" label="Serranus Clinton Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577853" start="9020" end="9047" title="Hastings College of the Law" label="Hastings College of the Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="9051" end="9075" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q762726" start="9093" end="9121" title="List of counties in New York" label="List of counties in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975676" start="9124" end="9198" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Chenango County, New York" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Chenango County, New York"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53372" wikidata="Q854630" url="?curid=53372" title="Chemung County, New York">
<text>Chemung County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. The population was 84,148 as of the 2020 census. Its county seat is Elmira. Its name is derived from a Delaware Indian village whose name means &quot;big horn&quot; in the Seneca language. The county is part of the Southern Tier region of the state.

Chemung County comprises the Elmira, NY [[Metropolitan Statistical Area]], which is also included in the Elmira-Corning, NY Combined Statistical Area.

Many signs posted along roads in Chemung County refer to the area as &quot;Mark Twain Country,&quot; because the noted author lived and wrote for many years in Elmira.

==History==

Chemung County was formed from of Tioga County in 1836.

In 1854, Chemung County was divided and became Schuyler County, reducing Chemung to , its current size.

In the late 1870s, the Greenback Party became prominent in Chemung and nearby counties in western New York. Here it was primarily allied with labor in a critique of capital, reaching its peak in 1878, the year following the Great Railroad Strike of 1877 and the Scranton General Strike in Pennsylvania. There were also strikes that year in Albany, Syracuse and Buffalo, starting with the railroad workers. In Steuben and Chemung counties, Greenbackers were elected to county councils in 1878 instead of Democrats, and others were elected from there and nearby counties to the state legislature, gaining votes of more than 25 percent in several of the Southern Tier counties. It gradually declined after that, due to internal dissension and the strength of the two major parties.
==Geography==

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.8%) is water.

Chemung County is in the southwestern part of New York State, along the Pennsylvania border, in a part of New York called the Southern Tier and is also part of the Finger Lakes Region.

The Southern Tier Expressway runs through the County east-west near the Pennsylvania border, between Waverly, New York and Corning, New York via Elmira, New York.

==Transportation==

===Major highways===

* Interstate 86 / New York State Route 17 (Southern Tier Expressway)
* New York State Route 13
* New York State Route 14
* New York State Route 34
* New York State Route 223
* New York State Route 328
* New York State Route 352
* New York State Route 367
* New York State Route 414
* New York State Route 427
===Airport===
* Elmira Corning Regional Airport

==Demographics==

=== 2020 Census ===
=== 2000 Census ===
As of the 2000 census, there were 91,070 people, 35,049 households and 23,272 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 37,745 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 90.96% White, 5.82% Black or African American, 0.23% Native American, 0.78% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.75% from other races, and 1.44% from two or more races. 1.77% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 16.4% were of German, 15.7% Irish, 12.5% English, 11.8% Italian, 7.8% American and 6.3% Polish ancestry according to Census 2000 . Most of those claiming to be of &quot;American&quot; ancestry are of English descent and, in upstate New York, also in some cases of Dutch descent, but have family that has been in the country for so long, in many cases since the early seventeenth century, that they choose to identify simply as &quot;American&quot;. 96.2% spoke English and 1.6% Spanish as their first language.

There were 35,049 households, of which 31.00% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.80% were married couples living together, 12.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.60% were non-families. 27.90% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.20% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.44 and the average family size was 2.97.

Age distribution was 24.40% under the age of 18, 8.80% from 18 to 24, 28.30% from 25 to 44, 22.90% from 45 to 64, and 15.60% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 97.70 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.30 males.

The median household income was $36,415, and the median family income was $43,994. Males had a median income of $35,076 versus $24,215 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,264. About 9.10% of families and 13.00% of the population were below the poverty line, including 18.40% of those under age 18 and 6.80% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==

Before 1974, Chemung County was governed by a board of supervisors. On January 1, 1974, executive and legislative powers were split between a county executive and a 15-seat legislature. All 15 members are elected from single-member districts. As of 2024, the Chemung County Legislature includes 13 Republicans and 2 Democrats. Chemung County is a part of the 23rd congressional district, represented by Republican Nick Langworthy.













|}

In presidential elections, Chemung County tends to vote Republican. Only two Democrats (Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964 and Bill Clinton in 1996) have carried the county since 1920. It voted for George W. Bush in 2004 by a 10.85% margin. In 2008, the margin was much closer, but voters still gave John McCain a 1.23% win over Barack Obama. In 2012, Mitt Romney carried the county by 2.33%. In 2016, Donald Trump carried Chemung County with 55.64% of the vote compared to Hillary Clinton&#x27;s 38.09%. Trump carried the county again in 2020 with over 55% of the vote.

==Education==

Education in Chemung County is provided by various private and public institutions. High school students and adults have access to GST BOCES. BOCES provides vocation-style training in a wide range of fields as well as adult education and special education.

===Public school districts===
School districts with any portion of territory in the county, even if the schools and/or administrative offices are elsewhere, include:

* Corning City School District
* Elmira City School District
* Elmira Heights Central School District
* Horseheads Central School District
* Odessa-Montour Central School District
* Spencer-Van Etten Central School District
* Watkins Glen Central School District
* Waverly Central School District
===Private schools===
* Chemung Valley Montessori School
* Elmira Christian Academy
* Holy Family Middle School
* Saint Mary Our Mother School
* Notre Dame High School
* Twin Tiers Christian Academy

===Higher education===
* Arnot Ogden School of Nursing
* Corning Community College &quot;(off-campus sites)&quot;
* Elmira College
* Elmira Business Institute

===Public libraries===
Chemung County Library District

* Steele Memorial Library
* Horseheads Free Library
* Big Flats Library
* West Elmira Library
* Van Etten Library
* Chemung County Bookmobile

==Communities==

===Larger Settlements===

† - County Seat

†† - Former Village

===Towns===

* Ashland
* Baldwin
* Big Flats
* Catlin
* Chemung
* Elmira
* Erin
* Horseheads
* Southport
* Van Etten
* Veteran
===Hamlet===
* Lowman

==Notable people==
==See also==

* List of counties in New York
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Chemung County, New York

==References==
;Specific
;General
* New York: Atlas of Historical County Boundaries; Compiled by Kathryn Ford Thorne and Edited by John H. Long.

==Further reading==

==External links==

* Chemung County, New York site
* Chemung County Chamber of Commerce
* Elmira College
* Chemung County Library District</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q854630" start="0" end="14" title="Chemung County, New York" label="Chemung County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="20" end="26" title="County (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="34" end="44" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="48" end="56" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="94" end="105" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="111" end="122" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q934135" start="126" end="132" title="Elmira, New York" label="Elmira"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="161" end="169" title="Lenape" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="170" end="176" title="Native American (U.S.)" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185133" start="230" end="245" title="Seneca language" label="Seneca language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570547" start="273" end="286" title="Southern Tier" label="Southern Tier"/>
<link wikidata="Q854630" start="338" end="382" title="Chemung County, New York" label="Elmira, NY [[Metropolitan Statistical Area]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q576395" start="421" end="428" title="Corning (city), New York" label="Corning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985090" start="433" end="458" title="Combined Statistical Area" label="Combined Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="536" end="546" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q71190" start="747" end="762" title="Schuyler County, New York" label="Schuyler County"/>
<link wikidata="Q475261" start="828" end="843" title="Greenback Party" label="Greenback Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599833" start="1029" end="1058" title="Great Railroad Strike of 1877" label="Great Railroad Strike of 1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q24060790" start="1067" end="1090" title="Scranton General Strike" label="Scranton General Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1616" end="1634" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="1780" end="1792" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570547" start="1834" end="1847" title="Southern Tier" label="Southern Tier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416994" start="1872" end="1884" title="Finger Lakes" label="Finger Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485976" start="1898" end="1922" title="Southern Tier Expressway" label="Southern Tier Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460878" start="1995" end="2002" title="Waverly, Tioga County, New York" label="Waverly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="2004" end="2012" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171776" start="2017" end="2024" title="Corning (town), New York" label="Corning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="2026" end="2034" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q934135" start="2039" end="2045" title="Elmira, New York" label="Elmira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="2047" end="2055" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q94930" start="2102" end="2115" title="Interstate 86 (Pennsylvania-New York)" label="Interstate 86"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485976" start="2118" end="2141" title="New York State Route 17" label="New York State Route 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485976" start="2143" end="2167" title="Southern Tier Expressway" label="Southern Tier Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485956" start="2171" end="2194" title="New York State Route 13" label="New York State Route 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485962" start="2197" end="2220" title="New York State Route 14" label="New York State Route 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486054" start="2223" end="2246" title="New York State Route 34" label="New York State Route 34"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486460" start="2249" end="2273" title="New York State Route 223" label="New York State Route 223"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486682" start="2276" end="2300" title="New York State Route 328" label="New York State Route 328"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486720" start="2303" end="2327" title="New York State Route 352" label="New York State Route 352"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486748" start="2330" end="2354" title="New York State Route 367" label="New York State Route 367"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486817" start="2357" end="2381" title="New York State Route 414" label="New York State Route 414"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486842" start="2384" end="2408" title="New York State Route 427" label="New York State Route 427"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242688" start="2425" end="2456" title="Elmira Corning Regional Airport" label="Elmira Corning Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="2526" end="2537" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2631" end="2649" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2758" end="2763" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2771" end="2776" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2780" end="2796" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2804" end="2819" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2827" end="2832" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2840" end="2856" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2869" end="2880" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="2945" end="2953" title="Hispanics in the United States" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2957" end="2963" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="2991" end="2997" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="3005" end="3010" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="3018" end="3025" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="3033" end="3040" title="Italian people" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3047" end="3055" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="3065" end="3071" title="Polish people" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="3094" end="3105" title="Census 2000" label="Census 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3438" end="3445" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="3455" end="3462" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3598" end="3613" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4368" end="4385" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4482" end="4494" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998914" start="4729" end="4745" title="county executive" label="county executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052894" start="4805" end="4827" title="single-member district" label="single-member district"/>
<link wikidata="Q12357468" start="4946" end="4973" title="New York&amp;#x27;s 23rd congressional district" label="23rd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="4990" end="5000" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q55356856" start="5001" end="5016" title="Nick Langworthy" label="Nick Langworthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="5123" end="5140" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="5153" end="5165" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="5224" end="5238" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="5326" end="5337" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="5355" end="5367" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="5378" end="5389" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="5428" end="5440" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="5500" end="5515" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931445" start="5748" end="5753" title="Board of Cooperative Educational Services (New York)" label="BOCES"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6040" end="6068" title="Corning City School District" label="Corning City School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366799" start="6071" end="6098" title="Elmira City School District" label="Elmira City School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992437" start="6101" end="6139" title="Elmira Heights Central School District" label="Elmira Heights Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995884" start="6142" end="6176" title="Horseheads Central School District" label="Horseheads Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6179" end="6217" title="Odessa-Montour Central School District" label="Odessa-Montour Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6220" end="6261" title="Spencer-Van Etten Central School District" label="Spencer-Van Etten Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6264" end="6300" title="Watkins Glen Central School District" label="Watkins Glen Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975476" start="6303" end="6334" title="Waverly Central School District" label="Waverly Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q190218" start="6374" end="6384" title="Montessori education" label="Montessori"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707122" start="6480" end="6502" title="Notre Dame High School (Elmira, New York)" label="Notre Dame High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171775" start="6592" end="6617" title="Corning Community College" label="Corning Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051594" start="6651" end="6665" title="Elmira College" label="Elmira College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805211" start="6990" end="6997" title="Ashland, Chemung County, New York" label="Ashland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475613" start="7000" end="7007" title="Baldwin, Chemung County, New York" label="Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411770" start="7010" end="7019" title="Big Flats (town), New York" label="Big Flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q428006" start="7022" end="7028" title="Catlin, New York" label="Catlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708424" start="7031" end="7038" title="Chemung, New York" label="Chemung"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366796" start="7041" end="7047" title="Elmira (town), New York" label="Elmira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708526" start="7050" end="7054" title="Erin, New York" label="Erin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10751434" start="7057" end="7067" title="Horseheads (town), New York" label="Horseheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708487" start="7070" end="7079" title="Southport (town), New York" label="Southport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913321" start="7082" end="7091" title="Van Etten (town), New York" label="Van Etten"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708699" start="7094" end="7101" title="Veteran, New York" label="Veteran"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706838" start="7117" end="7123" title="Lowman, New York" label="Lowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q762726" start="7160" end="7188" title="List of counties in New York" label="List of counties in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975677" start="7191" end="7264" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Chemung County, New York" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Chemung County, New York"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53373" wikidata="Q76425" url="?curid=53373" title="Emil von Behring">
<text>Emil von Behring (; Emil Adolf von Behring: born Emil Adolf Behring; 15 March 1854 – 31 March 1917), was a German physiologist who received the 1901 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, the first one awarded in that field, for his discovery of a diphtheria antitoxin. He was widely known as a &quot;saviour of children&quot;, as diphtheria used to be a major cause of child death. His work with the disease, as well as tetanus, has come to bring him most of his fame and acknowledgment. He was honoured with Prussian nobility in 1901, henceforth being known by the surname &quot;von Behring&quot;.

==Biography==
Behring was born in Hansdorf, Kreis Rosenberg, Province of Prussia (now Ławice, Iława County, Poland). His father was a schoolmaster; the family had 13 children.

Between 1874 and 1878, Behring studied medicine at the Kaiser-Wilhelm-Akademie in Berlin, an academy for military doctors, since his family could not afford the university. As a military doctor, he studied the action of iodoform. Due to his work on Neurotomia opticociliaris (or optociliary neurotomy), Behring became a doctor from the institute and later was able to pass his exam for licensed work in his area of Marburg. In 1878, his service required him to be sent to Poland where he focused on septic diseases. His potential was becoming well known to many. This led to his commanded return to Prussia to study with Robert Koch. He was employed by the military as he received his grants and money from the Prussian army. For each semester of education, he owed one year of service as a military surgeon. This accumulated to two years, from 1881 to 1883 as he served under the Second Hussar regiment. A lesser known part of his studies was his research in ophthalmology and how he furthered the understanding of the eye and its diseases. He wrote a paper during his time at Wicherkiewicz&#x27;s hospital in Poznań from 1881 to 1883 on an eye tumor case that ended up with the patient dying from leukemia, but it did allow for much needed research on treatments for the eye and what the preferred pathways for surgery would be. He learned under some of the great ophthalmologists such as Carl Ernst Schweigger and Wilhelm Uhthoff, leading to his interest in the subject and his writing his doctoral dissertation on it.

In 1890 he published an article with Kitasato Shibasaburō reporting that they had developed &quot;antitoxins&quot; against both diphtheria and tetanus. They had injected diphtheria and tetanus toxins into guinea-pigs, goats and horses; when these animals developed immunity, they derived antitoxins (now known to contain antibodies) from their serum. This process would be called serum therapy by him at the time as he described it as a way to induce permanent immunity or &quot;to stimulate the body&#x27;s internal disinfection&quot;. These antitoxins could protect against and cure the diseases in non-immunized animals. In 1892 he started the first human trials of the diphtheria antitoxin, but they were unsuccessful. Successful treatment started in 1894, after the production and quantification of antitoxin had been optimized. During 1894, Behring was also awarded the Cameron Prize for Therapeutics of the University of Edinburgh.

In 1895 he became Professor of Hygienics within the Faculty of Medicine at the University of Marburg, a position held for the rest of his life. He and the pharmacologist Hans Horst Meyer had their laboratories in the same building, and Behring stimulated Meyer&#x27;s interest in the mode of action of tetanus toxin.

Behring won the first Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1901 for the development of serum therapies against diphtheria. His research colleague Kitasato Shibasaburō with whom together von Behring had laid the foundation for this therapy in 1890, while nominated as well, was not awarded the Nobel Prize.

Emil von Behring was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1902.

In 1904 he founded the Behringwerke in Marburg, a company to produce antitoxins and vaccines.

At the International Tuberculosis Congress in 1905 he announced that he had discovered &quot;a substance proceeding from the virus of tuberculosis&quot;. This substance, which he designated &quot;T C&quot;, plays the important part in the immunizing action of his &quot;bovivaccine&quot;, which prevents bovine tuberculosis. He tried unsuccessfully to obtain a protective and therapeutic agents for humans.

Behring died at Marburg, Hessen-Nassau, on 31 March 1917. His name survived in the Dade Behring organisation (now part of the Siemens Healthineers), in CSL Behring, a manufacturer of plasma-derived biotherapies, in Novartis Behring and in the Emil von Behring Prize of the University of Marburg, the highest endowed medicine award in Germany.

His Nobel Prize medal is now kept on display at the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Museum in Geneva.

===Controversy===
Von Behring is believed to have cheated Paul Ehrlich out of recognition and financial reward in relation to collaborative research in diphtheria. The two men developed a diphtheria serum by repeatedly injecting the deadly toxin into a horse. The serum was used effectively during an epidemic in Germany. A chemical company preparing to undertake commercial production and marketing of the diphtheria serum offered a contract to both men, but von Behring manoeuvered to claim all the considerable financial rewards for himself. To add insult to injury, only Behring received the first Nobel Prize in Medicine, in 1901, for his contributions. However, Ehrlich went on to win the 1908 Nobel Prize in Medicine for his contribution to immunology.


==Personal life==
On 29 December 1896 Behring married the then twenty-year-old Else Spinola (1876–1936), who was a daughter of , the director of the Charité hospital in Berlin, and a Jewish-born mother – Elise Spinola, born Bendix – who had converted to Christianity upon her marriage. They had six sons. They held their honeymoon at villa &quot;Behring&quot; on Capri 1897, where Behring owned a vacation home. In 1909–1911, the Russian writer Maxim Gorky lived at this villa.

==Publications==
* &quot;Die Blutserumtherapie&quot; (1892)
* &quot;Die Geschichte der Diphtherie&quot; (1893)
* &quot;Bekämpfung der Infektionskrankheiten&quot; (1894)
* &quot;Beiträge zur experimentellen Therapie&quot; (1906)
* &quot;E. v. Behring&#x27;s Gesammelte Abhandlungen&quot; (1915) Digital edition by the University and State Library Düsseldorf

==See also==
* German inventors and discoverers

==References==
*
* Ulrike Enke: Salvatore dell&#x27;Infanzia Behring and Capri
* Christoph Hans Gerhard : Trias deutschen Forschergeistes Emil von Behring Pflaum-Verlag / Munich Naturheilpraxis 71.Jahrgang January, 2018

=== Notes ===
==External links==
* including the Nobel Lecture on December 12, 1901 &quot;Serum Therapy in Therapeutics and Medical Science&quot;
* www.uni-marburg.de/behring-digital</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q76425" start="0" end="16" title="Emil von Behring" label="Emil von Behring"/>
<link wikidata="Q76425" start="20" end="42" title="Emil von Behring" label="Emil Adolf von Behring"/>
<link wikidata="Q76425" start="49" end="67" title="Emil von Behring" label="Emil Adolf Behring"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="114" end="126" title="physiologist" label="physiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="149" end="186" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q134649" start="248" end="258" title="diphtheria" label="diphtheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q584135" start="259" end="268" title="antitoxin" label="antitoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170365" start="510" end="527" title="Prussian nobility" label="Prussian nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q675291" start="662" end="681" title="Province of Prussia" label="Province of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2800779" start="687" end="693" title="Ławice" label="Ławice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135409" start="695" end="707" title="Iława County" label="Iława County"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="709" end="715" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="860" end="866" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q412393" start="998" end="1006" title="iodoform" label="iodoform"/>
<link wikidata="Q161437" start="1738" end="1751" title="ophthalmology" label="ophthalmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="1889" end="1895" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="1977" end="1985" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q442225" start="2338" end="2358" title="Kitasato Shibasaburō" label="Kitasato Shibasaburō"/>
<link wikidata="Q134649" start="2429" end="2439" title="diphtheria" label="diphtheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q47790" start="2444" end="2451" title="tetanus" label="tetanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79803" start="2506" end="2516" title="guinea-pig" label="guinea-pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="2622" end="2632" title="antibodies" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q110084" start="2645" end="2650" title="Serum (blood)" label="serum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29026864" start="3177" end="3238" title="Cameron Prize of the University of Edinburgh" label="Cameron Prize for Therapeutics of the University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q162297" start="3272" end="3281" title="Hygienics" label="Hygienics"/>
<link wikidata="Q155354" start="3320" end="3341" title="University of Marburg" label="University of Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q89444" start="3411" end="3427" title="Hans Horst Meyer" label="Hans Horst Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q411288" start="3543" end="3556" title="tetanus toxin" label="tetanus toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="3581" end="3618" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q420496" start="3650" end="3665" title="Antiserum" label="serum therapies"/>
<link wikidata="Q442225" start="3709" end="3729" title="Kitasato Shibasaburō" label="Kitasato Shibasaburō"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="3932" end="3969" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979192" start="4379" end="4385" title="Bovinae" label="bovine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="4386" end="4398" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869" start="4499" end="4506" title="Marburg" label="Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q693356" start="4508" end="4521" title="Hessen-Nassau" label="Hessen-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q581398" start="4566" end="4578" title="Dade Behring" label="Dade Behring"/>
<link wikidata="Q472451" start="4609" end="4629" title="Siemens Healthineers" label="Siemens Healthineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q692524" start="4635" end="4646" title="CSL Behring" label="CSL Behring"/>
<link wikidata="Q507154" start="4698" end="4706" title="Novartis" label="Novartis"/>
<link wikidata="Q155354" start="4756" end="4777" title="University of Marburg" label="University of Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="4831" end="4848" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="4879" end="4926" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="4930" end="4936" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q57089" start="4997" end="5009" title="Paul Ehrlich" label="Paul Ehrlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q162684" start="5850" end="5857" title="Charité" label="Charité"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="5884" end="5890" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q173292" start="6064" end="6069" title="Capri" label="Capri"/>
<link wikidata="Q12706" start="6146" end="6157" title="Maxim Gorky" label="Maxim Gorky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496254" start="6497" end="6536" title="University and State Library Düsseldorf" label="University and State Library Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406985" start="6553" end="6585" title="German inventors and discoverers" label="German inventors and discoverers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53374" wikidata="Q841418" url="?curid=53374" title="Strategic bombing">
<text>Strategic bombing is a systematically organized and executed military attack from the air which can utilize strategic bombers, long- or medium-range missiles, or nuclear-armed fighter-bomber aircraft to attack targets deemed vital to the enemy&#x27;s war-making capability. It is a military strategy used in total war with the goal of defeating the enemy by destroying its morale, its economic ability to produce and transport materiel to the theatres of military operations, or both. The term terror bombing is used to describe the strategic bombing of civilian targets without military value, in the hope of damaging an enemy&#x27;s morale.

One of the strategies of war is to demoralize the enemy so that peace or surrender becomes preferable to continuing the conflict. Strategic bombing has been used to this end. The phrase &quot;terror bombing&quot; entered the English lexicon towards the end of World War II and many strategic bombing campaigns and individual raids have been described as terror bombing by commentators and historians. Because the term has pejorative connotations, some, including the Allies of World War II, have preferred to use euphemisms such as &quot;will to resist&quot; and &quot;morale bombings&quot;.

The theoretical distinction between tactical and strategic air warfare was developed between the two world wars. Some leading theorists of strategic air warfare during this period were the Italian Giulio Douhet, the Trenchard school in the United Kingdom, and General Billy Mitchell in the United States. These theorists were highly influential, both on the military justification for an independent air force (such as the Royal Air Force) and in influencing political thoughts on a future war as exemplified by Stanley Baldwin&#x27;s 1932 comment that &quot;the bomber will always get through&quot;.

==Enemy morale==
One of the aims of war is to demoralize the enemy; facing continual death and destruction may make the prospect of peace or surrender preferable. The proponents of strategic bombing between the world wars, such as General Douhet, expected that direct attacks upon an enemy country&#x27;s cities by strategic bombers would lead to a rapid collapse of civilian morale so that political pressure to sue for peace would lead to a rapid conclusion. When such attacks were tried in the 1930s—in the Spanish Civil War and the Second Sino-Japanese War—they were ineffective. Commentators observed the failures and some air forces, such as the Luftwaffe, concentrated their efforts upon direct support of the troops.

==The term &quot;terror bombing&quot; ==
&quot;Terror bombing&quot; is a term used for aerial attacks planned to weaken or break enemy morale. Use of the term to refer to aerial attacks implies the attacks are criminal according to the law of war, or if within the laws of war are nevertheless a moral crime. According to John Algeo in &quot;Fifty Years among the New Words: A Dictionary of Neologisms 1941–1991&quot;, the first recorded usage of &quot;Terror bombing&quot; in a United States publication was in a &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot; article dated June 1941, a finding confirmed by the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot;.

Aerial attacks described as terror bombing are often long range strategic bombing raids, although attacks which result in the deaths of civilians may also be described as such, or if the attacks involve fighters strafing they may be labelled &quot;terror attacks&quot;.

German propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels and other high-ranking officials of Nazi Germany frequently described attacks by the Royal Air Force (RAF) and the United States Army Air Forces (USAAF) during their strategic bombing campaigns as &quot;Terrorangriffe&quot;—terror attacks. The Allied governments usually described their bombing of cities with euphemisms such as area bombing (RAF) or precision bombing (USAAF), and for most of World War II the Allied news media did the same. However, at a SHAEF press conference on 16 February 1945, two days after the bombing of Dresden, British Air Commodore Colin McKay Grierson replied to a question by one of the journalists that the primary target of the bombing had been on communications to prevent the Germans from moving military supplies and to stop movement in all directions if possible. He then added in an offhand remark that the raid also helped destroy &quot;what is left of German morale.&quot; Howard Cowan, an Associated Press war correspondent, filed a story about the Dresden raid. The military press censor at SHAEF made a mistake and allowed the Cowan cable to go out starting with &quot;Allied air bosses have made the long awaited decision to adopt deliberate terror bombing of great German population centers as a ruthless expedient to hasten Hitler&#x27;s doom.&quot; There were follow-up newspaper editorials on the issue and a longtime opponent of strategic bombing, Richard Stokes MP, asked questions in the House of Commons on 6 March.

The controversy stirred up by the Cowan news report reached the highest levels of the British Government when on 28 March 1945 the Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, sent a memo by telegram to General Ismay for the British Chiefs of Staff and the Chief of the Air Staff in which he started with the sentence &quot;It seems to me that the moment has come when the question of bombing of German cities simply for the sake of increasing the terror, though under other pretexts, should be reviewed...&quot; Under pressure from the Chiefs of Staff and in response to the views expressed by Chief of the Air Staff Sir Charles Portal, and the head of Bomber Command, Arthur &quot;Bomber&quot; Harris, among others, Churchill withdrew his memo and issued a new one. This was completed on 1 April 1945 and started instead with the usual euphemism used when referring to strategic bombing: &quot;It seems to me that the moment has come when the question of the so called &#x27;area-bombing&#x27; of German cities should be reviewed from the point of view of our own interests...&quot;.

Many strategic bombing campaigns and individual raids of aerial warfare have been described as &quot;terror bombing&quot; by commentators and historians since the end of World War II, but because the term has pejorative connotations, others have denied that such bombing campaigns and raids are examples of &quot;terror bombing&quot;.

==Defensive measures==
Defensive measures against air raids include:
* attempting to shoot down attackers using fighter aircraft and anti-aircraft guns or surface-to-air missiles
* the use of air raid shelters to protect the population
* air raid sirens
* setting up civil defence organisations with air raid wardens, firewatchers, rescue and recovery personnel, firefighting crews, and demolition and repair teams to rectify damage
* Blackouts – extinguishing all lights at night to make bombing less accurate
* Dispersal of war-critical factories to areas difficult for bombers to reach
* Duplication of war-critical manufacturing to &quot;shadow factories&quot;
* Building factories in tunnels or other underground locations that are protected from bombs
* Setting up decoy targets in rural areas, mimicking an urban area with fires intended to look like the initial effects of a raid

==History and origins==

===World War I===
Strategic bombing was used in World War I, though it was not understood in its present form. The first aerial bombing of a city was on 6 August 1914 when the German Army Zeppelin Z VI bombed, with artillery shells, the Belgian city of Liège, killing nine civilians. The second attack was on the night of 24–25 August 1914, when eight bombs were dropped from a German airship onto the Belgian city of Antwerp.

The first effective strategic bombing was pioneered by the Royal Naval Air Service (RNAS) in 1914. The mission was to attack the Zeppelin production lines and their sheds at Cologne (Köln) and Düsseldorf. Led by Charles Rumney Samson, the force of four aircraft inflicted minor damage on the sheds. The raid was repeated a month later with slightly more success. Within a year or so, specialized aircraft and dedicated bomber squadrons were in service on both sides. These were generally used for tactical bombing; the aim was that of directly harming enemy troops, strongpoints, or equipment, usually within a relatively small distance of the front line. Eventually, attention turned to the possibility of causing &quot;indirect&quot; harm to the enemy by systematically attacking vital rear-area resources.

The most well known attacks were those done by Zeppelins over England through the course of the war. The first aerial bombardment of English civilians was on January 19, 1915, when two Zeppelins dropped 24 fifty-kilogram (110-pound) high-explosive bombs and ineffective three-kilogram incendiaries on the Eastern England towns of Great Yarmouth, Sheringham, King&#x27;s Lynn, and the surrounding villages. In all, four people were killed and sixteen injured, and monetary damage was estimated at £7,740 (about US$36,000 at the time). German airships also bombed on other fronts, for example in January 1915 on Liepāja in Latvia.
In 1915 there were 19 more raids, in which 37 tons of bombs were dropped, killing 181 people and injuring 455. Raids continued in 1916. London was accidentally bombed in May, and in July the Kaiser allowed directed raids against urban centers. There were 23 airship raids in 1916, in which 125 tons of ordnance were dropped, killing 293 people and injuring 691. Gradually British air defenses improved. In 1917 and 1918, there were only 11 Zeppelin raids against England, and the final raid occurred on August 5, 1918, which resulted in the death of KK Peter Strasser, commander of the German Naval Airship Department.

By the end of the war, 51 raids had been undertaken, in which 5,806 bombs were dropped, killing 557 people and injuring 1,358. These raids caused only minor hampering of wartime production, by later standards. A much greater impact was the diversion of twelve aircraft squadrons, many guns, and over 10,000 men to air defenses. The raids generated a wave of hysteria, partially caused by media. This revealed the tactic&#x27;s potential as a weapon that was of use for propagandists on both sides. The late Zeppelin raids were complemented by the Gotha bomber, which was the first heavier-than-air bomber to be used for strategic bombing.

The French army on June 15, 1915, attacked the German town of Karlsruhe, killing 29 civilians and wounding 58. Further raids followed until the Armistice in 1918. In a raid in the afternoon of June 22, 1916, the pilots used outdated maps and bombed the location of the abandoned railway station, where a circus tent was placed, killing 120 persons, most of them children.

The British also stepped up their strategic bombing campaign. In late 1915, the order was given for attacks on German industrial targets, and the 41st Wing was formed from units of the RNAS and Royal Flying Corps. The RNAS took to the strategic bombing in a bigger way than the RFC, who were focused on supporting the infantry actions of the Western Front. At first, the RNAS attacked the German submarines in their moorings and then steelworks further in targeting the origin of the submarines themselves.

In early 1918 they operated their &quot;round the clock&quot; bombing raid, with lighter bombers attacking the town of Trier by day and large HP O/400s attacking by night. The Independent Force, an expanded bombing group, and the first independent strategic bombing force, was created in April 1918. By the end of the war, the force had aircraft that could reach Berlin, but these were never used.

===Interwar period===
Following the war, the concept of strategic bombing developed. Calculations of the number of dead to the weight of bombs would have a profound effect on the attitudes of the British authorities and population in the interwar years. As bombers became larger, it was fully expected that deaths would dramatically increase. The fear of aerial attack on such a scale was one of the fundamental driving forces of the appeasement of Nazi Germany in the 1930s.

These early developments of aerial warfare led to two distinct branches in the writings of air warfare theorists: tactical air warfare and strategic air warfare. Tactical air warfare was developed as part of a combined-arms attack which would be developed to a significant degree by Germany, and which contributed much to the success of the Wehrmacht during the first four years (1939–42) of World War II. The Luftwaffe became a major element of the German blitzkrieg.

Some leading theorists of strategic air warfare, namely strategic bombing during this period were the Italian Giulio Douhet, the Trenchard school in Great Britain, and General Billy Mitchell in the United States. These theorists thought that aerial bombardment of the enemy&#x27;s homeland would be an important part of future wars. Not only would such attacks weaken the enemy by destroying important military infrastructure, they would also break the morale of the civilian population, forcing their government to capitulate. Although area bombing theorists acknowledged that measures could be taken to defend against bombers—using fighter planes and anti-aircraft artillery—the maxim of the times remained &quot;the bomber will always get through&quot;. These theorists for strategic bombing argued that it would be necessary to develop a fleet of strategic bombers during peacetime, both to deter any potential enemy, and also in the case of a war, to be able to deliver devastating attacks on the enemy industries and cities while suffering from relatively few friendly casualties before victory was achieved.

In the period between the two world wars, military thinkers from several nations advocated strategic bombing as the logical and obvious way to employ aircraft. Domestic political considerations saw to it that the British worked harder on the concept than most. The British Royal Flying Corps and Royal Naval Air Service of the Great War had been merged in 1918 to create a separate air force, which spent much of the following two decades fighting for survival in an environment of severe government spending constraints.

In Italy, the airpower prophet General Giulio Douhet asserted the basic principle of strategic bombing was the offensive, and there was no defense against carpet bombing and poison gas attacks. The seeds of Douhet&#x27;s apocalyptic predictions found fertile soil in France, Germany, and the United States, where excerpts from his book &quot;The Command of the Air&quot; (1921) were published. These visions of cities laid waste by bombing also gripped the popular imagination and found expression in novels such as Douhet&#x27;s &quot;The War of 19--&quot; (1930) and H. G. Wells&#x27;s &quot;The Shape of Things to Come&quot; (1933) (filmed by Alexander Korda as &quot;Things to Come&quot; (1936)).

Douhet&#x27;s proposals were hugely influential among air force enthusiasts, arguing as they did that the bombing air arm was the most important, powerful, and invulnerable part of any military. He envisaged future wars as lasting a matter of a few weeks. While each opposing Army and Navy fought an inglorious holding campaign, the respective Air Forces would dismantle their enemies&#x27; country, and if one side did not rapidly surrender, both would be so weak after the first few days that the war would effectively cease. Fighter aircraft would be relegated to spotting patrols but would be essentially powerless to resist the mighty bombers. In support of this theory, he argued for targeting of the civilian population as much as any military target, since a nation&#x27;s morale was as important a resource as its weapons. Paradoxically, he suggested that this would actually reduce total casualties, since &quot;The time would soon come when to put an end to horror and suffering, the people themselves, driven by the instinct of self-preservation, would rise up and demand an end to the war...&quot;. As a result of Douhet&#x27;s proposals, air forces allocated greater resources to their bomber squadrons than to their fighters, and the &#x27;dashing young pilots&#x27; promoted in the propaganda of the time were invariably bomber pilots.

Royal Air Force leaders, in particular Air Chief Marshal Hugh Trenchard, believed the key to retaining their independence from the senior services was to lay stress on what they saw as the unique ability of a modern air force to win wars by unaided strategic bombing. As the speed and altitude of bombers increased in proportion to fighter aircraft, the prevailing strategic understanding became &quot;the bomber will always get through&quot;. Although anti-aircraft guns and fighter aircraft had proved effective in the Great War, it was accepted there was little warring nations could do to prevent massive civilian casualties from strategic bombing. High civilian morale and retaliation in kind were seen as the only answers—a later generation would revisit this, as Mutual Assured Destruction.

During the interwar period (1919–1939), the use of aerial bombing was developed as part of British foreign policy in its colonies, with Hugh Trenchard as its leading proponent, Sir Charles Portal, Sir Arthur Harris, and Sidney Bufton. The Trenchard School theories were successfully put into action in Mesopotamia (modern-day Iraq) where RAF bombers used high-explosive bombs and strafing runs against Arab forces. The techniques of so-called &quot;Air Control&quot; also included target marking and locating, as well as formation flying. Arthur Harris, a young RAF squadron commander (later nicknamed &quot;Bomber&quot;), reported after a mission in 1924, &quot;The Arab and Kurd now know what real bombing means, in casualties and damage. They know that within 45 minutes a full-sized village can be practically wiped out and a third of its inhabitants killed or injured&quot;.

On an official level, RAF directives stressed:
A statement clearly pointed out that the ability of aircraft to inflict punishment could be open to abuse:
In British strikes over Yemen in over a six-month period, sixty tons of bombs were dropped in over 1,200 cumulative flying hours. By August 1928, total losses in ground fighting and air attack, on the Yemeni side, were 65 killed or wounded (one RAF pilot was killed and one airman wounded). Between the wars the RAF conducted 26 separate air operations within the Aden Protectorate. The majority were conducted in response to persistent banditry or to restore the Government&#x27;s authority. Excluding operations against Yemeni forces—which had effectively ceased by 1934—a total of twelve deaths were attributed to air attacks conducted between 1919 and 1939. Bombing as a military strategy proved to be an effective and efficient way for the British to police their Middle East protectorates in the 1920s. Fewer men were required as compared to ground forces.

Pre-war planners, on the whole, vastly overestimated the damage bombers could do, and underestimated the resilience of civilian populations. Jingoistic national pride played a major role: for example, at a time when Germany was still disarmed and France was Britain&#x27;s only European rival, Trenchard boasted, &quot;the French in a bombing duel would probably squeal before we did&quot;. At the time, the expectation was any new war would be brief and very brutal. A British Cabinet planning document in 1938 predicted that, if war with Germany broke out, 35% of British homes would be hit by bombs in the first three weeks. This type of expectation would justify the appeasement of Hitler in the late 1930s.

During the Spanish Civil War, the bombing of Guernica by German aviators including the Condor Legion, under Nationalist command, resulted in its near destruction. Casualties were estimated to be between 500 and 1500. Though this figure was relatively small, aerial bombers and their weaponry were continually improving—already suggesting the devastation that was to come in the near future. Yet the theory that &quot;the bomber will always get through&quot; started to appear doubtful, as stated by the U.S.  Attaché in 1937, &quot;The peacetime theory of the complete invulnerability of the modern type of bombardment airplane no longer holds. The increased speeds of both the bombardment and pursuit plane have worked in favor of the pursuit ... The flying fortress died in Spain.&quot;

Large scale bombing of the civilian population, thought to be demoralizing to the enemy, seemed to have the opposite effect. E. B. Strauss surmised, &quot;Observers state that one of the most remarkable effects of the bombing of open towns in Government Spain had been the welding together into a formidable fighting force of groups of political factions who were previously at each other&#x27;s throats...&quot;, a sentiment with which Hitler&#x27;s Luftwaffe, supporting the Spanish Nationalists, generally agreed.

===World War II===
In terms of scale, the strategic bombing conducted in World War II was unlike any before. The bombing campaigns then conducted over Europe and Asia could involve aircraft dropping thousands of tons of conventional bombs or, as happened twice in Japan in 1945, devastating much of a city all at once with an atomic bomb.

Area bombardment came to prominence during World War II, with the use by attacking forces of large numbers of unguided gravity bombs, often mixed with a high proportion of incendiary devices to strike the target region indiscriminately: to kill war workers, to destroy materiel, and to demoralize the enemy. In high-enough concentration, such bombing could start a destructive firestorm. Often, high-explosive delay-action bombs could kill or intimidate people fighting the fires initially caused by the incendiary bombs.

(During WWII, such results required multiple aircraft, often returning to the target in waves. Whereas nowadays, one large bomber or missile could cause the same effect on a small area [a town or an airfield, for example] by releasing a relatively-large number of smaller bombs.)

Strategic bombing campaigns were conducted in Europe and Asia. The Germans and Japanese mostly used smaller twin-engined bombers with a typical payload of less than ; they did not manufacture larger aircraft to any significant extent. By comparison, the British and American militaries (which at first used similarly-sized bombers early in the war), soon developed significantly-larger strategic bombers with four engines. The increased payloads of these big airplanes ranged from for the B-17 Flying Fortress on long-range missions, to for the B-24 Liberator, for the Avro Lancaster, and B-29 Superfortress, (also with some specialized Allied aircraft, such as the modified &quot;Special B&quot; Avro Lancaster, able to carry a gigantic [ Grand Slam).] munition.

During the first year of the war in Europe, strategic bombing was developed through &quot;trial-and-error.&quot; The &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; had been attacking both civilian and military targets from the first day of the war, when Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939. A strategic-bombing campaign was launched by the Germans as a precursor to the invasion of the United Kingdom to force the RAF to engage the Luftwaffe and so to be destroyed either on the ground or in the air. That tactic failed, and the RAF began bombing German cities on 11 May 1940. After the Battle of Britain, the Germans launched their night time Blitz hoping to break British morale and to have the British be cowed into making peace.

At first the Luftwaffe raids took place in daylight, but changed to night bombing attacks when losses became unsustainable. The RAF, who had preferred precision bombing, also switched to night bombing, also due to excessive losses. Before the Rotterdam Blitz on 14 May 1940 the British restricted themselves to tactical bombing west of the Rhine and naval installations. The day after the Rotterdam Blitz a new directive was issued to the RAF to attack targets in the Ruhr, including oil plants and other civilian industrial targets which aided the German war effort, such as blast furnaces that at night were self-illuminating. After the Butt Report (released in September 1941) proved the inadequacy of RAF Bomber Command training methods and equipment, the RAF adopted an area-attack strategy, by which it hoped to impede Germany&#x27;s war production, her powers of resistance (by destroying resources and forcing Germany to divert resources from her front lines to defend her air space), and her morale. The RAF dramatically improved its navigation so that on average its bombs hit closer to target. Accuracy never exceeded a radius from point of aim in any case.

The United States Army Air Forces adopted a policy of daylight precision bombing for greater accuracy as, for example, during the Schweinfurt raids. That doctrine, based on the erroneous supposition that bombers could adequately defend themselves against air attack, entailed much higher American losses until long-range fighter escorts (e.g. the Mustang) became available. Conditions in the European theatre made it very difficult to achieve the accuracy achieved using the exceptional and top-secret Norden optical bombsight in the clear skies over the desert bombing ranges of Nevada and California. Raids over Europe commonly took place in conditions of very poor visibility, with targets partly or wholly obscured by thick cloud, smokescreens, or smoke from fires started by previous raids. As a result, bomb loads were regularly dropped &quot;blind&quot; using dead-reckoning methods little different from those used by the RAF night bombers. In addition, only the leading bomber in a formation actually utilized the Norden sight, the rest of the formation dropping their bombs only when they saw the lead aircraft&#x27;s bombload falling away. Since even a very tight bomber formation could cover a vast area, the scatter of bombs was likely to be considerable. Add to these difficulties the disruptive effects of increasingly accurate anti-aircraft fire and head-on attacks by fighter aircraft and the theoretical accuracy of daylight bombing was often hard to achieve. Accuracy, described as &quot;pinpoint&quot;, never exceeded the best British average of about a radius from point of aim in any case. Postwar German engineers considered the bombing of railways, trains, canals, and roads more harmful to production than attacks on factories themselves, Sir Roy Fedden (in his report on a postwar British scientific intelligence mission) calling it &quot;fatal&quot; and saying it reduced aero-engine production by two thirds (from a maximum output of 5,000 to 7,000 a month).

Strategic bombing was a way of taking the war into Europe while Allied ground forces were unable to do so. Between them, Allied air forces claimed to be able to bomb &quot;around the clock&quot;. In fact, few targets were ever hit by British and American forces the same day, the strategic isolation of Normandy on D-Day and the bombing of Dresden in February 1945 being exceptions rather than the rule. There were generally no coordinated plans for the around-the-clock bombing of any target.

In some cases, single missions have been considered to constitute strategic bombing. The bombing of Peenemünde was such an event, as was the bombing of the Ruhr dams. The Peenemünde mission delayed Nazi Germany&#x27;s V-2 program enough that it did not become a major factor in the outcome of the war.

Soviet Air Forces conducted strategic bombings of Helsinki, the capital of Finland, between 1939 and 1944, with Finland being subjected to a number of bombing campaigns by the USSR in that period. The largest were three raids in February 1944, which have been called &quot;The Great Raids Against Helsinki&quot;. The Finnish Air Force responded to the air raids with a series of night infiltration bombings of ADD airfields near Leningrad.

Strategic bombing in Europe never reached the decisive completeness the American campaign against Japan achieved, helped in part by the fragility of Japanese housing, which was particularly vulnerable to firebombing through the use of incendiary devices. The destruction of German infrastructure became apparent, but the Allied campaign against Germany only really succeeded when the Allies began targeting oil refineries and transportation in the last year of the war. At the same time, the strategic bombing of Germany was used as a morale booster for the Allies in the period before the land war resumed in Western Europe in June 1944.
In the Asiatic-Pacific Theater, the Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service and the Imperial Japanese Army Air Service frequently used strategic bombing over Singaporean, Burmese, and Chinese cities such as Shanghai, Guangzhou, Nanjing, Chongqing, Singapore, and Rangoon. However, the Japanese military in most places advanced quickly enough that a strategic bombing campaign was unnecessary, and the Japanese aircraft industry was incapable of producing truly strategic bombers in any event. In those places where it was required, the smaller Japanese bombers (in comparison to British and American types) did not carry a bombload sufficient to inflict the sort of damage regularly occurring at that point in the war in Europe, or later in Japan.

The development of the B-29 gave the United States a bomber with sufficient range to reach the Japanese home islands from the safety of American bases in the Pacific or western China. The capture of the Japanese island of Iwo Jima further enhanced the capabilities that the Americans possessed in their strategic bombing campaign. High-explosive and incendiary bombs were used against Japan to devastating effect, with greater indiscriminate loss of life in the firebombing of Tokyo on March 9–10, 1945 than was caused either by the Dresden mission, or the atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima or Nagasaki. Unlike the USAAF&#x27;s strategic bombing campaign in Europe, with its avowed (if unachievable) objective of precision bombing of strategic targets, the bombing of Japanese cities involved the deliberate targeting of residential zones from the outset. Bomb loads included very high proportions of incendiaries, with the intention of igniting the highly combustible wooden houses common in Japanese cities and thereby generating firestorms.

The final development of strategic bombing in World War II was the use of nuclear weapons. On August 6 and 9, 1945, the United States exploded nuclear bombs over Hiroshima and Nagasaki, killing 105,000 people and inflicting a psychological shock on the Japanese nation. On August 15, Emperor Hirohito announced the surrender of Japan, stating: 

Moreover, the enemy has begun to employ a new and most cruel bomb, the power of which to do damage is indeed incalculable, taking the toll of many innocent lives. Should We continue to fight, it would not only result in an ultimate collapse and obliteration of the Japanese nation but also it would lead to the total extinction of human civilization. Such being the case, how are We to save the millions of Our subjects; or to atone Ourselves before the hallowed spirits of Our Imperial Ancestors? This is the reason why We have ordered the acceptance of the provisions of the Joint Declaration of the Powers.

===Cold War===
Nuclear weapons defined strategic bombing during the Cold War. The age of the massive strategic bombing campaign had come to an end. It was replaced by more devastating attacks using improved targeting and weapons technology. Strategic bombing by the Great Powers also became politically indefensible. The political fallout resulting from the destruction being broadcast on the evening news ended more than one strategic bombing campaign.

==== Korean War ====
Strategic bombing during the Korean war was a huge part of the aerial warfare for the United States. It was widely used at targeting infrastructure and economic targets forcing the USSR and China to leverage more economically and materially in the supporting North Korean efforts. It was also consistently reliable for the US even amongst Chinese and USSR interference throughout the war. 

While nuclear weapons were never used, at the outset of the war the US Strategic Air Command was ready with 9 B-29s from the 9th Bomb Wing acting as an atomic task force which were sent to Guam on standby duty. 

The United States Air Force (USAF) at first conducted only tactical attacks against strategic targets. Because it was widely considered a limited war, the Truman Administration prohibited the USAF to bomb near the borders of China and the Soviet Union in fear of provoking the countries to enter into the war. Common targets were railroad yards, bridges, and airfields, seeking to disrupt supply lines and ability to produce materials for the war. The first notable strategic bombing was a bombing consisting of nine B-29s which bombed the Rising Sun oil refinery at Wonsan on July 6, 1950, followed by a bombing of a chemical plant at Hungnam. Later that month on July 30 a Chosen nitrogen explosives factory at Hungnam was bombed destroying the largest of the Konan Industrial-Chemical Complex. 

The Chinese intervention in the war in November 1950 changed the aerial bombing policy dramatically. In response to the Chinese intervention, the USAF carried out an intensive bombing campaign against North Korea to demoralize the North Koreans and inflict as much economic cost to North Korea in order to reduce their ability to wage war. The largest incendiary raid of the war had 70 B-29s drop firebombs on the town of Sinuiju and was a representation for the change in aerial bombing policy. The extensive bombing raids on North Korea continued until the armistice agreement was signed between communist and UN forces on July 27, 1953.

==== Vietnam War ====
In the Vietnam War, the strategic bombing of North Vietnam in Operation Rolling Thunder could have been more extensive, but fear by the Johnson Administration of the entry of China into the war led to restrictions on the selection of targets, as well as only a gradual escalation of intensity.

The aim of the bombing campaign was to demoralize the North Vietnamese, damage their economy, and reduce their capacity to support the war in the hope that they would negotiate for peace, but it failed to have those effects. The Nixon Administration continued this sort of limited strategic bombing for most of the war but pivoted towards the ending of it. Operation Linebacker campaigns were much heavier bombing campaigns taking off many of the restrictions that were placed initially and began flying B-52 bombers. Images such as that of Kim Phuc Phan Thi (although this incident was the result of close air support rather than strategic bombing) disturbed the American public enough to demand a stop to the campaign.

Due to this, and the ineffectiveness of carpet bombing (partly because of a lack of identifiable targets), new precision weapons were developed. The new weapons allowed more effective and efficient bombing with reduced civilian casualties. High civilian casualties had always been the hallmark of strategic bombing, but later in the Cold War, this began to change.

Laos was also bombed heavily during the Vietnam War. While originally denied by the US government Laos became the most heavily bombed country per capita as the result of more than 2 million tons of ordinance dropped. Laos contained heavy supply lines for communist troops and the US sought to destroy them safely before they could enter Vietnam and be used against American troops. The first of many targets within the country was the &quot;Plain of Jars&quot; which was known as a logistical center for military forces to gather and is the main air base in Urdon. While there were two different aerial operations held within Laos, Operation Steel Tiger is the one that focused on the Strategic Bombing of supporting civilian infrastructure that could aid in the up-and-coming communist regime and was assisting in getting rebels to aid the North Vietnamese military.

Strategic bombing was entering a new phase of high-intensity attacks, specifically targeting factories that take years to build and enormous investment capital. These new high-intensity and focused attacks made extra use of newer and modern fighter aircraft such as the McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II enabling less reliance on heavier, more vulnerable bombers.

==== Iran-Iraq War ====

After the fall of 1981, in the context of the Iranian ground counter-offensives, the USSR lifted their arms embargo and massively rearmed Iraq, including with 40 MiG-25s, which enabled the Iraqi air force to challenge Iran&#x27;s F-14s in their air space. Iraq used Tu-22 Blinder and Tu-16 Badger strategic bombers to carry out long-range high-speed raids on Iranian cities, including Tehran. Fighter-bombers such as the MiG-25 Foxbat and Su-22 Fitter were used against smaller or shorter range targets, as well as escorting the strategic bombers. Civilian and industrial targets were hit by the raids, and each successful raid inflicted economic damage from regular strategic bombing. Iran also launched several retaliatory air raids on Iraq, while primarily shelling border cities such as Basra. Iran also bought some Scud missiles from Libya and launched them against Baghdad. These too inflicted damage upon Iraq.

===Post–Cold War===
Strategic bombing in the post–Cold War era is defined by American advances in and the use of smart munitions. The developments in guided munitions meant that the Coalition forces in the First Gulf War were able to use them, although the majority—93%—of bombs dropped in that conflict were still conventional, unguided bombs. More frequently in the Kosovo War, and the initial phases of Operation Iraqi Freedom of 2003, strategic bombing campaigns were notable for the heavy use of precision weaponry by those countries that possessed them. Although bombing campaigns were still strategic in their aims, the widespread area bombing tactics of World War II had mostly disappeared. This led to significantly fewer civilian casualties associated with previous bombing campaigns, though it has not brought about a complete end to civilian deaths or collateral property damage.

Additionally, strategic bombing via smart munitions is now possible through the use of aircraft that have been considered traditionally tactical in nature such as the F-16 Fighting Falcon or F-15E Strike Eagle, which had been used during Operation Desert Storm, Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom to destroy targets that would have required large formations of strategic bombers during World War II.

During the Kosovo campaign NATO forces bombed targets far from Kosovo like bridges in Novi Sad, power plants around Belgrade and flea market in Nis.

During the 2008 South Ossetia war Russian aircraft attacked the shipbuilding center of Poti.

==== Russian invasion of Ukraine ====

As part of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, missile and drone waves hit Ukraine infrastructure periodically, causing damage, deaths, injuries, and deeply affecting energy distribution across Ukraine and nearby countries. By late November 2022, nearly half of the country&#x27;s energy systems had been destroyed, leaving millions of Ukrainians without power; energy workers rushed to restore services. The methodical attacks on power stations and electrical nodes imposed large economic and practical costs on Ukraine, with a severe impact for millions of civilians over the winter. It was assumed that Russia&#x27;s strategic intention was to break the will of the Ukrainian population to continue the war.

==Aerial bombardment and international law==

Air warfare must comply with laws and customs of war, including international humanitarian law by protecting the victims of the conflict and refraining from attacks on protected persons.

These restraints on aerial warfare are covered by the general laws of war, because unlike the war on land and at sea—which is specifically covered by rules such as the 1907 Hague Convention and Protocol I additional to the Geneva Conventions, which contain pertinent restrictions, prohibitions and guidelines—there are no treaties specific to aerial warfare.

To be legal, aerial operations must comply with the principles of humanitarian law: &quot;military necessity&quot;, &quot;distinction&quot;, and &quot;proportionality&quot;: An attack or action must be intended to help in the defeat of the enemy; it must be an attack on a legitimate military objective, and the harm caused to protected civilians or civilian property must be proportional and not excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated.

==Pioneers ==
* Henry H. &quot;Hap&quot; Arnold, USAF
* Giulio Douhet, Regia Aeronautica (Italy)
* Arthur &quot;Bomber&quot; Harris, RAF
* Curtis LeMay, USAF
* Billy Mitchell, USAAS
* Alexander P. de Seversky in &quot;Victory Through Air Power&quot; (1942 book and 1943 film)
* Carl Spaatz, USAF
* Hugh Trenchard, RAF

== See also ==
* Dahiya doctrine

==References==
Informational notes
Citations
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Trimble, Michael M. &quot;Air Force Strategic Bombing and Its Counterpoints from World War I to Vietnam.&quot; &quot;Joint Force Quarterly : JFQ&quot; 91 (2018): 82–89. Web.
* McCoy A. Reflections on History&#x27;s Largest Air War. &quot;Critical Asian Studies&quot;. 2013;45(3):481-489. doi:10.1080/14672715.2013.829670

===Further reading===

* Biddle, Tami Davis. &quot;Rhetoric and Reality in Air Warfare: The Evolution of British and American Ideas about Strategic Bombing, 1914–1945&quot; (Princeton Studies in International History and Politics) (2004)
* Boog, Horst, ed. &quot;The Conduct of the Air War in the Second World War: An International Comparison&quot; (1992) 763 pp.; very important anthology by major researchers
* Boog, Horst, ed. &quot;Germany and the Second World War: Volume VII: The Strategic Air War in Europe and the War in the West and East Asia, 1943–1944/5&quot; (Oxford UP, 2006), 928pp official German history vol 7 excerpt and text search; online edition
* Clodfelter, Mark. &quot;Aiming to Break Will: America&#x27;s World War II Bombing of German Morale and its Ramifications&quot;, &quot;Journal of Strategic Studies&quot;, June 2010, Vol. 33 Issue 3, pp. 401–35
* Clodfelter, Mark. &quot;Beneficial Bombing: The Progressive Foundations of American Air Power, 1917–1945&quot; (University of Nebraska Press; 2010) 347 pp.
* Craven, Wesley Frank, and James Lea Cate. &quot;The Army Air Forces in World War II&quot; (7 vols 1948–1958; rpr. 1985), official US Army Air Force history
* Davis, Richard G. &quot;Bombing Strategy Shifts, 1944–45&quot;, &quot;Air Power History&quot; 39 (1989) 33–45
* Futrell, Robert Frank. &quot;Ideas, concepts, doctrine: A history of basic thinking in the United States Air Force, 1907–1964&quot; (2 vols 1974)
* Grayling, Anthony C. &quot;Among the dead cities: The history and moral legacy of the WWII bombing of civilians in Germany and Japan&quot; (Bloomsbury Publishing USA, 2009)
* Griffith, Charles. &quot;The quest: Haywood Hansell and American strategic bombing in World War II&quot; (1999) online edition
* Hansell, Jr., Haywood S. &quot;Air Plan That Defeated Hitler&quot; (1980) online version
* Kennett, Lee B. &quot;A History of Strategic Bombing&quot; (1982)
* Koch, H. W. &quot;The Strategic Air Offensive against Germany: the Early Phase, May–September 1940.&quot; &quot;The Historical Journal&quot;, 34 (March 1991) pp. 117–41. online at JSTOR
* Levine, Alan J. &quot;The Strategic Bombing of Germany, 1940–1945&quot; (1992) online edition 
* MacIsaac, David. &quot;Strategic Bombing in World War Two&quot; (1976) story of the official American Strategic Bombing Survey 
* Messenger, Charles. &quot;&quot;Bomber&quot; Harris and the Strategic Bombing Offensive, 1939–1945&quot; (1984), defends Harris
* Morris, Craig F. &quot;The Origins of American Strategic Bombing Theory&quot; (US Naval Institute Press, 2017), 272 pp.
* Neillands, Robin. &quot;The Bomber War: The Allied Air Offensive Against Nazi Germany&quot; (Overlook Press, 2001)
* Overy. Richard. &quot;The Means to Victory: Bombs and Bombing&quot; in Overy, &quot;Why the Allies Won&quot; (1995), pp. 101–33
* Overy. Richard. &quot;The Bombers and the Bombed: Allied Air War Over Europe 1940–1945&quot; (2014), 592 pp excerpt and text search; a longer version was published in UK as &quot;The Bombing War: Europe, 1939–1945&quot; (2013), 880 pp
* 
* Sherry, Michael. &quot;The Rise of American Air Power: The Creation of Armageddon&quot; (1987), important study 1930s–1960s
* Smith, Malcolm. &quot;The Allied Air Offensive&quot;, &quot;Journal of Strategic Studies&quot; (1990) 13#1 pp. 67–83
* Spaight. James M. &quot;Bombing Vindicated&quot;] G. Bles, 1944. (Spaight was Principal Assistant Secretary of the Air Ministry) (UK)
* Verrier, Anthony. &quot;The Bomber Offensive&quot; (1968), British
* Webster, Charles and Noble Frankland, The Strategic Air Offensive Against Germany, 1939–1945 (HMSO, 1961), 4 vols. Important critical official history of RAF Bomber Command effort
* Werrell, Kenneth P. &quot;The Strategic Bombing of Germany in World War II: Costs and Accomplishments&quot;, &quot;Journal of American History&quot; 73 (1986) 702–13; in JSTOR
* Werrell, Kenneth P. &quot;Death From the Heavens: A History of Strategic Bombing&quot; (2009) Good analysis
* Wetta, Frank J., and Martin A. Novelli. &quot;Good Bombing, Bad Bombing: Hollywood, Air Warfare, and Morality in World War I and World War II.&quot; &quot;OAH Magazine of History&quot; 22.4 (2008): 25–29. online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="0" end="17" title="Strategic bombing" label="Strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q507720" start="108" end="124" title="strategic bomber" label="strategic bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="149" end="156" title="missile" label="missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q385642" start="176" end="190" title="fighter-bomber" label="fighter-bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q219087" start="282" end="299" title="military strategy" label="military strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154605" start="308" end="317" title="total war" label="total war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359118" start="427" end="435" title="materiel" label="materiel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="443" end="474" title="Theater (warfare)#Theater of operations" label="theatres of military operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="494" end="508" title="Strategic bombing" label="terror bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q331793" start="679" end="689" title="demoralization (warfare)" label="demoralize"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="1111" end="1133" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83464" start="1157" end="1167" title="euphemisms" label="euphemisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422289" start="1273" end="1281" title="tactical bombing" label="tactical"/>
<link wikidata="Q471145" start="1296" end="1307" title="air warfare" label="air warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q364463" start="1434" end="1447" title="Giulio Douhet" label="Giulio Douhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q336065" start="1453" end="1462" title="Hugh Trenchard" label="Trenchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q863201" start="1505" end="1519" title="Billy Mitchell" label="Billy Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1660" end="1675" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="1749" end="1764" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228376" start="1796" end="1830" title="the bomber will always get through" label="the bomber will always get through"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="2349" end="2366" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="2375" end="2399" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="2491" end="2500" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688002" start="2801" end="2811" title="Aerial bombardment and international law" label="law of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q371820" start="3085" end="3105" title="Reader&amp;#x27;s Digest" label="Reader&amp;#x27;s Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="3170" end="3195" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430863" start="3416" end="3424" title="strafing" label="strafing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="3502" end="3517" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3554" end="3566" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="3603" end="3618" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="3633" end="3662" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q715695" start="3684" end="3711" title="Strategic bombing during World War II" label="strategic bombing campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688003" start="3805" end="3822" title="aerial bombing of cities" label="bombing of cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788547" start="3847" end="3859" title="area bombing" label="area bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239540" start="3869" end="3886" title="precision bombing" label="precision bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q647033" start="3975" end="3980" title="SHAEF" label="SHAEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q152142" start="4038" end="4056" title="bombing of Dresden" label="bombing of Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145371" start="4080" end="4100" title="Colin McKay Grierson" label="Colin McKay Grierson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="4449" end="4465" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329262" start="4916" end="4930" title="Richard Stokes (politician)" label="Richard Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="4931" end="4933" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="5074" end="5092" title="British Government" label="British Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="5135" end="5152" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q335004" start="5181" end="5194" title="Hastings Lionel Ismay" label="General Ismay"/>
<link wikidata="Q776938" start="5573" end="5595" title="Chief of the Air Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of the Air Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q663070" start="5600" end="5614" title="Charles Portal, 1st Viscount Portal of Hungerford" label="Charles Portal"/>
<link wikidata="Q372052" start="5648" end="5680" title="Arthur Harris" label="Arthur &amp;quot;Bomber&amp;quot; Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q471145" start="6122" end="6136" title="aerial warfare" label="aerial warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="6513" end="6529" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="6534" end="6552" title="anti-aircraft guns" label="anti-aircraft guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="6556" end="6579" title="surface-to-air missiles" label="surface-to-air missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q389959" start="6593" end="6609" title="air raid shelter" label="air raid shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q695738" start="6639" end="6653" title="air raid siren" label="air raid siren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770547" start="6836" end="6845" title="Blackout (wartime)" label="Blackouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688003" start="7436" end="7460" title="aerial bombing of cities" label="aerial bombing of a city"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="7568" end="7573" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="7733" end="7740" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="7802" end="7825" title="Royal Naval Air Service" label="Royal Naval Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q191413" start="7872" end="7880" title="Zeppelin" label="Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751770" start="7908" end="7913" title="airship hangar" label="sheds"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="7917" end="7924" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="7936" end="7946" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082223" start="7955" end="7976" title="Charles Rumney Samson" label="Charles Rumney Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="8162" end="8168" title="bomber" label="bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="8786" end="8800" title="high-explosive" label="high-explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q237253" start="8883" end="8897" title="Great Yarmouth" label="Great Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q239496" start="8899" end="8909" title="Sheringham" label="Sheringham"/>
<link wikidata="Q157341" start="8911" end="8927" title="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn" label="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q167668" start="9163" end="9170" title="Liepāja" label="Liepāja"/>
<link wikidata="Q67825" start="9735" end="9749" title="Peter Strasser" label="Peter Strasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q670252" start="10349" end="10354" title="Gotha G.IV" label="Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="10383" end="10399" title="heavier-than-air" label="heavier-than-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040" start="10504" end="10513" title="Karlsruhe" label="Karlsruhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="11009" end="11027" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138" start="11442" end="11447" title="Trier" label="Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425455" start="11465" end="11474" title="Handley-Page O/400" label="HP O/400s"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820917" start="11499" end="11516" title="Independent Force, RAF" label="Independent Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="11686" end="11692" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q620737" start="12156" end="12167" title="appeasement" label="appeasement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="12171" end="12183" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q471145" start="12227" end="12241" title="aerial warfare" label="aerial warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q471145" start="12361" end="12381" title="Air warfare" label="Tactical air warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="12482" end="12489" title="Nazi Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="12540" end="12549" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="12609" end="12618" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="12656" end="12666" title="blitzkrieg" label="blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q471145" start="12695" end="12716" title="air warfare" label="strategic air warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q364463" start="12779" end="12792" title="Giulio Douhet" label="Giulio Douhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q863201" start="12845" end="12859" title="Billy Mitchell" label="Billy Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="13303" end="13316" title="fighter plane" label="fighter plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="13322" end="13345" title="anti-aircraft warfare" label="anti-aircraft artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228376" start="13384" end="13418" title="the bomber will always get through" label="the bomber will always get through"/>
<link wikidata="Q507720" start="13520" end="13536" title="strategic bomber" label="strategic bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="14058" end="14076" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="14081" end="14104" title="Royal Naval Air Service" label="Royal Naval Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q364463" start="14347" end="14360" title="Giulio Douhet" label="Giulio Douhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q838364" start="14463" end="14477" title="carpet bombing" label="carpet bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263216" start="14482" end="14492" title="poison gas" label="poison gas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14844" end="14859" title="Giulio Douhet#Aerial strategy" label="The War of 19--"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="14877" end="14888" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q627383" start="14902" end="14929" title="The Shape of Things to Come" label="The Shape of Things to Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q55221" start="14954" end="14969" title="Alexander Korda" label="Alexander Korda"/>
<link wikidata="Q241141" start="14979" end="14993" title="Things to Come" label="Things to Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q61883" start="16162" end="16171" title="air force" label="air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="16363" end="16378" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q336065" start="16420" end="16434" title="Hugh Trenchard" label="Hugh Trenchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124737" start="16972" end="17014" title="Civilian casualties of strategic bombing" label="civilian casualties from strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q637802" start="17133" end="17159" title="Mutual Assured Destruction" label="Mutual Assured Destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380335" start="17213" end="17227" title="aerial bombing" label="aerial bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q336065" start="17298" end="17312" title="Hugh Trenchard" label="Hugh Trenchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q663070" start="17339" end="17357" title="Sir Charles Portal" label="Sir Charles Portal"/>
<link wikidata="Q372052" start="17359" end="17376" title="Arthur Harris" label="Sir Arthur Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509262" start="17382" end="17395" title="Sidney Osborne Bufton" label="Sidney Bufton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="17464" end="17475" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="17488" end="17492" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q372052" start="17701" end="17714" title="Arthur Harris" label="Arthur Harris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17764" end="17782" title="List of military figures by nickname#B" label="&amp;quot;Bomber&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="18221" end="18226" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q620737" start="19732" end="19743" title="appeasement" label="appeasement"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="19747" end="19753" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="19785" end="19802" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170351" start="19808" end="19827" title="bombing of Guernica" label="bombing of Guernica"/>
<link wikidata="Q153324" start="19861" end="19874" title="Condor Legion" label="Condor Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228376" start="20191" end="20225" title="the bomber will always get through" label="the bomber will always get through"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688003" start="20564" end="20610" title="aerial bombing of cities" label="Large scale bombing of the civilian population"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="21001" end="21007" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="21015" end="21024" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717447" start="21302" end="21320" title="Conventional weapon" label="conventional bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="21408" end="21419" title="atomic bomb" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454201" start="21541" end="21553" title="gravity bomb" label="gravity bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q897842" start="21594" end="21611" title="incendiary device" label="incendiary device"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359118" start="21691" end="21699" title="materiel" label="materiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465318" start="21708" end="21718" title="morale" label="demoralize"/>
<link wikidata="Q918145" start="21799" end="21808" title="firestorm" label="firestorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q187207" start="21832" end="21849" title="delay-action bomb" label="delay-action bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q185000" start="22715" end="22735" title="B-17 Flying Fortress" label="B-17 Flying Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q220759" start="22771" end="22785" title="B-24 Liberator" label="B-24 Liberator"/>
<link wikidata="Q203622" start="22795" end="22809" title="Avro Lancaster" label="Avro Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q184870" start="22815" end="22833" title="B-29 Superfortress" label="B-29 Superfortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366888" start="22966" end="22976" title="Grand Slam bomb" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="23114" end="23123" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="23228" end="23242" title="invasion of Poland" label="invaded Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="23387" end="23390" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="23560" end="23577" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="23617" end="23622" title="the Blitz" label="Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q714349" start="23950" end="23965" title="Rotterdam Blitz" label="Rotterdam Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="24175" end="24179" title="Ruhr Area" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="24221" end="24231" title="Manufacturing" label="industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q181485" start="24283" end="24296" title="blast furnace" label="blast furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q222099" start="24346" end="24357" title="Butt Report" label="Butt Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="24412" end="24430" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="RAF Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="24881" end="24910" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239540" start="24940" end="24957" title="precision bombing" label="precision bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126" start="25007" end="25018" title="Schweinfurt" label="Schweinfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q192075" start="25224" end="25231" title="North American P-51 Mustang" label="Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707691" start="25379" end="25403" title="Norden bombsight" label="Norden optical bombsight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170818" start="26645" end="26655" title="Roy Fedden" label="Roy Fedden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="27180" end="27185" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q152142" start="27190" end="27212" title="Bombing of Dresden in World War II" label="the bombing of Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q320252" start="27449" end="27470" title="Bombing of Peenemünde in World War II" label="bombing of Peenemünde"/>
<link wikidata="Q845203" start="27497" end="27525" title="Operation Chastise" label="the bombing of the Ruhr dams"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="27578" end="27581" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="27663" end="27680" title="Soviet Air Forces" label="Soviet Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093055" start="27681" end="27709" title="Bombing of Helsinki in World War II" label="conducted strategic bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="27713" end="27721" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="27738" end="27745" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="27839" end="27843" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q847492" start="27980" end="27997" title="Finnish Air Force" label="Finnish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055881" start="28073" end="28076" title="Long Range Aviation" label="ADD"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="28092" end="28101" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q590545" start="28176" end="28207" title="Air raids on Japan" label="American campaign against Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088415" start="28253" end="28269" title="Housing in Japan" label="Japanese housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353049" start="28308" end="28319" title="firebombing" label="firebombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q897842" start="28339" end="28356" title="incendiary device" label="incendiary device"/>
<link wikidata="Q12296445" start="28750" end="28773" title="Asiatic-Pacific Theater" label="Asiatic-Pacific Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568476" start="28779" end="28813" title="Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service" label="Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q702107" start="28822" end="28856" title="Imperial Japanese Army Air Service" label="Imperial Japanese Army Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q254599" start="28945" end="28953" title="battle of Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="28955" end="28964" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="28966" end="28973" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q705165" start="28975" end="28984" title="bombing of Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13630094" start="28986" end="28995" title="Bombing of Singapore (1941)" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510984" start="29001" end="29008" title="Bombing of Rangoon (1941–1942)" label="Rangoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q201633" start="29709" end="29717" title="Iwo Jima" label="Iwo Jima"/>
<link wikidata="Q51881408" start="29949" end="29969" title="Bombing of Tokyo (10 March 1945)" label="firebombing of Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q152142" start="30020" end="30035" title="Bombing of Dresden in World War II" label="Dresden mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="30044" end="30089" title="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima or Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q34479" start="30824" end="30832" title="Hirohito" label="Hirohito"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="30847" end="30865" title="surrender of Japan" label="surrender of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q709465" start="30867" end="30874" title="gyokuon-hoso" label="stating"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="31504" end="31518" title="Nuclear weapon" label="Nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="31557" end="31565" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q702073" start="31755" end="31767" title="Great Powers" label="Great Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="32573" end="32596" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247326" start="32707" end="32718" title="limited war" label="limited war"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="32724" end="32745" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Truman Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862267" start="33927" end="33946" title="Korean Armistice Agreement" label="armistice agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="34038" end="34049" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q547247" start="34093" end="34118" title="Operation Rolling Thunder" label="Operation Rolling Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="34167" end="34189" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Johnson Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="34555" end="34575" title="Richard Nixon" label="Nixon Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q489959" start="34683" end="34703" title="Operation Linebacker" label="Operation Linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q233383" start="34867" end="34884" title="Kim Phuc Phan Thi" label="Kim Phuc Phan Thi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="34927" end="34944" title="close air support" label="close air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118609" start="35333" end="35341" title="hallmark" label="hallmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q83405" start="36376" end="36385" title="Factory" label="factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q151432" start="36553" end="36585" title="McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II" label="McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II"/>
<link wikidata="Q213342" start="36938" end="36951" title="Tu-22" label="Tu-22 Blinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q192779" start="36956" end="36968" title="Tu-16" label="Tu-16 Badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q507720" start="36969" end="36986" title="strategic bombers" label="strategic bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q199570" start="37093" end="37106" title="MiG-25" label="MiG-25 Foxbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q183146" start="37111" end="37123" title="Su-22" label="Su-22 Fitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961428" start="37187" end="37196" title="Escort fighter" label="escorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q221641" start="37492" end="37496" title="Scud" label="Scud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="37511" end="37516" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q32050" start="37704" end="37719" title="smart munitions" label="smart munitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="37797" end="37811" title="Gulf War" label="First Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="37959" end="37969" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="37997" end="38020" title="Operation Iraqi Freedom" label="Operation Iraqi Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q100026" start="38651" end="38671" title="F-16 Fighting Falcon" label="F-16 Fighting Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q844500" start="38675" end="38693" title="F-15E Strike Eagle" label="F-15E Strike Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="38722" end="38744" title="Operation Desert Storm" label="Operation Desert Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q326668" start="38746" end="38772" title="Operation Enduring Freedom" label="Operation Enduring Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="38777" end="38800" title="Operation Iraqi Freedom" label="Operation Iraqi Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="38932" end="38936" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630" start="38991" end="38999" title="Novi Sad" label="Novi Sad"/>
<link wikidata="Q620735" start="39066" end="39088" title="2008 South Ossetia war" label="2008 South Ossetia war"/>
<link wikidata="Q185345" start="39142" end="39146" title="Poti" label="Poti"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="39203" end="39230" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="39616" end="39630" title="Power station" label="power stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q471145" start="39943" end="39954" title="Air warfare" label="Air warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833880" start="39972" end="39995" title="laws and customs of war" label="laws and customs of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q381148" start="40007" end="40037" title="international humanitarian law" label="international humanitarian law"/>
<link wikidata="Q25109641" start="40111" end="40128" title="protected persons" label="protected persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566316" start="40299" end="40320" title="Hague Conventions (1907)" label="1907 Hague Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2229133" start="40325" end="40335" title="Protocol I" label="Protocol I"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="40354" end="40372" title="Geneva Conventions" label="Geneva Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857704" start="40581" end="40599" title="military necessity" label="military necessity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282964" start="40613" end="40624" title="distinction (law)" label="distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q603959" start="40642" end="40657" title="proportionality (law)" label="proportionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518482" start="40764" end="40793" title="legitimate military target" label="legitimate military objective"/>
<link wikidata="Q436102" start="40986" end="41017" title="Henry H. Arnold" label="Henry H. &amp;quot;Hap&amp;quot; Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="41019" end="41023" title="United States Air Force" label="USAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q364463" start="41026" end="41039" title="Giulio Douhet" label="Giulio Douhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517242" start="41041" end="41058" title="Regia Aeronautica" label="Regia Aeronautica"/>
<link wikidata="Q372052" start="41069" end="41101" title="Arthur Harris" label="Arthur &amp;quot;Bomber&amp;quot; Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="41103" end="41106" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q15866" start="41109" end="41121" title="Curtis LeMay" label="Curtis LeMay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="41123" end="41127" title="United States Air Force" label="USAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q863201" start="41130" end="41144" title="Billy Mitchell" label="Billy Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096700" start="41146" end="41151" title="U.S. Army Air Service" label="USAAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q621879" start="41154" end="41178" title="Alexander P. de Seversky" label="Alexander P. de Seversky"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405026" start="41188" end="41213" title="Victory Through Air Power" label="Victory Through Air Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q579115" start="41248" end="41259" title="Carl Spaatz" label="Carl Spaatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="41261" end="41265" title="United States Air Force" label="USAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q336065" start="41268" end="41282" title="Hugh Trenchard" label="Hugh Trenchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="41284" end="41287" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033576" start="41306" end="41321" title="Dahiya doctrine" label="Dahiya doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17322331" start="41976" end="41987" title="Horst Boog" label="Boog, Horst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6295971" start="42538" end="42566" title="Journal of Strategic Studies" label="Journal of Strategic Studies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53377" wikidata="Q6497384" url="?curid=53377" title="Vulcan (Star Trek)">
<text>Vulcans, sometimes referred to as Vulcanians, are a fictional extraterrestrial humanoid species in the &quot;Star Trek&quot; media franchise. They are noted for their strict adherence to logic and reason and suppression of emotion. Known for their pronounced eyebrows and pointed ears, they originate from the fictional planet Vulcan. In the &quot;Star Trek&quot; universe, they were the first extraterrestrial species to make contact with humans.

The most notable Vulcan character is Spock, first played by actor Leonard Nimoy in &quot;Star Trek: The Original Series&quot; (1966–1969). Some aspects of this fictional alien race that have entered popular culture are their pointy ears, the Vulcan salute, the Vulcan nerve pinch, and their adherence to logical thinking and disdain for emotion. 

==Development==
The Vulcan Mister Spock first appeared in the original 1965 &quot;Star Trek&quot; pilot, &quot;The Cage&quot;, shown to studio executives. Show creator Gene Roddenberry revealed in 1964 that he wanted an alien as part of the ship&#x27;s crew, but knew that budget restraints would limit make-up choices. He chose actor Leonard Nimoy because of his &quot;high Slavic cheekbones and interesting face&quot; and &quot;with those cheekbones some sort of pointed ear might go well.&quot; Nimoy later commented that Roddenberry felt the presence of an alien would &quot;establish that we were in the 23rd century and that interplanetary travel was an established fact.&quot;

==Vulcan salute==

The Vulcan salutation is that of the Jewish priestly blessing: a hand gesture consisting of a raised hand with the palm forward and the thumb extended, while the fingers are parted between the middle and ring finger. Typically, the phrase &quot;live long and prosper&quot; is uttered when making the salute, adapting the priestly blessing &quot;may the Lord bless you and keep you.&quot; An appropriate reply would be to return the gesture and utter either &quot;live long and prosper&quot;, or &quot;peace and long life&quot;.

==Biology==
===Physical characteristics===
Vulcans are depicted as similar in appearance to humans, as budget constraints in &quot;The Original Series&quot; did not allow for elaborate make-up. All Vulcans have arched and upswept eyebrows and pointy ears. White actors portraying Vulcans are given a yellowish hue to their skin. A Vulcan&#x27;s on-screen blood is green due to copper-based hemocyanin. Vulcans are said to possess an inner eyelid, or nictitating membrane, which protects their vision from bright light, an evolutionary trait developed due to the fictional planet Vulcan being so close to its sun. In addition, their heart is located on the right side of the torso, between the ribs and pelvis; as Dr. McCoy once says about Spock after the Vulcan has been shot through the chest: &quot;Lucky his heart&#x27;s where his liver should be, or he&#x27;d be dead now.&quot;

===Diet===
Vulcans are vegetarians by choice and were omnivores in ages past. It is a Vulcan custom for guests in the home to prepare meals for their hosts.

Vulcans are said to not drink alcohol, though they are often depicted as doing so.

In an episode of &quot;Star Trek: Deep Space Nine&quot;, Quark alludes to Vulcans becoming inebriated by ingesting chocolate. This is confirmed in the novelisation of Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home. Kirk buys some candy to get change for the bus. When he gives one to Spock, Spock asks if it contains sucrose. When Kirk asks why, Spock tells him that sucrose has the same effect on Vulcans as alcohol has on humans.

An episode of &quot;Star Trek: Voyager&quot; mentions that Vulcan coffee is poisonous to humans.

===Mating drive===
Every seven years, Vulcan males and females experience an overpowering hormone imbalance known as pon farr. Once triggered, a Vulcan must have sexual intercourse with someone or the chemical imbalance may cause insanity, loss of self-control, and death.

Despite popular opinion, &quot;TOS&quot; writer and story editor, D. C. Fontana, insists that pon farr is not the only time that Vulcans feel sexual desire or engage in sexual activity:

Vulcans mate normally any time they want to. However, every seven years you do the ritual, the ceremony, the whole thing. The biological urge. You must, but any other time is any other emotion—humanoid emotion—when you&#x27;re in love. When you want to, you know when the urge is there, you do it. This every-seven-years business was taken too literally by too many people who don&#x27;t stop and understand. We didn&#x27;t mean it only every seven years. I mean, every seven years would be a little bad, and it would not explain the Vulcans of many different ages that are not seven years apart.

If a mate is not available, there are other ways to relieve the effects of the pon farr, including meditation, violence, &quot;shock&quot;, and simulation.

===Other characteristics===
Vulcans are typically depicted as stronger, faster, and longer-lived than humans. This is hypothesized to be due to the increased gravity on Vulcan (1.4 &quot;g&quot;). However, Vulcans are less cold-tolerant than humans. There are instances of them living over 220 years. Having evolved on a fictional desert planet, Vulcans can survive without water for longer periods than humans. Vulcans can also go without sleep for as long as two weeks.

==Psychology==
===Emotion===
Vulcans are known as logical beings who have removed emotions from their daily lives. The Vulcan character, Spock, struggles with this throughout the original series as he is half-human. T&#x27;Pol states that paranoia and homicidal rage were common on Vulcan before the adoption of Surak&#x27;s code of emotional control.

Surak&#x27;s ideas were that all Vulcans should suppress emotions, for the safety of the species. Before him, Vulcans were dangerously raging, emotional, war-like and religiously fanatical, to the point that it could have threatened the continuation of their society and species. Then, around the 4th century BC, he created a system revolving around these ideas, intended to create a peaceful society. Some Vulcans disagreed, unfortunately, causing a war to break out. The two sides separated, causing the emotional ones to become Romulans and the logical ones to become what is referred to as modern-day Vulcans. Vulcans still possess and experience emotions, but make great efforts to keep them from being expressed or controlling their behavior. They occasionally have mental breakdowns. Only those who follow the discipline of &quot;kolinahr&quot; have completely purged all emotions from their minds. Spock, in &quot;Star Trek: The Motion Picture&quot;, attempts to achieve &quot;kolinahr&quot;, but ultimately fails to do so.

Other Vulcans who did not believe in war but still wanted to embrace emotions made different choices. A group of renegade Vulcans who believed in this was encountered in the &quot;Star Trek: Enterprise&quot; episode &quot;Fusion&quot;, while Spock&#x27;s half-brother Sybok, seen in the film &quot;Star Trek V: The Final Frontier&quot;, was also fully emotional. An episode of &quot;Enterprise&quot; titled &quot;E²&quot; featured an elderly T&#x27;Pol in an alternative timeline who had embraced emotion and allowed her half-human son, Lorian, to do likewise.

In the 1st pilot episode, &quot;The Cage&quot;, Spock showed much more emotion. For the second pilot, &quot;Where No Man Has Gone Before&quot;, Number OneSpock&#x27;s superior officer, who showed little emotionwas removed, and it was decided that Spock would take on those traits.

Vulcan emotions are seemingly more intense than those of humans. In the TNG episode &quot;Sarek&quot;, Ambassador Sarek warns Captain Picard that &quot;Vulcan emotions are extremely intense; we have learned to suppress them&quot;, and that Picard would be overwhelmed by Sarek&#x27;s unrestrained emotions due to the effects of Bendii syndrome while the two are linked during a Vulcan mind-meld. Picard does, in fact, have tremendous difficulty controlling himself while experiencing Sarek&#x27;s emotions during the meld, including the ambassador&#x27;s suppressed loves and hidden regrets.

===Telepathy===
Vulcans are telepaths. Beginning in the original series, the character Spock was able to &quot;mind meld&quot; (see below) by touching another being and to share thoughts. Vulcans have also displayed telepathy at great distance and through walls.

====Mind melds====

A mind meld is a technique for sharing thoughts, experiences, memories, and knowledge with another individual, essentially a limited form of telepathy. It usually requires physical contact with a subject, though instances of mind melds without contact have been seen. When first depicted in the &quot;TOS&quot; episode &quot;Dagger of the Mind&quot;, the procedure was said to require several moments of intense concentration and preparation. However, subsequent episodes show contact between minds occurring almost immediately. Although most often seen done with humanoids, mind melds can be performed with members of other species. Spock even once successfully mind melded with a machine and was able to establish telepathic contact with the space probe V&#x27;ger, with silicon-based lifeform, the Horta, and, in another instance, with a humpback whale.

Mind melds can be used both to erase and restore memories; Spock performs each of these on Captain Kirk during &quot;TOS&quot;″s third season. A mind meld was even used to rejoin Spock&#x27;s &quot;katra&quot; (see below) with his physical body in &quot;Star Trek III: The Search for Spock&quot;. Mind melds can also allow more than one mind to experience memories and sensations, and sometimes even interact with the memories. Some species are able to resist mind melds.

The quad-lobed brain structure of Ferengi make them unable to be telepathically read by other species, and with sufficient training and mental discipline, high-level Cardassian military personnel and/or agents of the Obsidian Order are able to resist mind melds used to extract information. For example, when Gul Dukat was captured by the Maquis, he successfully resisted a prolonged mind meld attempt from a female Vulcan Maquis member, much to the latter&#x27;s frustration.

====Katra====
Vulcans are able to implant their &quot;katra&quot; into another person via a mind meld just before death. Sarek explained to Kirk that Spock&#x27;s katra was &quot;his essence, everything that was not of the body, his katra, his living spirit...everything that he was, everything that he knew&quot;. He further explained that this transference was &quot;the Vulcan way, when the body&#x27;s end is near.&quot; Dr Julian Bashir in the &quot;DS9&quot; episode &quot;The Passenger&quot; referred to this phenomenon as &quot;synaptic pattern displacement&quot;. The &quot;ENT&quot; Season 4 trilogy of episodes (&quot;The Forge&quot;, &quot;Awakening&quot;, and &quot;Kir&#x27;Shara&quot;) reveal some of the history of mind-melding and the journey of the katra of Surak to modern times. 

Katra can also be used to transfer a Vulcan&#x27;s healing ability to another to aid in regeneration for serious injury. Sarek transferred some of his katra to Michael Burnham (&quot;DIS&quot; Season 1, Episode 6, &quot;Lethe&quot;) in order to save her life as a child, which connected Michael to Sarek, and she refers to it as a &quot;soul graft&quot;.

Katras can be returned to the body. Such was the case with Spock, who, near the end of &quot;Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan&quot;, implanted his katra into the mind of Dr. McCoy before sacrificing his life. In &quot;Star Trek III: The Search for Spock&quot;, a mind meld ritual, the &quot;fal tor pan&quot; (&quot;re-fusion&quot;), removed the katra from McCoy and implanted it into Spock&#x27;s regenerated body. The ritual was successful, though it carried risks for both.

==Culture==
===Language===
Vulcans have their own language in the &quot;Star Trek&quot; universe. Several words are heard throughout the various television series starting with the &quot;Star Trek: The Original Series&quot; episode &quot;Amok Time&quot;. Words and dialogue are heard in the feature films &quot;Star Trek: The Motion Picture&quot;, &quot;Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan&quot;, &quot;Star Trek III: The Search for Spock&quot; and &quot;Star Trek V: The Final Frontier&quot;.

Linguist Marc Okrand is credited for creating the Vulcan spoken language for &quot;Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan&quot;. As in most of the films, the actors filmed their lines in English which was later dubbed with the Vulcan translation.

===Names===
The treatment of Vulcan names has been erratic throughout &quot;Star Trek&quot;″s production history. Early on, female Vulcans were typically given names beginning with &quot;T&quot; followed by an apostrophe then a &quot;p&quot;. The earliest reference to Vulcan names following a set pattern dates back to a May 3, 1966 memo from &quot;TOS&quot; producer Robert H. Justman to Gene Roddenberry (later reprinted in the book &quot;The Making of Star Trek&quot;) in which Justman recommended that all Vulcan names begin with &quot;SP&quot; and end with &quot;K&quot;, and have exactly five letters. (It is clear from the context of the book, however, that the memo was intended as a joke, as the series of memos ends up discussing the pronunciation of such names as &quot;Spook&quot;, &quot;Spilk&quot; and &quot;Spork&quot;.)

Only non-canonical sources have provided any Vulcans with family names, which are usually spoken of as defying attempts at both human pronunciation, especially with English-language phonemes, and human typesetting, especially with the characters of the modern Latin alphabet used for the English language. Hence, no canonical source has given any family names to any Vulcan characters, and, indeed, every one of the personal names previously mentioned is officially described as being only Latin-alphabetical and English-phonetic approximations of the real ones. In the &quot;TOS&quot; episode &quot;This Side of Paradise&quot;, Spock is asked if he has another name, to which he replies &quot;You couldn&#x27;t pronounce it.&quot;

===Marriage===
Vulcans practice arranged marriage, in which a male and a female are bonded as children, with consummation at a later date. Spock explains that this childhood pairing has no one-for-one human analogue, as it is considered less than a full &quot;marriage&quot;, but more than simply a &quot;betrothal&quot;. This is why Spock first described T&#x27;Pring as his &quot;wife&quot;, before later explaining that this was an incorrect approximation. Following adult union, it is customary for the couple to remain on Vulcan for at least one Vulcan year before conducting off-world travel, though it is possible to defer this requirement until a later date, upon negotiation with the male&#x27;s family. The state of pon farr is not required for marriage to occur.

A Vulcan female can challenge the proposed bonding by calling for &quot;koon-ut-kal-if-fee&quot;, meaning &quot;marriage or challenge&quot;, in which a challenger for marriage engages the bonded male in a fight to the death. Alternatively, the bonded male has the option of rejecting his intended bride and choosing another. It is acceptable for a male to &quot;release&quot; his mate from marriage (effectively the same as a divorce). It is not established whether females have the same option, and T&#x27;Pring stated in &quot;Amok Time&quot; that a koon-ut-kal-if-fee challenge was the only way she could legally divorce Spock.

While most Vulcan marriages are arranged in childhood, adult Vulcans who have no mates may also declare the &quot;koon-ut-so-lik&quot;, the ritual Vulcan marriage proposal. As with arranged marriages, the Vulcan being proposed to may accept or challenge the union.

===Family===
It is customary for Vulcan children to undertake an initiation ordeal known as the &quot;Kahs-wan&quot; (sometimes spelled Kaswahn), in which they are left to fend for themselves in the desert for a specific period of time. Not all children survive this rite of passage. T&#x27;Pol underwent the ritual, while Tuvok experienced a variation known as the &quot;tal&#x27;oth&quot;. The Kahs-wan was first introduced in the &quot;Star Trek: The Animated Series&quot; episode &quot;Yesteryear&quot;, in which Spock&#x27;s experience as a child was detailed.

Contrary to the Vulcan image of expressing no emotion, family bonds can be strong and affectionate just as they are for humans. Tuvok expressed his love for his wife on a few occasions (without actually using the term), Sarek openly expressed affection for both his human wives, and a clear bond of love existed between T&#x27;Pol and her mother, T&#x27;Les. The bond between Spock and his adopted sister, Michael Burnham, is a central theme of the &quot;Star Trek: Discovery&quot; second season.

===Fighting and self-defense===
In the &quot;TOS&quot; episode &quot;The Savage Curtain&quot;, Surak explains to Kirk Vulcan&#x27;s history of violence and the turn to peace that saved their civilization. He tells Kirk that he will not fight. Spock says that he has fought, and will fight again, but that he, too, is a &quot;Vulcan, bred to peace.&quot;

====Vulcan nerve pinch====

Vulcans are capable of a technique known as the &quot;Vulcan nerve pinch&quot; or &quot;neck pinch&quot;, which targets a location on the neck between the head and the shoulder that renders the victim unconscious. The pinch was first seen in the &quot;TOS&quot; episode &quot;The Naked Time&quot;. The mechanics of the pinch have never been explained. While practiced mainly by Vulcans, it is apparently not exclusive to their race. Jonathan Archer and Jean-Luc Picard both use the technique after becoming involved in Vulcan telepathic rituals (Archer holding the katra of Surak, Picard having undergone a mind-meld with Sarek). Seven of Nine is depicted as capable of using this ability in the episode of &quot;Voyager&quot; &quot;The Raven&quot;. The android Data also displayed this ability in the &quot;TNG&quot; episode &quot;Unification, Part II,&quot; which Spock described as &quot;not bad.&quot; In Star Trek: Discovery, Michael Burnham does the nerve pinch on Captain Philippa Georgiou and commits mutiny.

The neck pinch itself (referred to in scripts as &quot;FSNP&quot;, or &quot;Famous Spock Neck Pinch&quot;) was created by Leonard Nimoy, who objected to a scene in &quot;The Enemy Within&quot;, in which a transporter malfunction had divided Kirk between his good and evil selves, that required Spock to render the &quot;evil&quot; Kirk unconscious and subduing him by hitting him over the head with the butt of a phaser. Nimoy was convinced that such overt violence, in addition to being too similar to that found in many crime dramas of the time, was uncharacteristic of the strictly-logical Spock, and suggested the neck pinch as a less-emotional alternative.

===IDIC===

In &quot;Star Trek&quot;, the IDIC (Infinite Diversity in Infinite Combinations) has become a symbol of Vulcan equality philosophy. It is symbolized by the &quot;Kol-Ut-Shan&quot;, a pendant of yellow and white gold with a circle and triangle resting upon each other, and adorned with a white jewel in the center.

The Vulcan IDIC pendant was designed by Gene Roddenberry as a marketing premium to be sold through mail order to &quot;Star Trek&quot; fans. As early as the end of the first season, fans of the show had begun writing the studio asking for copies of the scripts, film clip frames, etc., and these were soon sold through Roddenberry&#x27;s mail order company, Lincoln Enterprises. As evidenced in some of his letters and memos, Roddenberry was fond of circle-and-triangle designs and had wanted to use them as early as the first season&#x27;s &quot;The Return of the Archons&quot;. As reported by &quot;Inside Star Trek&quot; editor Ruth Berman, &quot;ardent rock hound and amateur lapidary&quot; Roddenberry came up with the Vulcan philosophy after he presented Leonard Nimoy with a unique hand-crafted piece of jewelry, a pendant of a polished yellow gold circle and a florentined white gold triangle with a stone of brilliant white fabulite—an artificial gem &quot;developed by the laser industry and used in space mechanisms for its optical qualities&quot;, and thus well-suited as a gift for an actor in a science fiction show. Readers were encouraged to submit their interest in such a product to Lincoln Enterprises mail order firm. It was noted that less expensive materials would keep costs down.

According to William Shatner in &quot;Star Trek Memories&quot;, IDIC was only worked into the episode &quot;Is There in Truth No Beauty?&quot; as an afterthought. The actors all knew it was a mere advertising toy. Reportedly, Leonard Nimoy was asked to wear it and refused, so it was passed on to Shatner; when he also refused, Nimoy reluctantly agreed to wear it. At the last minute, Roddenberry sent down several pages of new script for the dinner scene, in which Spock was to give a long-winded explanation of the philosophy. The actors refused to film it until Roddenberry cut it down.

In an issue of &quot;The Humanist&quot;, Majel Barrett claimed that the philosophy of &quot;Infinite Diversity in Infinite Combinations&quot; was based on the teachings of Rabbi Maimonides.

Although its origins are rooted in marketing and sales, the IDIC became a theme writers and set designers have used in most of the &quot;Star Trek&quot; franchise. Spock wore the symbol during important gatherings and ceremonies as part of his dress uniform. After appearing for the first time in the &quot;TOS&quot; episode, &quot;Is There in Truth No Beauty?&quot;, it appeared in Spock&#x27;s quarters in &quot;Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan&quot;, &quot;Star Trek III: The Search for Spock&quot;, and &quot;Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country&quot;. In the series &quot;Star Trek: Enterprise&quot;, T&#x27;Pol is given an IDIC pendant from her mother T&#x27;Les, she holds an IDIC pendant in &quot;Terra Prime&quot; while she is in mourning for her dying child, and in the episode &quot;The Andorian Incident&quot; the IDIC symbol appears on small playing pieces that are being used to construct a map of the P&#x27;Jem catacombs. In the &quot;DS9&quot; episode &quot;The Jem&#x27;Hadar&quot;, Quark mentions selling Vulcan IDIC pins, and in the &quot;DS9&quot; episode &quot;Take Me Out to the Holosuite&quot;, Captain Solok and his Vulcan team, the Logicians, wear ball caps featuring the IDIC symbol.

==Homeworld==
The fictional Vulcan homeworld, also named &quot;Vulcan,&quot; was visited several times in the &quot;Star Trek&quot; series and feature films. The inhabitants are known as &quot;Vulcans&quot; or &quot;Vulcanians&quot;. First seen in the &quot;TOS&quot; episode &quot;Amok Time&quot;, Vulcan, a Class M planet, is an arid world with a thinner atmosphere than Earth. Upon beaming down, McCoy states &quot;&#x27;Hot as Vulcan.&#x27; Now I understand what that phrase means.&quot; In the &quot;TOS&quot; episode &quot;The Man Trap&quot;, while Uhura is attempting to make conversation with Spock, he informs her that Vulcan has no moon.

According to Star Trek canon, the planet orbits 40 Eridani A. The authorized &quot;Star Trek&quot; book &quot;Star Trek: Star Charts&quot; and Roddenberry himself give this location. In addition, Commander Tucker&#x27;s statement in the &quot;Star Trek: Enterprise&quot; episode &quot;Home&quot; that Vulcan is &quot;a little over&quot; 16 light years from Earth supports this location, as 40 Eridani A is 16.39 light-years from our own Solar System. The planet&#x27;s location is confirmed by a map shown in the &quot;Star Trek: Discovery&quot; episode &quot;Magic to Make the Sanest Man Go Mad&quot;.

In several non-canon works, Vulcan is also claimed to be located in the triple star system 40 Eridani, less than 17 light-years from Earth.

The &quot;Star Trek: Discovery&quot; episode &quot;Unification III&quot; reveals that after the Vulcans reunified with their ancient cousins, the Romulans, the Vulcan homeworld was renamed Ni&#x27;Var. Ni&#x27;Var had seceded from the Federation (due to the apocalyptic event known as The Burn); in the later episode &quot;All Is Possible&quot;, Ni&#x27;Var rejoins the Federation.

In the 2009 film &quot;Star Trek&quot;, an alternate timeline is created in which Vulcan is destroyed by Nero, a Romulan renegade. By the time of &quot;Star Trek Into Darkness&quot; a Vulcan colony named &quot;New Vulcan&quot; had been established.

==History==
Vulcans once practiced a form of polytheism; this can be seen in gods of war, peace, and death depicted on the Stone of Gol relic in the &quot;TNG&quot; episode &quot;Gambit&quot;. The DVD commentary for &quot;Amok Time&quot; says that &quot;TOS&quot; writer D. C. Fontana named the Vulcan god of death &quot;Shariel&quot;, a bust of whom is seen in Spock&#x27;s quarters.

Vulcan civilization is ancient. In &quot;Amok Time&quot;, Spock says that the place of &quot;Koon-ut-kal-if-fee&quot; has been held by his family for 2,000 years. In the &quot;TOS&quot; episode &quot;The Savage Curtain&quot;, the image of Surak speaks of a time when Vulcan war nearly destroyed them, before logic was embraced as a way of life.

In 1957, the launch of &quot;Sputnik I&quot;, Earth&#x27;s first artificial satellite, was observed by a Vulcan vessel that subsequently crashed on the planet, marooning several crew members for a number of months in Carbon Creek, Pennsylvania; the humans were unaware of the alien nature of their guests.

On April 5, 2063, Vulcans and humans made official first contact near the town of Bozeman, Montana, following the successful test of Earth scientist Zefram Cochrane&#x27;s first warp-capable starship.

In 2097, the Vulcans annexed the Andorian planetoid Weytahn and renamed it Pan Mokar.

In 2105, the Vulcans and the Andorians agreed to a compromise over Weytahn/Pan Mokar. Still, tensions continued due to the threat of mutual annihilation.

By the 22nd century, the &quot;Vulcan High Command&quot; is a form of military government that controls both the Vulcan space fleet and most of the planet itself. Most Vulcans, including T&#x27;Pol, from &quot;Star Trek: Enterprise&quot; obey the High Command. It is dissolved in the early fourth season of &quot;Star Trek: Enterprise&quot;.

In 2151, Sub-Commander T&#x27;Pol joined the crew of the Earth Starfleet vessel &quot;Enterprise&quot; (NX-01), within a couple of weeks setting a Vulcan endurance record for serving aboard a human vessel. In 2154, T&#x27;Pol became a commissioned officer with Starfleet.

Throughout the period of &quot;Star Trek: Enterprise&quot;, the High Command&#x27;s actions were the themes of several episodes. Vulcan starships were sent to spy on the &quot;Enterprise&quot; and report on the ship&#x27;s activities. They appeared to participate in open acts of persecution towards other Vulcans, such as isolating and quarantining victims of Pa&#x27;nar Syndrome rather than treating them; prejudicial acts against any Vulcan proven to have committed a mind meld; and hunting down and capturing, sometimes killing, members of the underground dissident group, the Syrranites.

In 2154, V&#x27;Las, the head of the High Command and undercover agent for the Romulans, bombed the United Earth embassy on Vulcan in an attempt to frame and eliminate all Syrranites while simultaneously attempting an invasion of Andoria. He was foiled by the crew of the &quot;Enterprise&quot;. During these events, the Kir&#x27;Shara, a device containing the original writings of Surak, was discovered by Jonathan Archer. This led to the prompt dissolution of the High Command and a reevaluation of Vulcan traditional values. It also resulted in Vulcan agreeing to stop &quot;looking over Earth&#x27;s shoulder&quot; in space exploration matters.

It was revealed to viewers that the High Command&#x27;s illogical and often emotionally based actions were, in reality, the result of covert Romulan influence. The Romulans had secretly made contact with V&#x27;Las and attempted to reunify their long-lost peoples. After the invasion of Andoria was foiled, the High Command was disbanded and V&#x27;Las was dismissed from his post. Subsequently, the altered political climate on Vulcan caused the undercover Romulan operative Talok to leave Vulcan, apparently ending the infiltration.

On August 12, 2161, Vulcan became one of the founding members of the United Federation of Planets.

In the time of &quot;Star Trek: Enterprise&quot;, Vulcans are seen to be arrogant and cold in their behavior towards humans. Soval, Vulcan&#x27;s ambassador to Earth, appeared particularly distrustful of humans, and was often at odds with Archer and his crew. Soval later justified this behavior in the fourth season episode &quot;The Forge&quot;:

&#x27;We don&#x27;t know what to do about humans. Of all the species we&#x27;ve made contact with, yours is the only one we can&#x27;t define. You have the arrogance of Andorians, the stubborn pride of Tellarites. One moment you&#x27;re as driven by your emotions as Klingons, and the next, you confound us by suddenly embracing logic&quot;

Soval also explained that Earth recovered from World War III far more quickly than Vulcan did from its equivalent. (In &quot;The Forge&quot; and its sequel episodes, it is said that Vulcans took almost a thousand years to fully rebuild their society after their last catastrophic war.) This alarmed many Vulcans, who were confused as to how to deal with a rapidly growing and emotional society such as Earth&#x27;s.

After the overthrow of the corrupt Vulcan High Command and the death of Admiral Maxwell Forrest, who sacrificed his life to save Soval from a terrorist attack, the attitudes of Soval, and Vulcan society in general, became more cordial and accepting towards humanity.

By the 32nd century, Ambassador Spock&#x27;s dream of Vulcan/Romulan reunification has been achieved. Following the destruction of Romulus, the surviving Romulans have returned to their ancestral homeworld, now called Ni&#x27;Var.

===&quot;Star Trek&quot; (2009) alternate timeline===
In the alternate timeline of the 2009 film, the planet Vulcan is destroyed in 2258 by the Romulan known as Nero, who had time-traveled from the future. Using his space mining vessel, &quot;Narada&quot;, Nero created a singularity in Vulcan&#x27;s planetary core as part of his quest to avenge the destruction of Romulus that Spock failed to save. The resulting implosion destroyed Vulcan, killing most of its six billion inhabitants. Only around 10,000 managed to escape. At the end of the film, Spock Prime tells the younger Spock a suitable planet has been located to establish a colony for the surviving Vulcans; this world is named &quot;New Vulcan&quot;.

==See also==

* Stoicism
* Vulcan, Alberta – a town in Canada that has incorporated &quot;Star Trek&quot; themes due to its name
* Vulcan (hypothetical planet)

==References==
==External links==
* Official &quot;Star Trek&quot; website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6497384" start="0" end="7" title="Vulcan (Star Trek)" label="Vulcans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497384" start="34" end="44" title="Vulcan (Star Trek)" label="Vulcanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="62" end="78" title="Extraterrestrial life" label="extraterrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q502931" start="79" end="87" title="humanoid" label="humanoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="109" end="118" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q196600" start="125" end="140" title="media franchise" label="media franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="187" end="192" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="197" end="203" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="327" end="333" title="#Homeworld" label="Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14841174" start="427" end="434" title="first contact (science fiction)" label="contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q16341" start="486" end="491" title="Spock" label="Spock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16345" start="515" end="528" title="Leonard Nimoy" label="Leonard Nimoy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="538" end="568" title="Star Trek: The Original Series" label="Star Trek: The Original Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529436" start="691" end="704" title="Vulcan salute" label="Vulcan salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825285" start="710" end="728" title="Vulcan nerve pinch" label="Vulcan nerve pinch"/>
<link wikidata="" start="908" end="916" title="The Cage (Star Trek: The Original Series)" label="The Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q191716" start="965" end="981" title="Gene Roddenberry" label="Gene Roddenberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16345" start="1132" end="1145" title="Leonard Nimoy" label="Leonard Nimoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112804" start="2273" end="2284" title="pointy ears" label="pointy ears"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="2286" end="2291" title="White people" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="2353" end="2357" title="skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407688" start="2420" end="2430" title="hemocyanin" label="hemocyanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48306" start="2480" end="2500" title="nictitating membrane" label="nictitating membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16351" start="2743" end="2752" title="Leonard McCoy" label="Dr. McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="2937" end="2948" title="Vegetarianism" label="vegetarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q164509" start="2968" end="2976" title="omnivore" label="omnivore"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3179" end="3205" title="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine" label="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473641" start="3213" end="3218" title="Quark (Star Trek)" label="Quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="3271" end="3280" title="chocolate" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3323" end="3352" title="Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home" label="Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3592" end="3610" title="Star Trek: Voyager" label="Star Trek: Voyager"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="3760" end="3767" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873" start="3832" end="3850" title="sexual intercourse" label="sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q450706" start="4010" end="4023" title="D. C. Fontana" label="D. C. Fontana"/>
<link wikidata="Q108458" start="4828" end="4838" title="meditation" label="meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037127" start="5217" end="5230" title="desert planet" label="desert planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315662" start="5575" end="5585" title="T&amp;#x27;Pol" label="T&amp;#x27;Pol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="5598" end="5606" title="paranoia" label="paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5641" end="5647" title="#Homeworld" label="Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264987" start="5671" end="5676" title="Surak" label="Surak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531622" start="5920" end="5990" title="existential risk" label="it could have threatened the continuation of their society and species"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6634" end="6663" title="Star Trek: The Motion Picture" label="Star Trek: The Motion Picture"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6925" end="6946" title="Star Trek: Enterprise" label="Star Trek: Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6967" end="6973" title="Fusion (Star Trek: Enterprise)" label="Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341051" start="7013" end="7018" title="Sybok" label="Sybok"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7043" end="7074" title="Star Trek V: The Final Frontier" label="Star Trek V: The Final Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423474" start="7158" end="7160" title="E²" label="E²"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7339" end="7347" title="The Cage (Star Trek: The Original Series)" label="The Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q25366" start="7415" end="7443" title="Where No Man Has Gone Before" label="Where No Man Has Gone Before"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568510" start="7451" end="7461" title="Number One (Star Trek)" label="Number One"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7679" end="7684" title="Sarek (Star Trek: The Next Generation)" label="Sarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712069" start="7703" end="7708" title="Sarek" label="Sarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16276" start="7715" end="7729" title="Jean-Luc Picard" label="Captain Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="8210" end="8219" title="Star Trek telepathy" label="telepaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="8607" end="8616" title="telepathy" label="telepathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107459" start="8791" end="8809" title="Dagger of the Mind" label="Dagger of the Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="9307" end="9321" title="humpback whale" label="humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q16311" start="9415" end="9427" title="James T. Kirk" label="Captain Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9522" end="9527" title="#Katra" label="katra"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9578" end="9613" title="Star Trek III: The Search for Spock" label="Star Trek III: The Search for Spock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712069" start="10396" end="10401" title="Sarek" label="Sarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16311" start="10415" end="10419" title="James T. Kirk" label="Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882443" start="10703" end="10716" title="Julian Bashir" label="Julian Bashir"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10730" end="10733" title="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine" label="DS9"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10754" end="10767" title="The Passenger (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine)" label="The Passenger"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10858" end="10861" title="Star Trek: Enterprise" label="ENT"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10904" end="10913" title="The Forge (Star Trek: Enterprise)" label="The Forge"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10927" end="10936" title="Awakening (Star Trek: Enterprise)" label="Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414725" start="10954" end="10968" title="Kir&amp;#x27;Shara" label="Kir&amp;#x27;Shara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264987" start="11051" end="11056" title="Surak" label="Surak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712069" start="11197" end="11202" title="Sarek" label="Sarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q40935468" start="11236" end="11251" title="Michael Burnham" label="Michael Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11253" end="11268" title="Star Trek: Discovery" label="&amp;quot;DIS&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16341" start="11491" end="11496" title="Spock" label="Spock"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11525" end="11556" title="Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan" label="Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16351" start="11601" end="11610" title="Leonard McCoy" label="Dr. McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11649" end="11684" title="Star Trek III: The Search for Spock" label="Star Trek III: The Search for Spock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747498" start="12147" end="12156" title="Amok Time" label="Amok Time"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12220" end="12249" title="Star Trek: The Motion Picture" label="Star Trek: The Motion Picture"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12263" end="12294" title="Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan" label="Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12308" end="12343" title="Star Trek III: The Search for Spock" label="Star Trek III: The Search for Spock"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12360" end="12391" title="Star Trek V: The Final Frontier" label="Star Trek V: The Final Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q714935" start="12409" end="12420" title="Marc Okrand" label="Marc Okrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q436048" start="12851" end="12861" title="apostrophe" label="apostrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157770" start="13010" end="13027" title="Robert H. Justman" label="Robert H. Justman"/>
<link wikidata="Q191716" start="13031" end="13047" title="Gene Roddenberry" label="Gene Roddenberry"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14079" end="14100" title="This Side of Paradise (Star Trek: The Original Series)" label="This Side of Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923231" start="14244" end="14261" title="arranged marriage" label="arranged marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q16341" start="14351" end="14356" title="Spock" label="Spock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14739" end="14745" title="#Homeworld" label="Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="15413" end="15420" title="divorce" label="divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747498" start="15516" end="15525" title="Amok Time" label="Amok Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q9108122" start="16208" end="16213" title="Tuvok" label="Tuvok"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16375" end="16385" title="Yesteryear (Star Trek: The Animated Series)" label="Yesteryear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712069" start="16672" end="16677" title="Sarek" label="Sarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315662" start="16772" end="16782" title="T&amp;#x27;Pol" label="T&amp;#x27;Pol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40935468" start="16858" end="16873" title="Michael Burnham" label="Michael Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16907" end="16927" title="Star Trek: Discovery" label="Star Trek: Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506683" start="17019" end="17037" title="The Savage Curtain" label="The Savage Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264987" start="17045" end="17050" title="Surak" label="Surak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825285" start="17387" end="17405" title="Vulcan nerve pinch" label="Vulcan nerve pinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984478" start="17609" end="17623" title="The Naked Time" label="The Naked Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101459" start="17766" end="17781" title="Jonathan Archer" label="Jonathan Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16276" start="17786" end="17801" title="Jean-Luc Picard" label="Jean-Luc Picard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17940" end="17949" title="#Mind melds" label="mind-meld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712069" start="17955" end="17960" title="Sarek" label="Sarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050346" start="17963" end="17976" title="Seven of Nine" label="Seven of Nine"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18066" end="18075" title="The Raven (Star Trek: Voyager)" label="The Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q22983" start="18095" end="18099" title="Data (Star Trek)" label="Data"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18165" end="18185" title="Unification (Star Trek: The Next Generation)" label="Unification, Part II"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18521" end="18537" title="The Enemy Within (Star Trek: The Original Series)" label="The Enemy Within"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111434" start="19209" end="19216" title="pendant" label="pendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q191716" start="19381" end="19397" title="Gene Roddenberry" label="Gene Roddenberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q425779" start="19440" end="19450" title="mail order" label="mail order"/>
<link wikidata="Q26833689" start="19699" end="19718" title="Lincoln Enterprises" label="Lincoln Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487430" start="19888" end="19913" title="The Return of the Archons" label="The Return of the Archons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535038" start="19998" end="20008" title="rock hound" label="rock hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q17319698" start="20021" end="20029" title="lapidary" label="lapidary"/>
<link wikidata="Q421340" start="20274" end="20282" title="Strontium titanate" label="fabulite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16297" start="20659" end="20674" title="William Shatner" label="William Shatner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487459" start="20754" end="20782" title="Is There in Truth No Beauty?" label="Is There in Truth No Beauty?"/>
<link wikidata="Q27716878" start="21258" end="21270" title="The Humanist (magazine)" label="The Humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q232917" start="21278" end="21291" title="Majel Barrett" label="Majel Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="21415" end="21425" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q317931" start="21672" end="21685" title="dress uniform" label="dress uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487459" start="21760" end="21788" title="Is There in Truth No Beauty?" label="Is There in Truth No Beauty?"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21887" end="21922" title="Star Trek III: The Search for Spock" label="Star Trek III: The Search for Spock"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21940" end="21978" title="Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country" label="Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22006" end="22027" title="Star Trek: Enterprise" label="Star Trek: Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703141" start="22134" end="22145" title="Terra Prime" label="Terra Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q744652" start="22223" end="22244" title="The Andorian Incident" label="The Andorian Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743099" start="22404" end="22422" title="The Jem&amp;#x27;Hadar" label="The Jem&amp;#x27;Hadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677716" start="22512" end="22540" title="Take Me Out to the Holosuite" label="Take Me Out to the Holosuite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747498" start="22923" end="22932" title="Amok Time" label="Amok Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q26728105" start="22950" end="22964" title="Class M planet" label="Class M planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287667" start="23170" end="23182" title="The Man Trap" label="The Man Trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q67622062" start="23338" end="23350" title="40 Eridani A" label="40 Eridani A"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23533" end="23554" title="Star Trek: Enterprise" label="Star Trek: Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23575" end="23579" title="Home (Star Trek: Enterprise)" label="Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="23727" end="23739" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23809" end="23829" title="Star Trek: Discovery" label="Star Trek: Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q41477806" start="23850" end="23885" title="Magic to Make the Sanest Man Go Mad" label="Magic to Make the Sanest Man Go Mad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500963" start="23905" end="23914" title="Star Trek canon" label="non-canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q67622062" start="23985" end="23995" title="40 Eridani" label="40 Eridani"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="24010" end="24021" title="light-years" label="light-years"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24045" end="24065" title="Star Trek: Discovery" label="Star Trek: Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q268082" start="24181" end="24188" title="Romulan" label="Romulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213081" start="24441" end="24450" title="Star Trek (2009 film)" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q171711" start="24570" end="24593" title="Star Trek Into Darkness" label="Star Trek Into Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q9163" start="24713" end="24723" title="polytheism" label="polytheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752560" start="24753" end="24756" title="List of war deities" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224467" start="24769" end="24774" title="Death deity" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24847" end="24853" title="Gambit (Star Trek: The Next Generation)" label="Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="24865" end="24868" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747498" start="24890" end="24899" title="Amok Time" label="Amok Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q450706" start="24939" end="24952" title="D. C. Fontana" label="D. C. Fontana"/>
<link wikidata="Q241045" start="25006" end="25010" title="Bust (sculpture)" label="bust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506683" start="25254" end="25272" title="The Savage Curtain" label="The Savage Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q170413" start="25429" end="25438" title="Sputnik program" label="Sputnik I"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="25476" end="25485" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25617" end="25629" title="Carbon Creek (Star Trek: Enterprise)" label="Carbon Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="25631" end="25643" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q569678" start="25789" end="25805" title="Bozeman, Montana" label="Bozeman, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q23000" start="25856" end="25871" title="Zefram Cochrane" label="Zefram Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003852" start="25898" end="25906" title="starship" label="starship"/>
<link wikidata="Q25424534" start="26221" end="26240" title="Military junta" label="military government"/>
<link wikidata="Q20074" start="26574" end="26604" title="Enterprise (NX-01)" label="&amp;quot;Enterprise&amp;quot; (NX-01)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674495" start="27128" end="27148" title="Pa&amp;#x27;nar Syndrome" label="Pa&amp;#x27;nar Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27239" end="27248" title="#Mind melds" label="mind meld"/>
<link wikidata="Q181043" start="27328" end="27337" title="dissident" label="dissident"/>
<link wikidata="Q838239" start="27592" end="27599" title="Andorian" label="Andoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q20074" start="27640" end="27650" title="Enterprise (NX-01)" label="Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414725" start="27683" end="27697" title="Kir&amp;#x27;Shara" label="Kir&amp;#x27;Shara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264987" start="27744" end="27749" title="Surak" label="Surak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101459" start="27769" end="27784" title="Jonathan Archer" label="Jonathan Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="27953" end="27958" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110" start="28617" end="28645" title="United Federation of Planets" label="United Federation of Planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613623" start="28773" end="28778" title="Soval" label="Soval"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28979" end="28988" title="The Forge (Star Trek: Enterprise)" label="The Forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q838239" start="29166" end="29174" title="Andorian" label="Andorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700422" start="29199" end="29208" title="Tellarite" label="Tellarite"/>
<link wikidata="Q54259" start="29264" end="29271" title="Klingon" label="Klingon"/>
<link wikidata="Q186143" start="29386" end="29399" title="World War III (Star Trek)" label="World War III"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29464" end="29473" title="The Forge (Star Trek: Enterprise)" label="The Forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q55670511" start="29828" end="29835" title="Admiral (Star Trek)" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613623" start="29836" end="29851" title="Maxwell Forrest" label="Maxwell Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="30528" end="30539" title="black hole" label="singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="30987" end="30995" title="Stoicism" label="Stoicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746129" start="30998" end="31013" title="Vulcan, Alberta" label="Vulcan, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="31026" end="31032" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q213636" start="31102" end="31130" title="Vulcan (hypothetical planet)" label="Vulcan (hypothetical planet)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53382" wikidata="Q150630" url="?curid=53382" title="Camillo Golgi">
<text>Camillo Golgi (; 7 July 184321 January 1926) was an Italian biologist and pathologist known for his works on the central nervous system. He studied medicine at the University of Pavia (where he later spent most of his professional career) between 1860 and 1868 under the tutelage of Cesare Lombroso. Inspired by pathologist Giulio Bizzozero, he pursued research in the nervous system. His discovery of a staining technique called black reaction (sometimes called Golgi&#x27;s method or Golgi&#x27;s staining in his honour) in 1873 was a major breakthrough in neuroscience. Several structures and phenomena in anatomy and physiology are named for him, including the Golgi apparatus, the Golgi tendon organ and the Golgi tendon reflex.

Golgi and the Spanish biologist Santiago Ramón y Cajal were jointly given the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 1906 &quot;in recognition of their work on the structure of the nervous system&quot;.

==Biography==
Camillo Golgi was born on 7 July 1843 in the village of Corteno near Brescia, in the province of Brescia (Lombardy), at the time Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia, today Italy. The village is now named Corteno Golgi in his honour. His father Alessandro Golgi was a physician and district medical officer, originally from Pavia. In 1860, he entered the University of Pavia to study medicine, and earned his medical degree in 1865. He did an internship at the San Matteo Hospital (now IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Foundation). During his internship he briefly worked as a civil physician in the Italian Army, and as assistant surgeon at the Novara Hospital (now Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Maggiore della Carità di Novara). At the same time he was also involved in the medical team for investigating cholera epidemic in villages around Pavia.

In 1867, he resumed his academic study under the supervision of Cesare Lombroso. Lombroso was a renowned scientist in medical psychology such as genius, madness and criminality. Inspired by Lombroso, Golgi wrote a thesis on the etiology of mental disorders, from which he obtained his M.D. in 1868. He became more interested in experimental medicine, and started attending the Institute of General Pathology headed by Giulio Bizzozero. Three years his junior, Bizzozero was an eloquent teacher and experimenter, who specialised in histology of the nervous system and the properties of bone marrow. The most important research publications of Golgi were directly or indirectly influenced by Bizzozero. The two became so close that they lived in the same building; and Golgi later married Bizzozero&#x27;s niece, Lina Aletti. By 1872, Golgi was an established clinician and histopathologist. He, however, had no opportunity as a tenured professor in Pavia to pursue teaching and research in neurology.

Financial pressure prompted him to join the Hospital of the Chronically Ill (Pio Luogo degli Incurabili) in Abbiategrasso, near Milan, as Chief Medical Officer in 1872. To continue research, he set up a simple laboratory on his own in a refurbished hospital kitchen, and it was there that he started making his most notable discoveries. His major achievement was the development of staining technique for nerve tissue called the black reaction (later the Golgi&#x27;s method). He published his major works between 1875 and 1885 in the journal &quot;Rivista sperimentale di Freniatria e di medicina legale&quot;. In 1875, he joined the faculty of histology at the University of Pavia. In 1879, he was appointed Chair of Anatomy at the University of Siena. But the next year, he returned to the University of Pavia as full Professor of histology. From 1879 he also became Professor of General Pathology as well as Honorary Chief (&quot;Primario ad honorarem&quot;) at the San Matteo Hospital. He served as Rector of the University of Pavia twice, first between 1893 and 1896, and second between 1901 and 1909. During the First World War (1914–1917), he directed the military hospital Collegio Borrmeo at Pavia. He retired in 1918 and continued to research in his private laboratory till 1923. He died on 21 January 1926.

===Personal life===

Golgi and his wife Lina Aletti had no children, and they adopted Golgi&#x27;s niece Carolina.

Golgi was irreligious in his later life and became an agnostic atheist. One of his former students attempted an unsuccessful deathbed conversion on him.

==Contributions==

===Black reaction or Golgi&#x27;s staining===

The Central nervous system was difficult to study during Golgi&#x27;s time because the cells were hard to identify. The available tissue staining techniques were useless for studying nervous tissue. While working as chief medical officer at the Hospital of the Chronically Ill, he experimented with metal impregnation of nervous tissue, using mainly silver (silver staining). In early 1873, he discovered a method of staining nervous tissue that would stain a limited number of cells at random in their entirety. He first treated the tissue with potassium dichromate to harden it, and then with silver nitrate. Under the microscope, the outline of the neuron became distinct from the surrounding tissue and cells. The silver chromate precipitate, as a reaction product, selectively stains only some cellular components randomly, sparing other cell parts. The silver chromate particles create a stark black deposit on the soma (nerve cell body) as well as on the axon and all dendrites, providing an exceedingly clear and well-contrasted picture of neuron against a yellow background. This makes it easier to trace the structure of the nerve cells in the brain for the first time. Since cells are selective stained in black, he called the process &quot;la reazione nera&quot; (&quot;the black reaction&quot;), but today it is called Golgi&#x27;s method or the Golgi stain. On 16 February 1873, he wrote to his friend Niccolò Manfredi:

His discovery was published in the &quot;Gazzeta Medica Italiani&quot; on 2 August 1873.

===Nervous system===

In 1871, a German anatomist Joseph von Gerlach postulated that the brain is a complex &quot;protoplasmic network&quot;, in the form of a continuous network called the reticulum. Using his black reaction, Golgi could trace various regions of the cerebro-spinal axis, clearly distinguishing the different nervous projections, namely axon from the dendrites. He drew up a new classification of cells on the basis of the structure of their nervous prolongation. He described an extremely dense and intricate network, composed of a web of intertwined branches of axons coming from different cell layers (&quot;diffuse nervous network&quot;). This network structure, which emerges from the axons, is essentially different from that hypothesized by Gerlach. It was the main organ of the central nervous system according to Golgi. Thus, Golgi presented the reticular theory which states that the brain is a single network of nerve fibres, and not of discrete cells. Although Golgi&#x27;s earlier works between 1873 and 1885 clearly depicted the axonal connections of cerebellar cortex and olfactory bulb as independent of one another, his later works including the Nobel Lecture showed the entire granular layer of the cerebellar cortex occupied by a network of branching and anastomosing nerve processes. This was due to his strong conviction in the reticular theory. Golgi&#x27;s theory was challenged by Ramón y Cajal, who used the same technique developed by Golgi. According to Ramón y Cajal&#x27;s neurone theory, the nervous system is but a collection of individual cells, the neurones, which are interconnected to form a network.

In addition to this, Golgi was the first to give clear descriptions of the structure of the cerebellum, hippocampus, spinal cord, olfactory lobe, as well as striatal and cortical lesions in a case of chorea. In 1878, he also discovered a receptor organ that senses changes in muscle tension, and is now known as Golgi tendon organ or Golgi receptor; and Golgi-Mazzoni corpuscles (pressure transductors). He further developed a stain specific for myelin (a specialised membrane which wraps around the axon) using potassium dichromate and mercuric chloride. Using this he discovered the myelin annular apparatus, often called the horny funnel of Golgi-Rezzonico.

===Kidney===
Golgi studied kidney function during 1882 to 1889. In 1882, he published his observations on the mechanism of renal hypertrophy, which he understood to be due to renal cell proliferation. In 1884, he described tubular cell mitoses in the kidney of a person suffering from tubulointerstitial nephritis, and he noted that the process was an essential part of repairing the kidney tissue. He was the first to dissect out intact nephrons, and show that the distal tubulus (loop of Henle) of the nephron returns to its originating glomerulus, a finding that he published in 1889 (&quot;Annotazioni intorno all&#x27;Istologia dei reni dell&#x27;uomo e di altri mammifieri e sull&#x27;istogenesi dei canalicoli oriniferi&quot;. &quot;Rendiconti R. Acad. Lincei&quot; 5: 545–557, 1889).

===Malaria===
A French Army physician Charles Louis Alphonse Laveran discovered that malaria was caused by microscopic parasite (now called &quot;Plasmodium falciparum&quot;) in 1880. But scientists were sceptical until Golgi intervened. It was Golgi who helped him prove that malarial parasite was a microscopic protozoan. From 1885, Golgi studied the malarial parasite and its transmission. He established two types of malaria, tertian and quartan fevers caused by &quot;Plasmodium vivax&quot; and &quot;Plasmodium malariae&quot; respectively. In 1886, he discovered that malarial fever (paroxysm) was produced by the asexual stage in the human blood (called erythrocytic cycle, or Golgi cycle). In 1889–1890, Golgi and Ettore Marchiafava described the differences between benign tertian malaria and malignant tertian malaria (the latter caused by &quot;P. falciparum&quot;). By 1898, along with Giovanni Battista Grassi, Amico Bignami, Giuseppe Bastianelli, Angelo Celli and Marchiafava, he confirmed that malaria was transmitted by anopheline mosquitoes.

===Cell organelle===

An organelle in eukaryotic cells now known as Golgi apparatus or Golgi complex, or sometimes simply as Golgi, was discovered by Camillo Golgi. Golgi modified his black reaction using osmium dichromate solution with which he stained the nerve cells (Purkinje cells) of the cerebellum of a barn owl. He noticed thread-like networks inside the cells and named them &quot;apparato reticolare interno&quot; (internal reticular apparatus). Recognising them to be unique cellular components, he presented his discovery before the Medical-Surgical Society of Pavia in April 1898. After the same was confirmed by his assistant Emilio Veratti, he published it in the &quot;Bollettino della Società medico-chirurgica di Pavia&quot;. However, most scientists disputed his discovery as nothing but a staining artefact. Their microscopes were not powerful enough to identify the organelles. By the 1930s, Golgi&#x27;s description was largely rejected. It was only firmly established 50 years after its discovery, when electron microscopes were developed.

==Awards and legacy==
Golgi, together with Santiago Ramón y Cajal, received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1906 for his studies of the structure of the nervous system. In 1900 he was named senator by King Umberto I. In 1913 he became foreign member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. He received honorary doctorates from the University of Cambridge, University of Geneva, Kristiania University College, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, and Paris-Sorbonne University. In 1994, the European Community commemorated him with postage stamps.

=== Monuments in Pavia ===
In Pavia several landmarks stand as Golgi&#x27;s memory.
* A marble statue, in a yard of the old buildings of the University of Pavia, at N.65 of the central &quot;Strada Nuova&quot;. On the basement, there is the following inscription in Italian language: &quot;Camillo Golgi / patologo sommo / della scienza istologica / antesignano e maestro / la segreta struttura / del tessuto nervoso / con intenta vigilia / sorprese e descrisse / qui operò / qui vive / guida e luce ai venturi / MDCCCXLIII – MCMXXVI&quot; (&quot;Camillo Golgi / outstanding pathologist / of histological science / precursor and master / the secret structure / of the nervous tissue / with strenuous effort / discovered and described / here he worked / here he lives / here he guides and enlightens future scholars / 1843 – 1926)&quot;.
* &quot;Golgi’s home&quot;, also in Strada Nuova, at N.77, a few hundreds meters away from the University, just in front to the historical &quot;Teatro Fraschini&quot;. It is the home in which Golgi spent the most of his family life, with his wife Lina.
* Golgi&#x27;s tomb is in the Monumental Cemetery of Pavia (viale San Giovannino), along the central lane, just before the big monument to the fallen of the First World War. It is a very simple granite grave, with a bronze medallion representing the scientist&#x27;s profile. Near Golgi&#x27;s tomb, apart from his wife, two other important Italian medical scientists are buried: Bartolomeo Panizza and Adelchi Negri.
* Golgi&#x27;s museum was created in 2012, in the ancient Palazzo Botta of the University of Pavia at N.10 of Piazza Antoniotto Botta reconstructs the study of Camillo Golgi and its laboratories with furniture and original instruments.

==Eponyms==
* The organelle Golgi apparatus or Golgi complex
* The sensory receptor Golgi tendon organ
* Golgi&#x27;s method or Golgi stain, a nervous tissue staining technique
* The enzyme Golgi alpha-mannosidase II
* Golgi cells of the cerebellum
* Golgi I nerve cells (with long axons)
* Golgi II nerve cells (with short or no axons)
* Golgi (crater), a lunar impact crater 
* Minor planet 6875 Golgi is named after him.

==See also==
* List of pathologists

== References ==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Life and Discoveries of Camillo Golgi
* including the Nobel Lecture on 11 December 1906 &quot;The Neuron Doctrine – Theory and Facts&quot;
* Some places and memories related to Camillo Golgi
* The museum in Corteno, now called Corteno Golgi, dedicated to Golgi. Includes a gallery of images of his birthplace.
* The Museum Camillo Golgi in Pavia
* Biography at Encyclopædia Britannica
* Biography at Encyclopedia.com
* Profile at Whonamedit?
* IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Foundation 
* Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Maggiore della Carità di Novara</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q150630" start="0" end="13" title="Camillo Golgi" label="Camillo Golgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="52" end="59" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q864503" start="60" end="69" title="biologist" label="biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208" start="74" end="85" title="pathologist" label="pathologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="113" end="135" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q219317" start="164" end="183" title="University of Pavia" label="University of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202420" start="283" end="298" title="Cesare Lombroso" label="Cesare Lombroso"/>
<link wikidata="Q703754" start="324" end="340" title="Giulio Bizzozero" label="Giulio Bizzozero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196894" start="463" end="482" title="Golgi&amp;#x27;s method" label="Golgi&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="609" end="616" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="621" end="631" title="physiology" label="physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q83181" start="665" end="680" title="Golgi apparatus" label="Golgi apparatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457958" start="686" end="704" title="Golgi tendon organ" label="Golgi tendon organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580668" start="713" end="732" title="Golgi tendon reflex" label="Golgi tendon reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q150526" start="767" end="789" title="Santiago Ramón y Cajal" label="Santiago Ramón y Cajal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="813" end="850" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16144" start="1037" end="1056" title="province of Brescia" label="province of Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="1058" end="1066" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104096" start="1148" end="1161" title="Corteno Golgi" label="Corteno Golgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q219317" start="1298" end="1317" title="University of Pavia" label="University of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q959265" start="1750" end="1766" title="Cholera outbreaks and pandemics" label="cholera epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202420" start="1858" end="1873" title="Cesare Lombroso" label="Cesare Lombroso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916597" start="1912" end="1930" title="medical psychology" label="medical psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="2034" end="2050" title="mental disorders" label="mental disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q913404" start="2079" end="2083" title="Doctor of Medicine" label="M.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q546523" start="2379" end="2390" title="bone marrow" label="bone marrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q42777" start="2903" end="2916" title="Abbiategrasso" label="Abbiategrasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196894" start="3250" end="3269" title="Golgi&amp;#x27;s method" label="Golgi&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245999" start="3529" end="3548" title="University of Siena" label="University of Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3914" end="3929" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247662" start="4356" end="4375" title="deathbed conversion" label="deathbed conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="4455" end="4477" title="Central nervous system" label="Central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332446" start="4581" end="4607" title="Staining (biology)" label="tissue staining techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q203850" start="4634" end="4648" title="nervous tissue" label="nervous tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="4801" end="4807" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q907841" start="4809" end="4824" title="silver staining" label="silver staining"/>
<link wikidata="Q842429" start="5372" end="5376" title="Soma (biology)" label="soma"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="5413" end="5417" title="axon" label="axon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12821248" start="5426" end="5435" title="dendrites" label="dendrites"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="5499" end="5505" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196894" start="5783" end="5802" title="Golgi&amp;#x27;s method" label="Golgi&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q472732" start="6026" end="6044" title="Joseph von Gerlach" label="Joseph von Gerlach"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="6329" end="6333" title="axon" label="axon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12821248" start="6343" end="6351" title="dendrite" label="dendrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148595" start="6847" end="6863" title="reticular theory" label="reticular theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q130983" start="7057" end="7074" title="cerebellar cortex" label="cerebellar cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q644945" start="7079" end="7093" title="olfactory bulb" label="olfactory bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108577" start="7494" end="7508" title="Neuron doctrine" label="neurone theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q130983" start="7721" end="7731" title="cerebellum" label="cerebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q48360" start="7733" end="7744" title="hippocampus" label="hippocampus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="7746" end="7757" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q644945" start="7759" end="7773" title="Olfactory bulb" label="olfactory lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319792" start="7786" end="7794" title="Striatum" label="striatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076421" start="7829" end="7835" title="chorea" label="chorea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457958" start="7941" end="7959" title="Golgi tendon organ" label="Golgi tendon organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q105790271" start="8075" end="8081" title="myelin" label="myelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q239729" start="8141" end="8161" title="potassium dichromate" label="potassium dichromate"/>
<link wikidata="Q143200" start="8166" end="8183" title="mercuric chloride" label="mercuric chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054718" start="8414" end="8431" title="renal hypertrophy" label="renal hypertrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424106" start="8576" end="8604" title="tubulointerstitial nephritis" label="tubulointerstitial nephritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q58184" start="8729" end="8737" title="nephrons" label="nephrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813955" start="8773" end="8786" title="loop of Henle" label="loop of Henle"/>
<link wikidata="Q909882" start="8830" end="8840" title="Glomerulus (kidney)" label="glomerulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189006" start="9122" end="9152" title="Charles Louis Alphonse Laveran" label="Charles Louis Alphonse Laveran"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="9169" end="9176" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q311383" start="9230" end="9251" title="Plasmodium falciparum" label="Plasmodium falciparum"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="9397" end="9406" title="protozoan" label="protozoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="9534" end="9539" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q311376" start="9557" end="9573" title="Plasmodium vivax" label="Plasmodium vivax"/>
<link wikidata="Q133969" start="9590" end="9609" title="Plasmodium malariae" label="Plasmodium malariae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053948" start="9674" end="9682" title="Paroxysmal attack" label="paroxysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371887" start="9806" end="9824" title="Ettore Marchiafava" label="Ettore Marchiafava"/>
<link wikidata="Q706466" start="9982" end="10006" title="Giovanni Battista Grassi" label="Giovanni Battista Grassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843282" start="10008" end="10021" title="Amico Bignami" label="Amico Bignami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770075" start="10023" end="10043" title="Giuseppe Bastianelli" label="Giuseppe Bastianelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057343" start="10045" end="10057" title="Angelo Celli" label="Angelo Celli"/>
<link wikidata="Q158597" start="10120" end="10130" title="Anopheles" label="anopheline"/>
<link wikidata="Q83181" start="10212" end="10227" title="Golgi apparatus" label="Golgi apparatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570272" start="10415" end="10428" title="Purkinje cell" label="Purkinje cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q150526" start="11251" end="11273" title="Santiago Ramón y Cajal" label="Santiago Ramón y Cajal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="11288" end="11325" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q633872" start="11411" end="11418" title="Italian senate" label="senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q153688" start="11427" end="11436" title="Umberto I of Italy" label="Umberto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q253439" start="11478" end="11524" title="Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q219317" start="11936" end="11955" title="University of Pavia" label="University of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106763" start="13266" end="13284" title="Bartolomeo Panizza" label="Bartolomeo Panizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397599" start="13289" end="13302" title="Adelchi Negri" label="Adelchi Negri"/>
<link wikidata="Q219317" start="13383" end="13402" title="University of Pavia" label="University of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83181" start="13569" end="13584" title="Golgi apparatus" label="Golgi apparatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83181" start="13588" end="13601" title="Golgi complex" label="Golgi complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457958" start="13625" end="13643" title="Golgi tendon organ" label="Golgi tendon organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196894" start="13646" end="13665" title="Golgi&amp;#x27;s method" label="Golgi&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q10897645" start="13731" end="13757" title="Golgi alpha-mannosidase II" label="Golgi alpha-mannosidase II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580667" start="13760" end="13770" title="Golgi cell" label="Golgi cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580667" start="13792" end="13799" title="Golgi I" label="Golgi I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580667" start="13832" end="13840" title="Golgi II" label="Golgi II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536475" start="13880" end="13894" title="Golgi (crater)" label="Golgi (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q313483" start="13934" end="13944" title="6875 Golgi" label="6875 Golgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632067" start="13981" end="14001" title="List of pathologists" label="List of pathologists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53386" wikidata="Q2958511" url="?curid=53386" title="Charles Beaumont">
<text>Charles Beaumont (born Charles Leroy Nutt; January 2, 1929 – February 21, 1967) was an American author of speculative fiction, including short stories in the horror and science fiction subgenres. He is remembered as a writer of classic &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; episodes, such as &quot;The Howling Man&quot;, &quot;Static&quot;, &quot;Miniature&quot;, &quot;Printer&#x27;s Devil&quot;, and &quot;Number Twelve Looks Just Like You&quot;, but also penned the screenplays for several films, such as &quot;7 Faces of Dr. Lao&quot;, &quot;The Intruder&quot;, and &quot;The Masque of the Red Death&quot;.

Novelist Dean Koontz said &quot;Charles Beaumont was one of the seminal influences on writers of the fantastic and macabre.&quot; Beaumont is also the subject of the documentary &quot;Charles Beaumont: The Short Life of Twilight Zone&#x27;s Magic Man&quot; by Jason V. Brock.

==Life and work==
Beaumont was born Charles Leroy Nutt in Chicago, on January 2, 1929, the only child of Charles Hiram Nutt (an auditor of freight accounts for the Chicago &amp; Alton Railroad) and Violet &quot;Letty&quot; (Phillips) Nutt, a homemaker who had been a scenarist at Essanay Studios. His father was 56 when Charles was born; Letty, his mother, was 22 years her husband&#x27;s junior. Letty is known to have dressed young Charles in girls&#x27; clothes, and once threatened to kill his dog to punish him. These early experiences inspired the celebrated short story &quot;Miss Gentilbelle&quot;, but according to Beaumont, &quot;Football, baseball, and dimestore cookie thefts filled my early world&quot;.

School did not hold his attention, and his last name exposed him to ridicule, so Charles Nutt found solace as a teenager in science fiction. He dropped out of high school in tenth grade to join the Army in the final years of World War II. He also worked as a cartoonist, illustrator, disc jockey, usher, and dishwasher before selling his first story to &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; in 1950. During his time as an illustrator, he briefly used the pseudonyms Charles McNutt (circa 1947/48) and E.T. Beaumont (inspired by a female artist named &quot;Miss Beaumont&quot; with whom he had collaborated in Everett, Washington), before settling on the name Charles Beaumont. He soon adopted this name legally and used it both personally and professionally for the rest of his life.

In 1954, &quot;Playboy&quot; magazine selected his story &quot;Black Country&quot; to be the first work of short fiction to appear in its pages. It was at this time that Beaumont started writing for television and film.

Beaumont was energetic and spontaneous, and was known to take trips (sometimes out of the country) at a moment&#x27;s notice. An avid racing fan, he often enjoyed participating in or watching area speedway races, with other authors tagging along. Beaumont and several friends built their own SCCA H Modified racecar dubbed the &quot;Monzetta&quot;, consisting of Panhard mechanicals and a Devin body and chassis, which was raced at many Southern California tracks including Paramount Ranch Racetrack. 

His cautionary fables include &quot;The Beautiful People&quot; (1952), about a rebellious adolescent girl in a future conformist society in which people are obligated to alter their physical appearance (adapted with friend and frequent writing partner John Tomerlin as an episode of &quot;Twilight Zone&quot;, &quot;Number 12 Looks Just Like You&quot;), and &quot;Free Dirt&quot; (1955), about a man who gorges on his entire vegetable harvest and dies from having consumed the magical soil he used to grow it.

His short story &quot;The Crooked Man&quot; (also published by &quot;Playboy&quot; in 1955) presents a dystopian future wherein heterosexuality is stigmatized in the same way that homosexuality then was, with heterosexual people living furtively like pre-Stonewall gay and lesbian people. In the story, a heterosexual man meets his lover in a gay orgy bar; they try to have sex in a curtained booth (she dressed in male drag) and are caught.

Beaumont wrote several scripts for &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;, including an adaptation of his own short story, &quot;The Howling Man&quot;, about a prisoner who might be the Devil, and the hour-long &quot;Valley of the Shadow&quot;, about a cloistered Utopia that refuses to share its startlingly advanced technology with the outside world.

Beaumont scripted the film &quot;Queen of Outer Space&quot; from an outline by Ben Hecht, deliberately writing the screenplay as a parody. According to Beaumont, the directorial style is not informed by his satiric intent. He penned one episode of the TV show &quot;Steve Canyon&quot;, titled &quot;Operation B-52&quot;, in which Canyon and his crew attempt to set a speed record in a B-52 accompanied by a newsman who hates Air Force pilots.

Beaumont was much admired by his colleagues (Ray Bradbury, Harlan Ellison, Richard Matheson, Robert Bloch, Roger Corman). Many of his stories have been re-released in the posthumous volumes &quot;Best of Beaumont&quot; (Bantam, 1982) and &quot;The Howling Man&quot; (Tom Doherty, 1992), and a set of previously unpublished tales, &quot;A Touch of the Creature&quot; (Subterranean Press, 1999). In 2004, Gauntlet Press released the first of two volumes collecting Beaumont&#x27;s &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; scripts.

Beaumont wrote several scripts for Roger Corman including &quot;The Intruder&quot;. According to &quot;Filmink&quot;, &quot;In Corman-ology, Beaumont’s often confused for Richard Matheson.&quot;

A book-length biography of Beaumont, titled &quot;Trapped in the Twilight Zone: The Life and Times of Charles Beaumont&quot;, by Roger Anker, is due to be published by Centipede Press in late 2024.

==Illness and death==
In 1963, when Beaumont was 34 and overwhelmed by numerous writing commitments, he began to suffer the effects of &quot;a mysterious brain disease&quot; which seemed to age him rapidly. His ability to speak, concentrate, and remember became erratic. While some people attributed all of this to Beaumont&#x27;s heavy drinking, his friend and colleague John Tomerlin disagreed: &quot;I was working closely with Chuck at the time, and we were good enough friends for me to know that alcohol by itself could not possibly account for the odd state of mind that he was in.&quot;

&quot;He was rarely well,&quot; his friend and colleague William F. Nolan later recalled. &quot;He was thin, and kept having headaches. He used Bromo-Seltzer like most people use water. He had a big Bromo bottle with him all the time&quot;. The disease also affected his work. &quot;He could barely sell stories, much less write. He would go unshaven to meetings with producers, which would end in disaster. [A script writer has] got to be able to think on your feet, which Chuck couldn&#x27;t do anymore; and so the producers would just go, &#x27;We&#x27;re sorry, Mr. Beaumont, but we don&#x27;t like the script&#x27;.&quot;

The condition might have been related to the spinal meningitis he suffered as a child. His friend and early agent Forrest J. Ackerman has asserted an alternative, that Beaumont suffered simultaneously from Alzheimer&#x27;s disease and Pick&#x27;s disease. This claim was supported by the UCLA Medical Staff, who subjected Beaumont to a battery of tests in the summer of 1964 that indicated that it might be either Alzheimer&#x27;s or Pick&#x27;s. Nolan recalls that the UCLA doctors sent Beaumont home with a death sentence: &quot;They said &#x27;There&#x27;s absolutely no treatment for this disease. It&#x27;s permanent and it&#x27;s terminal. He&#x27;ll probably live from six months to three years with it. He&#x27;ll decline and get to where he can&#x27;t stand up. He won&#x27;t feel any pain. In fact, he won&#x27;t even know this is happening&#x27;.&quot; In Nolan&#x27;s own words: &quot;Like his character &#x27;Walter Jameson,&#x27; Chuck just dusted away&quot;.

Several fellow writers, including Nolan and friend Jerry Sohl, began ghostwriting for Beaumont during 1963–1964, so that he could meet his many writing obligations. Privately, he insisted on splitting these fees. By 1965, however, Beaumont was too ill to even create or sell story ideas. His last on-screen writing credit was for the 1965 film &quot;Mister Moses&quot;, officially a screenplay written with (but more likely written by) Monja Danischewsky.

On February 21, 1967, Beaumont died in Woodland Hills, California at the age of 38. His son Christopher later said that his father, &quot;[...]looked ninety-five and was, in fact, ninety-five by every calendar except the one on your watch&quot;.

==Bibliography==

===&quot;Twilight Zone&quot; credits===
The following is a list of episodes Beaumont penned for &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; (an asterisk indicates that the episode was credited to Beaumont, but ghostwritten by Jerry Sohl).
*&quot;Perchance to Dream&quot;
*&quot;Elegy&quot;
*&quot;Long Live Walter Jameson&quot;
*&quot;A Nice Place to Visit&quot;
*&quot;The Howling Man&quot;
*&quot;Static&quot; (story by OCee Ritch)
*&quot;The Prime Mover&quot; (story by George Clayton Johnson)
*&quot;Long Distance Call&quot; (co-written with Bill Idelson)
*&quot;Shadow Play&quot;
*&quot;The Jungle&quot;
*&quot;Dead Man&#x27;s Shoes&quot; (story only; ghostwritten by OCee Ritch) 
*&quot;The Fugitive&quot;
*&quot;Person or Persons Unknown&quot;
*&quot;In His Image&quot; 
*&quot;Valley of the Shadow&quot;
*&quot;Miniature&quot;
*&quot;Printer&#x27;s Devil&quot;
*&quot;The New Exhibit&quot; *
*&quot;Passage on the Lady Anne&quot;
*&quot;Living Doll&quot; *
*&quot;Number 12 Looks Just Like You&quot; (co-written with John Tomerlin)
*&quot;Queen of the Nile&quot; *

===Short stories===
*&quot;The Devil, You Say?&quot; (Jan 1951, &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, adapted for &quot;Twilight Zone&quot;)
*&quot;The Beautiful People&quot; (Sep 1952, &quot;If&quot;, adapted for &quot;Twilight Zone&quot;)
*&quot;Fritzchen&quot; (1953, &quot;Orbit #1&quot;)
*&quot;Place of Meeting&quot; (1953, &quot;Orbit #2&quot;)
*&quot;Elegy&quot; (Feb 1953, &quot;Imagination&quot;, adapted for &quot;Twilight Zone&quot;)
*&quot;The Last Caper&quot; (Mar 1954, &quot;F&amp;SF&quot;)
*&quot;Keeper of the Dream&quot; (1954, &quot;Time to Come&quot;)
*&quot;Mass for Mixed Voices&quot; (May 1954, &quot;Science Fiction Quarterly&quot;)
*&quot;Hair of the Dog&quot; (Jul 1954, &quot;Orbit #3&quot;)
*&quot;The Quadriopticon&quot; (Aug 1954, &quot;F&amp;SF&quot;)
*&quot;Black Country&quot; (Sep 1954, &quot;Playboy&quot;)
*&quot;The Jungle&quot; (Dec 1954, &quot;If&quot;, adapted for &quot;Twilight Zone&quot;)
*&quot;The Murderers&quot; (Feb 1955, &quot;Esquire&quot;)
*&quot;The Hunger&quot; (Apr 1955, &quot;Playboy&quot;)
*&quot;The Last Word&quot; (with Chad Oliver, Apr 1955, &quot;F&amp;SF&quot;)
*&quot;Free Dirt&quot; (May 1955, &quot;F&amp;SF&quot;, adapted for &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; as a radio drama)
*&quot;The New Sound&quot; (Jun 1955, &quot;F&amp;SF&quot;)
*&quot;The Crooked Man&quot; (Aug 1955, &quot;Playboy&quot;)
*&quot;The Vanishing American&quot; (Aug 1955, &quot;F&amp;SF&quot;)
*&quot;Last Rites&quot; (Oct 1955, &quot;If&quot;)
*&quot;A Point of Honor&quot; / &quot;I&#x27;ll Do Anything&quot; (Nov 1955, &quot;Manhunt&quot;)
*&quot;A Classic Affair&quot; (Dec 1955, &quot;Playboy&quot;)
*&quot;Traumerei&quot; (Feb 1956, &quot;Infinity Science Fiction&quot;)
*&quot;The Monster Show&quot; (May 1956, &quot;Playboy&quot;)
*&quot;The Guests of Chance&quot; (with Chad Oliver, Jun 1956, &quot;Infinity Science Fiction&quot;)
*&quot;You Can&#x27;t Have Them All&quot; (Aug 1956, &quot;Playboy&quot;)
*&quot;Last Night in the Rain&quot; / &quot;Sin Tower&quot; (Oct 1956, &quot;Nugget&quot;)
*&quot;The Dark Music&quot; (Dec 1956, &quot;Playboy&quot;)
*&quot;Oh Father of Mine&quot; / &quot;Father, Dear Father&quot; (Jan 1957, &quot;Venture&quot;)
*&quot;The Love-Master&quot; (Feb 1957, &quot;Rogue&quot;)
*&quot;The Man Who Made Himself&quot; / &quot;In His Image&quot; (Feb 1957, &quot;Imagination&quot;, adapted for &quot;Twilight Zone&quot;)
*&quot;Night Ride&quot; (Mar 1957, &quot;Playboy&quot;)
*&quot;The Customers&quot; (Apr 1957, &quot;The Hunger and Other Stories&quot;)
*&quot;Fair Lady&quot; (Apr 1957, &quot;The Hunger and Other Stories&quot;)
*&quot;The Infernal Bouillabaisse&quot; (Apr 1957, &quot;The Hunger and Other Stories&quot;)
*&quot;Miss Gentilbelle&quot; (Apr 1957, &quot;The Hunger and Other Stories&quot;)
*&quot;Nursery Rhyme&quot; (Apr 1957, &quot;The Hunger and Other Stories&quot;)
*&quot;Open House&quot; (Apr 1957, &quot;The Hunger and Other Stories&quot;)
*&quot;Tears of the Madonna&quot; (Apr 1957, &quot;The Hunger and Other Stories&quot;)
*&quot;The Train&quot; (Apr 1957, &quot;The Hunger and Other Stories&quot;)
*&quot;A Death in the Country&quot; / &quot;The Deadly Will Win&quot; (Nov 1957, &quot;Playboy&quot;)
*&quot;Anthem&quot; (Apr 1958, &quot;Yonder&quot;)
*&quot;Mother&#x27;s Day&quot; (Apr 1958, &quot;Yonder&quot;)
*&quot;A World of Differents&quot; (Apr 1958, &quot;Yonder&quot;)
*&quot;The New People&quot; (Aug 1958, &quot;Rogue&quot;)
*&quot;Perchance to Dream&quot; (Oct 1958, &quot;Playboy&quot;, adapted for &quot;Twilight Zone&quot;)
*&quot;The Intruder&quot; (1959, excerpt of chapter ten of the novel)
*&quot;The Music of the Yellow Brass&quot; (Jan 1959, &quot;Playboy&quot;)
*&quot;The Trigger&quot; (Jan 1959, &quot;Mystery Digest&quot;)
*&quot;Sorcerer&#x27;s Moon&quot; (Jul 1959, &quot;Playboy&quot;)
*&quot;The Howling Man&quot; (Nov 1959, &quot;Rogue&quot;, adapted for &quot;Twilight Zone&quot;)
*&quot;Buck Fever&quot; (Mar 1960, &quot;Night Ride and Other Journeys&quot;)
*&quot;The Magic Man&quot; (Mar 1960, &quot;Night Ride and Other Journeys&quot;)
*&quot;The Neighbors&quot; (Mar 1960, &quot;Night Ride and Other Journeys&quot;)
*&quot;Song For a Lady&quot; (Mar 1960, &quot;Night Ride and Other Journeys&quot;, adapted for &quot;Twilight Zone&quot;)
*&quot;Gentlemen, Be Seated&quot; (Apr 1960, &quot;Rogue&quot;, adapted for &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; as a radio drama)
*&quot;Three Thirds of a Ghost&quot; / &quot;The Baron&#x27;s Secret&quot; (Aug 1960, &quot;Nugget&quot;)
*&quot;Blood Brother&quot; (Apr 1961, &quot;Playboy&quot;)
*&quot;Mourning Song&quot; (1963, &quot;Gamma #1&quot;)
*&quot;Something in the Earth&quot; (1963, &quot;Gamma #2&quot;)
*&quot;Auto Suggestion&quot; (1965, &quot;Gamma #5&quot;)
*&quot;Insomnia Vobiscum&quot; (1982, &quot;Best of Beaumont&quot;)
*&quot;My Grandmother&#x27;s Japonicas&quot; (1984, &quot;Masques #1&quot;)
*&quot;Appointment with Eddie&quot; (1987, &quot;The Howling Man&quot;)
*&quot;The Carnival&quot; (1987, &quot;The Howling Man&quot;)
*&quot;The Crime of Willie Washington&quot; (1987, &quot;The Howling Man&quot;)
*&quot;The Man with the Crooked Nose&quot; (1987, &quot;The Howling Man&quot;)
*&quot;To Hell with Claude&quot; (with Chad Oliver, 1987, &quot;The Howling Man&quot;)
*&quot;The Wages of Cynicism&quot; (1999)
*&quot;Adam&#x27;s Off Ox&quot; (2000, &quot;A Touch of the Creature&quot;)
*&quot;Fallen Star&quot; (2000, &quot;A Touch of the Creature&quot;)
*&quot;A Friend of the Family&quot; (2000, &quot;A Touch of the Creature&quot;)
*&quot;The Indian Piper&quot; (2000, &quot;A Touch of the Creature&quot;)
*&quot;The Junemoon Spoon&quot; (2000, &quot;A Touch of the Creature&quot;)
*&quot;Lachrymosa&quot; (2000, &quot;A Touch of the Creature&quot;)
*&quot;A Long Way from Capri&quot; (2000, &quot;A Touch of the Creature&quot;)
*&quot;Moon in Gemini&quot; (2000, &quot;A Touch of the Creature&quot;)
*&quot;Mr. Underhill&quot; (2000, &quot;A Touch of the Creature&quot;)
*&quot;The Pool&quot; (2000, &quot;A Touch of the Creature&quot;)
*&quot;Resurrection Island&quot; (2000, &quot;A Touch of the Creature&quot;)
*&quot;The Rival&quot; (2000, &quot;A Touch of the Creature&quot;)
*&quot;Time and Again&quot; (2000, &quot;A Touch of the Creature&quot;)
*&quot;With the Family&quot; (2000, &quot;A Touch of the Creature&quot;)
*&quot;I, Claude&quot; (with Chad Oliver)
*&quot;The Rest of Science Fiction&quot; (with Chad Oliver)

===Short story collections===
====Collections published during Beaumont&#x27;s lifetime====
*&quot;The Hunger and Other Stories&quot; (Apr 1957; UK title &quot;Shadow Play&quot;)
*&quot;Yonder&quot; (Apr 1958)
*&quot;Night Ride and Other Journeys&quot; (Mar 1960)
*&quot;The Magic Man&quot; (1965) (containing nine stories from &quot;The Hunger&quot;, three from &quot;Yonder&quot; and six from &quot;Night Ride&quot;)
*&quot;The Edge&quot; (1966) (containing three stories from &quot;Yonder&quot; and eight from &quot;Night Ride&quot;)

====Collections published posthumously====
*&quot;Best of Beaumont&quot; (Nov 1982) (featuring selected from previous collections and four not previously collected)
*&quot;Selected Stories&quot; (1988) (reprinted as &quot;The Howling Man&quot;, 1992) (featuring stories from previous collection and eight previously uncollected stories)&quot;
*&quot;A Touch of the Creature&quot; (2000) (fourteen previously unpublished/unfinished stories)
*&quot;Mass for Mixed Voices&quot; (2013) (expanded version of &quot;Selected Stories&quot; with two previously unpublished stories [&quot;Life of the Party&quot; and &quot;The Child&quot;], a new introduction, and three new story prefaces)
*&quot;Perchance to Dream&quot; (2015)
*&quot;The Carnival and Other Stories&quot; (2022)

===Film===
*&quot;Tradita&quot; (1954)
*&quot;Queen of Outer Space&quot; (1958)
*&quot;Ursula&quot; (1961, based on Beaumont&#x27;s short story &quot;Miss Gentilbelle&quot;)
*&quot;Night of the Eagle&quot; (1962) U.S. title &quot;Burn, Witch, Burn!&quot; (screenplay co-written with Richard Matheson and George Baxt based on &quot;Conjure Wife&quot; by Fritz Leiber)
*&quot;Premature Burial&quot; (1962) (based on &quot;The Premature Burial&quot; by Edgar Allan Poe)
*&quot;The Wonderful World of the Brothers Grimm&quot; (1962)
*&quot;The Intruder&quot; (1962, based on Beaumont&#x27;s novel. Also acted in a supporting role.)
*&quot;The Haunted Palace&quot; (1963) (based on the Edgar Allan Poe poem of the same name and by the short novel &quot;The Case of Charles Dexter Ward&quot; by H.P. Lovecraft)
*&quot;7 Faces of Dr. Lao&quot; (1964) (based on the short novel &quot;The Circus of Dr. Lao&quot; by Charles G. Finney)
*&quot;The Masque of the Red Death&quot; (1964) (based on eponymous short story by Edgar Allan Poe)
*&quot;Mister Moses&quot; (1965)
*&quot;Journey Into Darkness&quot; (1968, based on Beaumont&#x27;s short story &quot;The New People&quot;)
*&quot;Brain Dead&quot; (1990) (produced posthumously, from his screenplay)
*&quot;Miss Gentilbelle&quot; (2000)

===Novel===
*&quot;Run from the Hunter&quot; (1957, as Keith Grantland, co-authored by John Tomerlin)
*&quot;The Intruder&quot; (1959)

===Nonfiction===
*&quot;Remember? Remember?&quot; (1956, essays on American pop culture between the world wars)
*&quot;Omnibus of Speed: An Introduction to the World of Motorsport&quot; (1958, with William F. Nolan)

===Comics===
*Li&#x27;l Bad Wolf (untitled story) &quot;Walt Disney&#x27;s Comics and Stories&quot; #170 (1954)
*&quot;A Soft Life&quot; &quot;Woody Woodpecker&quot; #29 (1955)
*&quot;Why Birds Leave Home&quot; &quot;Tweety and Sylvester&quot; #8 (1955)
*&quot;The Mystery of Whalers&#x27; Cove&quot; &quot;Mickey Mouse&quot; #43 (1955) 
*&quot;The Adventure of the Silver Parrot&quot; &quot;Mickey Mouse&quot; #45 (1955/56) 
*&quot;The Mardi Gras Mystery&quot; &quot;Mickey Mouse&quot; #46 (1956) 
*&quot;The Mystery of Diamond Mountain&quot; &quot;Mickey Mouse&quot; #47 (1956) 
*&quot;The Mammoth Adventure&quot; &quot;Mickey Mouse&quot; #48 (1956)
*&quot;The Case of the Vanishing Bandit&quot; &quot;Mickey Mouse&quot; #48 (1956)
*&quot;The Giant Pearls of Agoo Island&quot; &quot;Mickey Mouse&quot; #49 (1956)
*&quot;Trouble Cooking&quot; &quot;Mickey Mouse&quot; #51 (1956-7)

===Note===
Beaumont co-wrote the stories with William F. Nolan.

==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Running from the Hunter: The Life and Works of Charles Beaumont&quot;, by Lee Prosser, (1996), .
* &quot;California Sorcery&quot;, edited by William F. Nolan and William Schafer.
* &quot;The Work of Charles Beaumont: An Annotated Bibliography &amp; Guide&quot;, by William F. Nolan.

==External links==

* Bibliographical information 
* 
* 
* The Comic World &quot;Fortnight&quot; May 1955 
* George Clayton Johnson interview in the Archive of American Television
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2958511" start="0" end="16" title="Charles Beaumont" label="Charles Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958511" start="23" end="41" title="Charles Beaumont" label="Charles Leroy Nutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q233762" start="87" end="102" title="American literature" label="American author"/>
<link wikidata="Q9326077" start="106" end="125" title="speculative fiction" label="speculative fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="137" end="150" title="short stories" label="short stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="158" end="164" title="Horror fiction" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="169" end="184" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="242" end="255" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628044" start="286" end="301" title="The Howling Man" label="The Howling Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711049" start="315" end="321" title="Static (The Twilight Zone)" label="Static"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725982" start="335" end="344" title="Miniature (The Twilight Zone)" label="Miniature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245297" start="358" end="378" title="Printer&amp;#x27;s Devil" label="Printer&amp;#x27;s Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776915" start="396" end="429" title="Number Twelve Looks Just Like You" label="Number Twelve Looks Just Like You"/>
<link wikidata="Q839916" start="502" end="520" title="7 Faces of Dr. Lao" label="7 Faces of Dr. Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018199" start="534" end="546" title="The Intruder (1962 film)" label="The Intruder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225929" start="564" end="591" title="The Masque of the Red Death (1964 film)" label="The Masque of the Red Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q272076" start="609" end="620" title="Dean Koontz" label="Dean Koontz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163660" start="860" end="874" title="Jason V. Brock" label="Jason V. Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q28389" start="1144" end="1153" title="scenarist" label="scenarist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368540" start="1157" end="1172" title="Essanay Studios" label="Essanay Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="1793" end="1797" title="United States Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1820" end="1832" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="1954" end="1969" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="2385" end="2392" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="2725" end="2731" title="auto racing" label="racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467696" start="2883" end="2887" title="Sports Car Club of America" label="SCCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q731471" start="2954" end="2961" title="Panhard" label="Panhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206891" start="2980" end="2985" title="Devin Enterprises" label="Devin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22024520" start="3065" end="3090" title="Paramount Ranch Racetrack" label="Paramount Ranch Racetrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="3383" end="3396" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776915" start="3410" end="3439" title="Number 12 Looks Just Like You" label="Number 12 Looks Just Like You"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="3674" end="3681" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51402" start="3856" end="3869" title="Stonewall riots" label="pre-Stonewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628044" start="4168" end="4183" title="The Howling Man" label="The Howling Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640964" start="4256" end="4276" title="Valley of the Shadow" label="Valley of the Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q924274" start="4426" end="4446" title="Queen of Outer Space" label="Queen of Outer Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q267441" start="4472" end="4481" title="Ben Hecht" label="Ben Hecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471769" start="4659" end="4671" title="Steve Canyon" label="Steve Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40640" start="4882" end="4894" title="Ray Bradbury" label="Ray Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="4896" end="4910" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q325130" start="4912" end="4928" title="Richard Matheson" label="Richard Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q355879" start="4930" end="4942" title="Robert Bloch" label="Robert Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="4944" end="4956" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5240" end="5254" title="Gauntlet Press" label="Gauntlet Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="5387" end="5399" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q325130" start="5523" end="5539" title="Richard Matheson" label="Richard Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578761" start="6399" end="6415" title="William F. Nolan" label="William F. Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973718" start="6486" end="6499" title="Bromo-Seltzer" label="Bromo-Seltzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="7015" end="7032" title="meningitis" label="spinal meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18227" start="7084" end="7103" title="Forrest J. Ackerman" label="Forrest J. Ackerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="7176" end="7200" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q18592" start="7205" end="7224" title="Pick&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Pick&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102527" start="7892" end="7906" title="Long Live Walter Jameson" label="Walter Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687871" start="7996" end="8006" title="Jerry Sohl" label="Jerry Sohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="8014" end="8026" title="ghostwriting" label="ghostwriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6880194" start="8295" end="8307" title="Mister Moses" label="Mister Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900537" start="8381" end="8399" title="Monja Danischewsky" label="Monja Danischewsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687871" start="8879" end="8889" title="Jerry Sohl" label="Jerry Sohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859200" start="8899" end="8917" title="Perchance to Dream (The Twilight Zone)" label="Perchance to Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2692812" start="8931" end="8936" title="Elegy (The Twilight Zone)" label="Elegy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102527" start="8950" end="8974" title="Long Live Walter Jameson" label="Long Live Walter Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684725" start="8988" end="9009" title="A Nice Place to Visit" label="A Nice Place to Visit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628044" start="9023" end="9038" title="The Howling Man" label="The Howling Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711049" start="9052" end="9058" title="Static (The Twilight Zone)" label="Static"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758219" start="9094" end="9109" title="The Prime Mover" label="The Prime Mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q325422" start="9126" end="9148" title="George Clayton Johnson" label="George Clayton Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618946" start="9157" end="9175" title="Long Distance Call" label="Long Distance Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909549" start="9199" end="9211" title="Bill Idelson" label="Bill Idelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984267" start="9220" end="9231" title="Shadow Play (1961 The Twilight Zone episode)" label="Shadow Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873118" start="9245" end="9255" title="The Jungle (The Twilight Zone)" label="The Jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13633732" start="9269" end="9290" title="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Shoes (The Twilight Zone)" label="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4332605" start="9346" end="9358" title="The Fugitive (Twilight Zone)" label="The Fugitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652354" start="9372" end="9397" title="Person or Persons Unknown" label="Person or Persons Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671656" start="9411" end="9423" title="In His Image" label="In His Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640964" start="9438" end="9458" title="Valley of the Shadow" label="Valley of the Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725982" start="9472" end="9481" title="Miniature (The Twilight Zone)" label="Miniature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245297" start="9495" end="9515" title="Printer&amp;#x27;s Devil" label="Printer&amp;#x27;s Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698415" start="9529" end="9544" title="The New Exhibit" label="The New Exhibit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796279" start="9560" end="9584" title="Passage on the Lady Anne" label="Passage on the Lady Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264438" start="9598" end="9609" title="Living Doll (The Twilight Zone)" label="Living Doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776915" start="9625" end="9654" title="Number 12 Looks Just Like You" label="Number 12 Looks Just Like You"/>
<link wikidata="Q53835418" start="9678" end="9691" title="John Tomerlin" label="John Tomerlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625108" start="9700" end="9717" title="Queen of the Nile (The Twilight Zone)" label="Queen of the Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245297" start="9838" end="9851" title="Printer&amp;#x27;s Devil (The Twilight Zone)" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776915" start="9938" end="9951" title="Number 12 Looks Just Like You (The Twilight Zone)" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2692812" start="10143" end="10156" title="Elegy (The Twilight Zone)" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873118" start="10630" end="10643" title="The Jungle (The Twilight Zone)" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="10918" end="10935" title="The Twilight Zone" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671656" start="12096" end="12109" title="In His Image" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859200" start="13246" end="13259" title="Perchance to Dream (The Twilight Zone)" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628044" start="13619" end="13632" title="Howling Man" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796279" start="13981" end="13994" title="Passage on the Lady Anne" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="14084" end="14101" title="The Twilight Zone" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741003" start="16258" end="16286" title="The Hunger and Other Stories" label="The Hunger and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054908" start="16345" end="16351" title="Yonder (book)" label="Yonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033421" start="16376" end="16405" title="Night Ride and Other Journeys" label="Night Ride and Other Journeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q924274" start="17515" end="17535" title="Queen of Outer Space" label="Queen of Outer Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641223" start="17650" end="17668" title="Night of the Eagle" label="Night of the Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q325130" start="17752" end="17768" title="Richard Matheson" label="Richard Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506962" start="17773" end="17784" title="George Baxt" label="George Baxt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882840" start="17800" end="17812" title="Conjure Wife" label="Conjure Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q313185" start="17822" end="17834" title="Fritz Leiber" label="Fritz Leiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625566" start="17843" end="17859" title="The Premature Burial (film)" label="Premature Burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086517" start="17889" end="17909" title="The Premature Burial" label="The Premature Burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="17919" end="17934" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217650" start="17943" end="17984" title="The Wonderful World of the Brothers Grimm" label="The Wonderful World of the Brothers Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018199" start="18005" end="18017" title="The Intruder (1962 film)" label="The Intruder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982191" start="18104" end="18122" title="The Haunted Palace" label="The Haunted Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="18150" end="18165" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="18166" end="18170" title="poem" label="poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739028" start="18178" end="18187" title="The Haunted Palace (poem)" label="same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q543844" start="18217" end="18248" title="The Case of Charles Dexter Ward" label="The Case of Charles Dexter Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="18258" end="18272" title="H.P. Lovecraft" label="H.P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q839916" start="18281" end="18299" title="7 Faces of Dr. Lao" label="7 Faces of Dr. Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723100" start="18345" end="18366" title="The Circus of Dr. Lao" label="The Circus of Dr. Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894197" start="18376" end="18393" title="Charles G. Finney" label="Charles G. Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225929" start="18402" end="18429" title="The Masque of the Red Death (1964 film)" label="The Masque of the Red Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q766086" start="18453" end="18462" title="The Masque of the Red Death" label="eponymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="18478" end="18493" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472217" start="18642" end="18652" title="Brain Dead (1990 film)" label="Brain Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q53835418" start="18836" end="18849" title="John Tomerlin" label="John Tomerlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578761" start="19083" end="19099" title="William F. Nolan" label="William F. Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578761" start="20031" end="20047" title="William F. Nolan" label="William F. Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578761" start="20234" end="20250" title="William F. Nolan" label="William F. Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578761" start="20358" end="20374" title="William F. Nolan" label="William F. Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787268" start="20526" end="20556" title="Archive of American Television" label="Archive of American Television"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53388" wikidata="Q2578761" url="?curid=53388" title="William F. Nolan">
<text>William Francis Nolan (March 6, 1928 – July 15, 2021) was an American author who wrote hundreds of stories in the science fiction, fantasy, horror, and crime fiction genres.

==Career==
Nolan became involved in science-fiction fandom in the 1950s, and published several fanzines, including &quot;Ray Bradbury Review&quot;. During this time, Nolan befriended several science-fiction and fantasy writers, including Ray Bradbury, Robert Bloch, Richard Matheson, Charles Beaumont, and Ray Russell. Nolan became a professional author in 1956. Nolan is perhaps best known for coauthoring the novel &quot;Logan&#x27;s Run&quot;, with George Clayton Johnson, but wrote literally hundreds of pieces, from poetry to nonfiction, to prose, for many publications, such as &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot;, &quot;Rogue&quot;, &quot;Playboy&quot;, &quot;Dark Discoveries&quot;, &quot;Nameless Digest&quot;, and others. Nolan wrote several mystery novels, including the &quot;Challis&quot; series. He also had a long career in the movie industry, primarily working for Dan Curtis, and co-wrote the screenplay for the 1976 horror film &quot;Burnt Offerings&quot; which starred Karen Black and Bette Davis.

Nolan was also a prolific editor of collections (by others), and anthologies, most recently co-editing two anthologies with friend, filmmaker, and writer Jason V Brock: &quot;The Bleeding Edge&quot; (2009), with stories from fellow writers Ray Bradbury, Richard Matheson, George Clayton Johnson, John Shirley, Dan O&#x27;Bannon, and several others, and &quot;The Devil&#x27;s Coattails&quot; (2012), which featured offerings from Ramsey Campbell, S. T. Joshi, Richard Selzer, Earl Hamner Jr., and more, both from Cycatrix Press. Nolan teamed up with Bluewater Productions for a comic book series, &quot;Logan&#x27;s Run: Last Day,&quot; released in 2010. In addition, he developed comics based on one other property of his for Bluewater: &quot;Tales from William F. Nolan&#x27;s Dark Universe&quot; (featuring stories adapted by Nolan and Brock and published in 2013). Another comic book mini-series &quot;Sam Space&quot; (forthcoming) has been scripted and approved.

Among his many accolades, Nolan was nominated once for the Edgar Allan Poe Award from the Mystery Writers of America. He was voted a Living Legend in Dark Fantasy by the International Horror Guild in 2002, and in 2006 was bestowed the honorary title of Author Emeritus by the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America. In 2010, he received the Lifetime Achievement Bram Stoker Award from the Horror Writers Association (HWA). In 2013 he was a recipient, along with Brian W. Aldiss, of the World Fantasy Convention Award in Brighton, England by the World Fantasy Convention. In May 2014, Nolan was presented with another Bram Stoker Award, for Superior Achievement in Nonfiction; this was for his collection about his late friend Ray Bradbury, called &quot;Nolan on Bradbury: Sixty Years of Writing about the Master of Science Fiction&quot;. In 2015, Nolan was named a World Horror Society Grand Master; the award was presented at the World Horror Convention in Atlanta, GA in May of that year.

==Personal life==
Nolan was born in Kansas City, Missouri, the son of Bernadette Mariana Kelly, a stenographer, and Michael Cahill Nolan, an adventurer, and sportsman. His family was Irish Catholic. He briefly attended the Kansas City Art Institute. Later, he worked for Hallmark Cards, Inc. writing verses and illustrating greeting cards before moving to California with his parents.

After a few years working in offices, he met Charles Beaumont, who would remain a close friend until Beaumont&#x27;s untimely death at age thirty-eight. Beaumont was instrumental in Nolan becoming an author.

Nolan was a close friend to radio writer Norman Corwin as well as speculative writer Ray Bradbury. He was also a member of the influential Southern California School of Writers in the 1950s–1960s (known informally as &quot;The Group&quot;), many of whom wrote for &quot;Alfred Hitchcock Presents&quot;, &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;, &quot;Star Trek&quot;, and other popular series of the day. Nolan was an ethical vegetarian and loved animals. In later life, he still wrote new material and was active in various literary projects, and conventions (he was Guest of Honor at Killer Con and Portland&#x27;s Orycon, as well as a special guest at the World Horror Convention, World Fantasy Convention, and many others), and promotional opportunities.

Though estranged for more than ten years, he had been married since 1970. He resided in Vancouver, Washington. With regard to his work, he said: &quot;I get excited about something, and I want to write about it.&quot;

Nolan died from complications of an infection in July 2021 at the age of 93.

==Appearances: films, TV and documentaries==
*&quot;The Intruder&quot; (1962) as villain &quot;Bart Carey&quot;
*&quot;Charles Beaumont: The Life of Twilight Zone’s Magic Man&quot; (JaSunni Productions, LLC; 2010) as himself
*&quot;The AckerMonster Chronicles!&quot; (JaSunni Productions, LLC; 2012) as himself

==Bibliography (partial)==
===Novels===
====Logan====
*&quot;Logan&#x27;s Run&quot; (1967) – Novel (with George Clayton Johnson)
*&quot;Logan&#x27;s World&quot; (1977) – Second novel in the original &quot;Logan Trilogy&quot;
*&quot;Logan&#x27;s Search&quot; (1980) – Third novel in the &quot;Logan Trilogy&quot;
*&quot;Logan&#x27;s Return&quot; (2001) – Novella, released as an e-book

====The Black Mask====
*&quot;The Black Mask Murders&quot; (1994) – Novel
*&quot;The Marble Orchard&quot; (1996) – Novel
*&quot;Sharks Never Sleep&quot; (1998) – Novel

====Sam Space====
*&quot;Space for Hire&quot; (1971) – Novel
*&quot;Look Out for Space&quot; (1985) – Novel
*&quot;3 For Space&quot; (1992) – Collection
*&quot;Far Out&quot; (2004) – Collection
*&quot;Seven for Space&quot; (2008) – Collection

====Challis====
*&quot;Death Is For Losers&quot; (1968) – Novel
*&quot;The White Cad Cross-Up&quot; (1969) – Novel
*&quot;Helle on Wheels&quot; (1992) – Novella
*&quot;The Brothers Challis&quot; (1996) – Collection

====Kincaid====
*&quot;Pirate&#x27;s Moon&quot; (1987) – Novella
*&quot;Broxa&quot; (1991) - Novella
*&quot;The Winchester Horror&quot; (1998) – Novella
*&quot;Demon!&quot; [Reprint of Broxa] (2005) – Novella
*&quot;Kincaid: A Paranormal Casebook&quot; (2011) – Collection

===Biographies===
====On Max Brand====
*&quot;Max Brand&#x27;s Best Western Stories&quot; (1981) – Brand Collection
*&quot;Max Brand&#x27;s Best Western Stories II&quot; (1985) – Brand Collection
*&quot;Max Brand: Western Giant&quot; (1986) – Anthology/Bibliography
*&quot;Max Brand&#x27;s Best Western Stories III&quot; (1987) – Brand Collection
*&quot;Tales of the Wild West&quot; (1997) – Brand Collection
*&quot;More Tales of the Wild West&quot; (1999) – Brand Collection
*&quot;Masquerade&quot; (2005) – Brand Collection
*&quot;King of the Pulps&quot; (forthcoming) – Biography

====On Dashiell Hammett====
*&quot;Dashiell Hammett: A Casebook&quot; (1969) – Critical study
*&quot;Hammett: A Life at the Edge&quot; (1983) – Biography
*&quot;Dash&quot; (2004) – Stage Play
*&quot;A Man Called Dash: The Life and Times of Samuel Dashiell Hammett&quot; (Alfred A. Knopf, 2015 [tentative release date]) – Definitive biography

====On Ray Bradbury====
*&quot;Ray Bradbury Review&quot; (1952) – Anthology
*&quot;The Ray Bradbury Index&quot; (1953) – Pamphlet
*&quot;The Ray Bradbury Companion&quot; (1975) – Biography/bibliography
*&quot;The Dandelion Chronicles&quot; (1984) – Pamphlet
*&quot;The Bradbury Chronicles&quot; (1991) – Anthology (with Martin H. Greenberg)
*&quot;Nolan On Bradbury: Sixty Years of Writing about the Master of Science Fiction&quot; (2013; Hippocampus Press) – Collected nonfiction book (Edited by S. T. Joshi)

====Other biographies and nonfiction====
*&quot;Adventure on Wheels&quot; (1959) – John Fitch autobiography
*&quot;Barney Oldfield&quot; (1961) – Biography
*&quot;Phil Hill: Yankee Champion&quot; (1962) – Biography
*&quot;John Huston: King Rebel&quot; (1965) - Biography
*&quot;Sinners and Supermen&quot; (1965) – Nonfiction collection
*&quot;Steve McQueen: Star on Wheels&quot; (1972) – Biography
*&quot;Hemingway: Last Days of the Lion&quot; (1974) – Biographical chapbook
*&quot;McQueen&quot; (1984) - Biography
*&quot;The Black Mask Boys&quot; (1985) – Biography/Anthology
*&quot;How to Write Horror Fiction&quot; (1990) – Reference
*&quot;Let&#x27;s Get Creative: Writing Fiction That Sells!&quot; (2006) - Reference

===Bibliographies===
*&quot;The Work of Charles Beaumont&quot; (1986)
*&quot;The Work of William F. Nolan&quot; (1988)

===Anthologies and collections (as editor)===
*&quot;The Fiend in You&quot; (1962) – Anthology (with Charles Beaumont; Nolan is uncredited)
*&quot;The Pseudo-People&quot; (1965)
*&quot;Man Against Tomorrow&quot; (1965)
*&quot;Il Meglio Della Fantascienza&quot; (1967)
*&quot;3 To the Highest Power&quot; (1968)
*&quot;A Wilderness of Stars&quot; (1969)
*&quot;A Sea of Space&quot; (1970)
*&quot;The Edge of Forever&quot; (1971) – Collection of Chad Oliver stories
*&quot;The Future is Now&quot; (1971)
*&quot;The Human Equation: Four Science Fiction Novels of Tomorrow&quot; (1971)
*&quot;Science Fiction Origins&quot; (1980) - Anthology (with Martin H. Greenberg)
*&quot;Urban Horrors&quot; (1990) – Anthology (with Martin H. Greenberg)
*&quot;California Sorcery&quot;, Edited by Nolan and William Schafer (1998)
*&quot;Offbeat&quot; (2002) – Collection of Richard Matheson stories
*&quot;The Bleeding Edge&quot; (2009) – Anthology (with Jason V Brock)
*&quot;The Devil&#x27;s Coattails&quot; (2012) – Anthology (with Jason V Brock)

===Verse===
*&quot;The Mounties&quot; (1979) – Broadside
*&quot;Dark Encounters&quot; (1986) – Collection
*&quot;Have You Seen the Wind?&quot; (2003) – Collection, with prose
*&quot;Ill Met by Moonlight&quot; (2004) – Collection, with prose and artwork
*&quot;Soul Trips&quot; (2015) – Collection

===Auto racing-specific works===
*&quot;Omnibus of Speed&quot; (1958) – Anthology (with Charles Beaumont)
*&quot;Men of Thunder&quot; (1964) – Collection
*&quot;When Engines Roar&quot; (1964) – Anthology (with Charles Beaumont)
*&quot;Carnival of Speed&quot; (1973) – Collection

===Horror works===
*&quot;Things Beyond Midnight&quot; (1984) – Collection
*&quot;Blood Sky&quot; (1991) – Chapbook
*&quot;Helltracks&quot; (1991) – Novel
*&quot;Night Shapes&quot; (1995) – Collection
*&quot;William F. Nolan&#x27;s Dark Universe&quot; (2001) – Career retrospective
*&quot;Nightworlds&quot; (2004) – Collection

===Miscellaneous works===
*&quot;A Cross Section of Art in Science-Fantasy&quot; (1952) – Chapbook
*&quot;Image Power&quot; (1988) – Pamphlet
*&quot;Rio Renegades&quot; (1989) – Western novel
*&quot;Simply An Ending&quot; (2002) – Pamphlet
*&quot;With Marlowe in L.A.&quot; (2003) – Pamphlet

===Other Nolan collections===
*&quot;Impact-20&quot; (1963) – Short stories
*&quot;Alien Horizons&quot; (1974)
*&quot;Wonderworlds&quot; (1977)
*&quot;Down the Long Night&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Ships in the Night: And Other Stories&quot; (2003) – Collection of sci-fi, Western, etc.
*&quot;Wild Galaxy: Selected Science Fiction Stories&quot; (2005)
*&quot;Like a Dead Man Walking and Other Shadow Tales&quot; (edited by Jason V Brock; a mix of science fiction, horror, poetry, and literary stories; Centipede Press, 2014)

===Screenplays===
*&quot;Burnt Offerings&quot; (1976)
*&quot;Who Goes There?&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;The Thing&quot;) Screen treatment (1978), written for Universal Studios (not produced), published by Rocket Ride Books in &quot;Who Goes There?: The Novella That Formed The Basis of THE THING&quot; (2009)

===Television scripts===
*&quot;Brain Wave&quot; (1959) – One Step Beyond
*&quot;Mental Lapse&quot; (1959) – 
*&quot;Black Belt&quot; (1960) – Wanted: Dead or Alive
*&quot;The Joy of Living&quot; (1971) – Norman Corwin Presents
*&quot;The Norliss Tapes&quot; (1973) – NBC Movie of the Week
*&quot;The Turn of the Screw&quot; (1974) – ABC miniseries
*&quot;Trilogy of Terror&quot; (Millicent and Therese; Julie) (1975) – ABC Movie of the Week
*&quot;Melvin Purvis: G-Man&quot; (1975)
*&quot;Sky Heist&quot; (1975) – NBC Movie of the Week
*&quot;The Kansas City Massacre&quot; (1975) – ABC Movie of the Week
*&quot;Logan&#x27;s Run&quot; (1977) – Pilot for CBS series
*&quot;First Loss&quot; (1981) – 240-Robert
*&quot;The Partnership&quot; (1981) – Darkroom
*&quot;Bridge Across Time&quot;, a.k.a. &quot;Terror at London Bridge&quot; (1985) – NBC Movie of the Week
*&quot;Trilogy of Terror II&quot; (The Graveyard Rats; He Who Kills) (1996) – USA Movie of the Week

==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* 2009 interview with Nolan about the &quot;Logan&#x27;s Run: Last Day&quot; comics from Bluewater Productions</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2578761" start="0" end="21" title="William F. Nolan" label="William Francis Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="114" end="129" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="131" end="138" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="140" end="146" title="Horror fiction" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937792" start="152" end="165" title="crime fiction" label="crime fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q773944" start="227" end="233" title="fandom" label="fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q181298" start="270" end="277" title="fanzine" label="fanzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40640" start="296" end="308" title="Ray Bradbury" label="Ray Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q355879" start="427" end="439" title="Robert Bloch" label="Robert Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q325130" start="441" end="457" title="Richard Matheson" label="Richard Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958511" start="459" end="475" title="Charles Beaumont" label="Charles Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298048" start="481" end="492" title="Ray Russell" label="Ray Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131423" start="598" end="614" title="Logan&amp;#x27;s Run" label="Logan&amp;#x27;s Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q325422" start="627" end="649" title="George Clayton Johnson" label="George Clayton Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="696" end="702" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q213051" start="706" end="716" title="nonfiction" label="nonfiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="765" end="783" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359502" start="797" end="802" title="Rogue (magazine)" label="Rogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="816" end="823" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223202" start="837" end="853" title="Dark Discoveries" label="Dark Discoveries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="867" end="882" title="Nameless Digest" label="Nameless Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415395" start="1013" end="1027" title="movie industry" label="movie industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q692808" start="1051" end="1061" title="Dan Curtis" label="Dan Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191134" start="1122" end="1137" title="Burnt Offerings (film)" label="Burnt Offerings"/>
<link wikidata="Q232333" start="1158" end="1169" title="Karen Black" label="Karen Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q71206" start="1174" end="1185" title="Bette Davis" label="Bette Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q194105" start="1214" end="1220" title="editor" label="editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="1253" end="1264" title="anthologies" label="anthologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163660" start="1342" end="1355" title="Jason V Brock" label="Jason V Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q40640" start="1428" end="1440" title="Ray Bradbury" label="Ray Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q325130" start="1442" end="1458" title="Richard Matheson" label="Richard Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q325422" start="1460" end="1482" title="George Clayton Johnson" label="George Clayton Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346126" start="1484" end="1496" title="John Shirley" label="John Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q498430" start="1498" end="1515" title="Dan O&amp;#x27;Bannon" label="Dan O&amp;#x27;Bannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q703476" start="1618" end="1633" title="Ramsey Campbell" label="Ramsey Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q625272" start="1635" end="1646" title="S. T. Joshi" label="S. T. Joshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328964" start="1648" end="1662" title="Richard Selzer" label="Richard Selzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q948870" start="1664" end="1679" title="Earl Hamner Jr." label="Earl Hamner Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2887790" start="1738" end="1759" title="Bluewater Productions" label="Bluewater Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="1766" end="1776" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q833154" start="2216" end="2237" title="Edgar Allan Poe Award" label="Edgar Allan Poe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720621" start="2247" end="2273" title="Mystery Writers of America" label="Mystery Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050945" start="2327" end="2353" title="International Horror Guild" label="International Horror Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q740651" start="2410" end="2425" title="Author Emeritus" label="Author Emeritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364364" start="2433" end="2479" title="Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America" label="Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q848963" start="2527" end="2544" title="Bram Stoker Award" label="Bram Stoker Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905197" start="2554" end="2586" title="Horror Writers Association" label="Horror Writers Association (HWA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q238702" start="2627" end="2642" title="Brian W. Aldiss" label="Brian W. Aldiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035705" start="2651" end="2681" title="World Fantasy Convention Award" label="World Fantasy Convention Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419048" start="2710" end="2734" title="World Fantasy Convention" label="World Fantasy Convention"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3030" end="3050" title="World Horror Society" label="World Horror Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="3193" end="3214" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="3340" end="3354" title="Irish Catholic" label="Irish Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364655" start="3380" end="3405" title="Kansas City Art Institute" label="Kansas City Art Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521910" start="3428" end="3448" title="Hallmark Cards" label="Hallmark Cards, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q915196" start="3481" end="3494" title="greeting card" label="greeting card"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958511" start="3588" end="3604" title="Charles Beaumont" label="Charles Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251336" start="3793" end="3806" title="Norman Corwin" label="Norman Corwin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3891" end="3928" title="Southern California School of Writers" label="Southern California School of Writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247206" start="4022" end="4047" title="Alfred Hitchcock Presents" label="Alfred Hitchcock Presents"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="4061" end="4078" title="The Twilight Zone" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="4092" end="4101" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="4167" end="4177" title="vegetarian" label="vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4327" end="4337" title="Killer Con" label="Killer Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105291" start="4358" end="4364" title="Orycon" label="Orycon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035830" start="4400" end="4423" title="World Horror Convention" label="World Horror Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419048" start="4425" end="4449" title="World Fantasy Convention" label="World Fantasy Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018199" start="4850" end="4862" title="The Intruder (1962 film)" label="The Intruder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4980" end="5004" title="JaSunni Productions, LLC" label="JaSunni Productions, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131423" start="5171" end="5187" title="Logan&amp;#x27;s Run" label="Logan&amp;#x27;s Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666875" start="5246" end="5264" title="Logan&amp;#x27;s World" label="Logan&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5342" end="5361" title="Logan&amp;#x27;s Search" label="Logan&amp;#x27;s Search"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5429" end="5448" title="Logan&amp;#x27;s Return" label="Logan&amp;#x27;s Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q128093" start="5488" end="5494" title="e-book" label="e-book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431868" start="7254" end="7269" title="Alfred A. Knopf" label="Alfred A. Knopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680150" start="7646" end="7665" title="Martin H. Greenberg" label="Martin H. Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5768414" start="7765" end="7782" title="Hippocampus Press" label="Hippocampus Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q625272" start="7823" end="7834" title="S. T. Joshi" label="S. T. Joshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172492" start="7920" end="7930" title="John Fitch (driver)" label="John Fitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q808483" start="7952" end="7967" title="Barney Oldfield" label="Barney Oldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112" start="8000" end="8009" title="Phil Hill" label="Phil Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q51575" start="8059" end="8070" title="John Huston" label="John Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q159347" start="8180" end="8193" title="Steve McQueen (actor)" label="Steve McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="8242" end="8251" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q159347" start="8319" end="8326" title="Steve McQueen (actor)" label="McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958511" start="8600" end="8616" title="Charles Beaumont" label="Charles Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q726865" start="9124" end="9135" title="Chad Oliver" label="Chad Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9471" end="9486" title="William Schafer (writer)" label="William Schafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q325130" start="9538" end="9554" title="Richard Matheson" label="Richard Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589189" start="11410" end="11425" title="Centipede Press" label="Centipede Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q210756" start="11531" end="11540" title="The Thing (1982 film)" label="The Thing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11632" end="11649" title="Rocket Ride Books" label="Rocket Ride Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248684" start="11795" end="11810" title="One Step Beyond (TV series)" label="One Step Beyond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251336" start="11942" end="11955" title="Norman Corwin" label="Norman Corwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23999981" start="11972" end="11989" title="The Norliss Tapes" label="The Norliss Tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523112" start="12034" end="12055" title="The Turn of the Screw (1974 film)" label="The Turn of the Screw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998814" start="12093" end="12110" title="Trilogy of Terror" label="Trilogy of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12186" end="12206" title="Melvin Purvis: G-Man" label="Melvin Purvis: G-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068306" start="12281" end="12305" title="The Kansas City Massacre" label="The Kansas City Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205038" start="12350" end="12366" title="Logan&amp;#x27;s Run (TV series)" label="Logan&amp;#x27;s Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821555" start="12485" end="12493" title="Darkroom (TV series)" label="Darkroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846427" start="12501" end="12519" title="Bridge Across Time" label="Bridge Across Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842097" start="12608" end="12628" title="Trilogy of Terror II" label="Trilogy of Terror II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887790" start="12831" end="12852" title="Bluewater Productions" label="Bluewater Productions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53391" wikidata="Q814269" url="?curid=53391" title="Befunge">
<text>Befunge is a two-dimensional stack-based, reflective, esoteric programming language. It differs from conventional languages in that programs are arranged on a two-dimensional grid. &quot;Arrow&quot; instructions direct the control flow to the left, right, up or down, and loops are constructed by sending the control flow in a cycle. It has been described as &quot;a cross between Forth and Lemmings&quot;.

Befunge was created by Chris Pressey in 1993 for the Amiga. The language was designed to be as hard to compile as possible, featuring self-modifying code and a multi-dimensional playfield. Despite this, several compilers have been written for the language. The original Befunge-93 specification limited programs to an 80x25 grid, and while not Turing-complete, subsequent extensions like Funge-98 expanded the concept to achieve Turing completeness.

The name &quot;Befunge&quot; originated from a typing error in an online discussion. While it was designed to be difficult to compile, compilers such as bef2c and Betty have managed to implement the language using various techniques. Befunge programs are characterized by their use of arrows to change control flow, and they can produce outputs like random number sequences or classic &quot;Hello, World!&quot; messages.

== History ==
The language was originally created by Chris Pressey in 1993 for the Amiga, as an attempt to devise a language which is as hard to compile as possible. Note that the codice_1 command allows for self-modifying code. Nevertheless, a number of compilers have subsequently been written. A number of extensions to the original &quot;Befunge-93&quot; specification also exist, most notably Funge-98, which extends the concept to an arbitrary number of dimensions and can be multithreaded, with multiple instruction pointers operating simultaneously on the same space. Befunge-extensions and variants are called &quot;Fungeoids&quot; or just &quot;Funges&quot;.

The Befunge-93 specification restricts each valid program to a grid of 80 instructions horizontally by 25 instructions vertically. Program execution which exceeds these limits &quot;wraps around&quot; to a corresponding point on the other side of the grid; a Befunge program is in this manner topologically equivalent to a torus. Since a Befunge-93 program can only have a single stack and its storage array is bounded, the Befunge-93 language is not Turing-complete (however, it has been shown that Befunge-93 is Turing Complete with unbounded stack word size). The later Funge-98 specification provides Turing completeness by removing the size restrictions on the program; rather than wrapping around at a fixed limit, the movement of a Funge-98 instruction pointer follows a model dubbed &quot;Lahey-space&quot; after its originator, Chris Lahey. In this model, the grid behaves like a torus of finite size with respect to wrapping, while still allowing itself to be extended indefinitely.

==Etymology==
The word Befunge is derived from a typing error in an online discussion, where the word &#x27;before&#x27; was intended.

== Compilation ==
As stated, the design goal for Befunge was to create a language which was difficult to compile. This was attempted with the implementation of self-modifying code (the &#x27;p&#x27; instruction can write new instructions into the playfield) and a multi-dimensional playfield (the same instruction can be executed in four different directions).

Nevertheless, these obstacles have been overcome, to some degree, and Befunge compilers have been written using appropriate techniques.

The bef2c compiler included with the standard Befunge-93 distribution uses threaded code: each instruction is compiled to a snippet of C code, and control flows through the snippets just as it does in a Befunge interpreter (that is, conditionally on the value of some &#x27;direction&#x27; register). This does not result in a significant advantage over a good interpreter. Note that the bef2c compiler is not correct since it does not handle either &#x27;p&#x27; or string mode, but it would not be impossible to make it do so (although the C language might not be well-suited for this).

The etty compiler, for example, treats every possible straight line of instructions as a subprogram, and if a &#x27;p&#x27; instruction alters that subprogram, that subprogram is recompiled. This variation on just-in-time compilation results in a much better advantage over an interpreter, since many instructions can be executed in native code without making intervening decisions on the &#x27;direction&#x27; register.

== Sample Befunge-93 code ==
The technique of using arrows to change control flow is demonstrated in the random number generator program below. The Befunge instruction pointer begins in the upper left corner and will travel to the right if not redirected. Following the arrows around, the codice_2 instructions send the instruction pointer in random cardinal directions until the pointer hits a digit, pushing it to the stack. Then the arrows navigate to the codice_3 to output the digit from the stack and return the pointer to the first directional randomiser. There is no codice_4 to terminate this program, so it produces an endless stream of random numbers from 1 to 9.

 v»»&gt;v
 12345
 &gt; ? ?^
 v?v
 6789
 »» v

The following code is an example of the classic &quot;Hello World!&quot; program. First the letters &quot;olleH&quot; are pushed onto the stack as ASCII numbers. These are then popped from the stack in LIFO order and output as text characters to give &quot;Hello&quot;. A space is character number 32 in ASCII, which here is constructed by multiplying 4 and 8, before being output as text. The remaining code then outputs &quot;World!&quot; in a similar way, followed by ASCII character 10 (a line feed character, moving the output cursor to a new line).

&gt; v
v ,,,&quot;Hello&quot;&lt;
&gt;48*, v
v,,,&quot;World!&quot;&lt;
&gt;25*,@

The following code is a slightly more complicated version. It adds the ASCII character 10 (a line feed character) to the stack, and then pushes &quot;!dlrow ,olleH&quot; to the stack. Again, LIFO ordering means that &quot;H&quot; is now the top of the stack and will be the first printed, &quot;e&quot; is second, and so on. To print the characters, the program enters a loop that first duplicates the top value on the stack (so now the stack would look like &quot;\n!dlrow ,olleHH&quot;). Then the &quot;_&quot; operation will pop the duplicated value, and go right if it&#x27;s a zero, left otherwise. (This assumes a compliant interpreter that &quot;returns&quot; 0 when popping an empty stack.) When it goes left, it pops and prints the top value as an ASCII character. It then duplicates the next character and loops back to the &quot;_&quot; test, continuing to print the rest of the stack until it is empty and so the next value popped is 0, at which point &quot;@&quot; ends the program.

 &gt;25*&quot;!dlrow ,olleH&quot;:v
 v:,_@


==Befunge-93 instruction list==
Most one-dimensional programming languages require some syntactic distinction between comment text and source code — although that distinction may be as trivial as Brainfuck&#x27;s rule that any character not in the set codice_5 is a comment. Languages like Lisp and Python treat strings as comments in contexts where the values are not used. Similarly, in Befunge, there is no comment syntax: to embed documentation in the code, the programmer simply routes the control flow &quot;around&quot; the &quot;comment&quot; area, so that the text in that area is never executed.

==See also==
*Brainfuck
*Carnage Heart – PlayStation programming game using a similar language
*INTERCAL
*Whitespace
*Malbolge
*Piet

==References==
==External links==
*Befunge-93 Specification
*Befunge-93 Reference Implementation
*Funge-98 Specification</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q814269" start="0" end="7" title="Befunge" label="Befunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q52845127" start="29" end="40" title="stack-oriented programming language" label="stack-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056451" start="42" end="52" title="Reflection (computer science)" label="reflective"/>
<link wikidata="Q610140" start="54" end="83" title="esoteric programming language" label="esoteric programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q275472" start="381" end="386" title="Forth (programming language)" label="Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q864177" start="391" end="399" title="Lemmings (video game)" label="Lemmings"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="1364" end="1369" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="1426" end="1433" title="compile" label="compile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165944" start="1489" end="1508" title="self-modifying code" label="self-modifying code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064412" start="1763" end="1776" title="Multithreading (computer architecture)" label="multithreaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q814194" start="1792" end="1811" title="instruction pointer" label="instruction pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423448" start="2127" end="2151" title="integer overflow" label="&amp;quot;wraps around&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="2244" end="2257" title="Topology" label="topologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q12510" start="2274" end="2279" title="torus" label="torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q197970" start="2402" end="2417" title="Turing-complete" label="Turing-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q734832" start="2994" end="3006" title="typing error" label="typing error"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491860" start="3655" end="3668" title="threaded code" label="threaded code"/>
<link wikidata="Q110546" start="4379" end="4403" title="just-in-time compilation" label="just-in-time compilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131303" start="5362" end="5394" title="Hello world program" label="&amp;quot;Hello World!&amp;quot; program"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="5461" end="5466" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q177929" start="5516" end="5520" title="LIFO (computing)" label="LIFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q184914" start="5807" end="5816" title="line feed" label="line feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q184914" start="6046" end="6055" title="line feed" label="line feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q177929" start="6144" end="6148" title="LIFO (computing)" label="LIFO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6324" end="6328" title="Control flow#Loops" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q184914" start="6418" end="6420" title="line feed" label="\n"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="6710" end="6715" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141067" start="7113" end="7125" title="comment (computer programming)" label="comment text"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="7130" end="7141" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q244627" start="7191" end="7200" title="Brainfuck" label="Brainfuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="7285" end="7289" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="7294" end="7300" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q244627" start="7616" end="7625" title="Brainfuck" label="Brainfuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043772" start="7627" end="7640" title="Carnage Heart" label="Carnage Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054365" start="7698" end="7706" title="INTERCAL" label="INTERCAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q378222" start="7708" end="7718" title="Whitespace (programming language)" label="Whitespace"/>
<link wikidata="Q517956" start="7720" end="7728" title="Malbolge" label="Malbolge"/>
<link wikidata="Q610140" start="7730" end="7734" title="Piet (programming language)" label="Piet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53392" wikidata="Q14329491" url="?curid=53392" title="The Twilight Zone">
<text>The Twilight Zone is an American media franchise based on the anthology television series created by Rod Serling in which characters find themselves dealing with often disturbing or unusual events, an experience described as entering &quot;the Twilight Zone&quot;. The episodes are in various genres, including fantasy, science fiction, absurdism, dystopian fiction, suspense, horror, supernatural drama, black comedy, and psychological thriller, frequently concluding with a macabre or unexpected twist, and usually with a moral. A popular and critical success, it introduced many Americans to common science fiction and fantasy tropes. The first series, shot entirely in black-and-white, ran on CBS for five seasons from 1959 to 1964.

&quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; followed in the tradition of earlier television shows such as &quot;Tales of Tomorrow&quot; (1951–53), &quot;Out There&quot; (1951–52) and &quot;Science Fiction Theatre&quot; (1955–57); radio programs such as &quot;The Weird Circle&quot; (1943–45), &quot;Dimension X&quot; (1950–51) and &quot;X Minus One&quot; (1955–58); and the radio work of one of Serling&#x27;s inspirations, Norman Corwin. The success of the series led to a feature film (1983), a TV film (1994), a radio series (2002–12), various literature, theme park attractions and various other spin-offs that spanned five decades, including three revival television series. The second series (1985–89) ran on CBS and in syndication in the 1980s, while the third series ran on UPN (2002–03). The fourth &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; series, helmed by Jordan Peele, was released on CBS All Access from 2019 to 2020.

&quot;TV Guide&quot; ranked the original TV series #5 in their 2013 list of the 60 greatest shows of all time and #4 in their list of the 60 greatest dramas.

== Television history ==

===Background===
As a boy, Rod Serling was a fan of pulp fiction stories. As an adult, he sought books with themes such as racism, government, war, society, and human nature in general. Serling decided to combine these interests to broach these subjects on television at a time when they were considered taboo.

Throughout the 1950s, Serling established himself as one of the most popular names in television. He was as famous for writing televised drama as he was for criticizing the medium&#x27;s limitations. His most vocal complaints concerned censorship, which was frequently practiced by sponsors and networks. &quot;I was not permitted to have my senators discuss any current or pressing problem&quot;, he said of his 1957 &quot;Studio One&quot; production &quot;The Arena&quot;, intended to be an involving look into contemporary politics. &quot;To talk of tariff was to align oneself with the Republicans; to talk of labor was to suggest control by the Democrats. To say a single thing germane to the current political scene was absolutely prohibited.&quot;

=== &quot;The Time Element&quot; (1958) ===
CBS purchased a teleplay in 1958 that writer Rod Serling hoped to produce as the pilot of a weekly anthology series. &quot;The Time Element&quot; marked Serling&#x27;s first entry in the field of science fiction.

====Plot====
Thirteen years after the end of World War II, a man named Peter Jenson (William Bendix) visits a psychoanalyst, Dr. Gillespie (Martin Balsam). Jenson tells him about a recurring dream in which he tries to warn people about the &quot;sneak attack&quot; on Pearl Harbor before it happens, but the warnings are disregarded. Jenson believes the events of the dream are real, and each night he travels back to 1941. Dr. Gillespie insists that time travel is impossible given the nature of temporal paradoxes. While on the couch, Jenson falls asleep once again but this time dreams that the Japanese planes shoot and kill him. In Dr. Gillespie&#x27;s office, the couch Jenson was lying on is now empty. Dr. Gillespie goes to a bar where he finds Jenson&#x27;s picture on the wall. The bartender tells him that Jenson had tended bar there, but he was killed during the Pearl Harbor attack.

====Production====
With the &quot;Time Element&quot; script, Serling drafted the fundamental elements that defined the subsequent series: a science-fiction/fantasy theme, opening and closing narration, and an ending with a twist. &quot;The Time Element&quot; was purchased immediately but shelved indefinitely.

This is where things stood when Bert Granet, the new producer for &quot;Westinghouse Desilu Playhouse&quot;, discovered &quot;The Time Element&quot; in CBS&#x27; vaults while searching for an original Serling script to add prestige to his show. &quot;The Time Element&quot; (introduced by Desi Arnaz) debuted on November 24, 1958, to an overwhelmingly delighted audience of television viewers and critics alike. &quot;The humor and sincerity of Mr. Serling&#x27;s dialogue made &#x27;The Time Element&#x27; consistently entertaining,&quot; offered Jack Gould of &quot;The New York Times&quot;. More than 6,000 letters of praise flooded Granet&#x27;s offices. Convinced that a series based on such stories could succeed, CBS again began talks with Serling about the possibilities of producing &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;. &quot;Where Is Everybody?&quot; was accepted as the pilot episode and the project was officially announced to the public in early 1959. Other than reruns at the time, &quot;The Time Element&quot; was not aired on television again until it was shown as part of a 1996 all-night sneak preview of the new cable channel TVLand. It is available in an Italian DVD boxed set titled &quot;Ai confini della realtà – I tesori perduti&quot;. The &quot;Twilight Zone Season 1&quot; Blu-ray boxed set released on September 14, 2010, offers a remastered high-definition version of the original &quot;Desilu Playhouse&quot; production as a special feature. The program&#x27;s supporting cast features Darryl Hickman, Jesse White, Bartlett Robinson and future Three Stooges member Joe DeRita.

=== First series (1959–1964) ===

The series was produced by Cayuga Productions, Inc., a production company owned and named by Serling. It reflects his background in Central New York State and is named after Cayuga Lake, on which he owned a home, and where Cornell University and Ithaca College are located.

Aside from Serling, who wrote or adapted nearly two-thirds of the series&#x27; total episodes, writers for &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; included leading authors such as Charles Beaumont, Ray Bradbury, Earl Hamner, Jr., George Clayton Johnson, Richard Matheson, Reginald Rose, and Jerry Sohl. Many episodes also featured new adaptations of classic stories by such writers as Ambrose Bierce, Jerome Bixby, Damon Knight, John Collier, and Lewis Padgett.

&quot;Twilight Zone&quot; writers frequently used science fiction as a vehicle for social comment, as networks and sponsors who censored controversial material from live dramas were less concerned with seemingly innocuous fantasy and sci-fi stories. Frequent themes on &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; included nuclear war, McCarthyism, and mass hysteria, subjects that were avoided on less serious primetime television. Episodes such as &quot;The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street&quot; and &quot;I Am the Night—Color Me Black&quot; offered specific commentary on current events and social issues. Other stories, such as &quot;The Masks&quot;, &quot;I Dream of Genie&quot;, or &quot;Mr. Denton on Doomsday&quot; were allegories, parables, or fables that reflected the moral and philosophical choices of the characters.

Despite his esteem in the writing community, Serling found the series difficult to sell. Few critics felt that science fiction could transcend empty escapism and enter the realm of adult drama. In a September 22, 1959, interview with Serling, Mike Wallace asked a question illustrative of the times: &quot;...[Y]ou&#x27;re going to be, obviously, working so hard on &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; that, in essence, for the time being and for the foreseeable future, you&#x27;ve given up on writing anything important for television, right?&quot; While Serling&#x27;s appearances on the show became one of its most distinctive features, with his clipped delivery still widely imitated today, he was reportedly nervous about it and had to be persuaded to appear on camera. Serling often appeared in medias res with the characters remaining oblivious to him, with one notable exception: In &quot;A World of His Own&quot;, a writer (Keenan Wynn) with the ability to make characters appear and disappear objects to Serling&#x27;s narration and promptly erases Serling from the show.

In season two, due to budgetary constraints, the network decided – against Serling&#x27;s wishes – to cut costs by shooting some episodes on videotape rather than film. The requisite multicamera setup of the videotape format precluded location shooting, severely limiting the potential scope of the storylines, and the experiment was abandoned after just six episodes (&quot;Twenty Two&quot;, &quot;Static&quot;, &quot;The Whole Truth&quot;, &quot;The Lateness of the Hour&quot;, &quot;The Night of the Meek&quot;, and &quot;Long Distance Call&quot;).

The first series contains 156 episodes. The episodes in seasons one through three are 30 minutes long with commercials (24 or 25 minutes without commercials). Season four (1962–63) consists of one-hour episodes with commercials (51 minutes without commercials). Season five returned to the half-hour format.

===Second series (1985–1989)===

It was Serling&#x27;s decision to sell his share of the series back to the network that eventually allowed for a &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; revival. As an in-house production, CBS stood to earn more money producing &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; than it could by purchasing a new series produced by an outside company. Even so, the network was slow to consider a revival, turning down offers from the original production team of Rod Serling and Buck Houghton and later from American filmmaker Francis Ford Coppola.

CBS gave the new &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; a greenlight in 1984 under the supervision of Carla Singer, then Vice President of Drama Development. While the show did not come close to matching the enduring popularity of the original, some episodes – particularly Alan Brennert&#x27;s love story &quot;Her Pilgrim Soul&quot; and J. Neil Schulman&#x27;s &quot;Profile in Silver&quot; – were critically acclaimed. In a tribute to the first series, the opening credits include a brief image of Rod Serling. Four episodes are remakes of those from the first series: &quot;Night of the Meek&quot;, &quot;Shadow Play&quot;, &quot;The After Hours&quot; and &quot;A Game of Pool&quot;, while &quot;Dead Woman&#x27;s Shoes&quot; is an adaptation of &quot;Dead Man&#x27;s Shoes&quot;. Unlike the first, third and fourth series, this version does not include the opening monologue during the title sequence. As well, the narration is all strictly voice-over and the narrator never appears on-screen.

===&quot;Rod Serling&#x27;s Lost Classics&quot; (1994)===

In the early 1990s, Richard Matheson and Carol Serling produced an outline for a two-hour made-for-TV movie which would feature Matheson adaptations of three yet-unfilmed Rod Serling short stories. Outlines for such a production were rejected by CBS until early 1994, when Serling&#x27;s widow discovered a complete shooting script (&quot;Where the Dead Are&quot;) authored by her late husband, while rummaging through their garage. She showed the forgotten script to producers Michael O&#x27;Hara and Laurence Horowitz, who were significantly impressed by it. &quot;I had a pile of scripts, which I usually procrastinate about reading. But I read this one right away and, after 30 pages, called my partner and said, &quot;I love it,&quot; recalled O&#x27;Hara. &quot;This is pure imagination, a period piece, literate – some might say wordy. If Rod Serling&#x27;s name weren&#x27;t on it, it wouldn&#x27;t have a chance at getting made.&quot;

Eager to capitalize on Serling&#x27;s celebrity status as a writer, CBS packaged &quot;Where the Dead Are&quot; with Matheson&#x27;s adaptation of &quot;The Theatre&quot;, debuting as a two-hour feature on the night of May 19, 1994, under the name &quot;Twilight Zone: Rod Serling&#x27;s Lost Classics&quot;. The title represents a misnomer, as both stories were conceived long after &quot;Twilight Zone&#x27;s&quot; cancellation. Written just months before Serling&#x27;s death, &quot;Where the Dead Are&quot; starred Patrick Bergin as a 19th-century doctor who stumbles upon a mad scientist&#x27;s medical experiments with immortality. &quot;The Theatre&quot; starred Amy Irving and Gary Cole as a couple who visits a cineplex where they discover the feature presentation depicts their own lives. James Earl Jones provided opening and closing narrations.

Critical response was mixed. Gannett News Service described it as &quot;taut and stylish, a reminder of what can happen when fine actors are given great words.&quot; &quot;USA Today&quot; was less impressed, even suggesting that Carol Serling &quot;should have left these two unproduced mediocrities in the garage where she found them.&quot; Ultimately, ratings proved insufficient to justify a proposed sequel featuring three scripts adapted by Matheson.

===Third series (2002–2003)===
A third series was developed by UPN in 2002; it was hosted by Forest Whitaker. It was broadcast in a one-hour format composed of two half-hour stories, it was canceled after one season. &quot;It&#x27;s Still a Good Life&quot; is a sequel to &quot;It&#x27;s a Good Life&quot;, &quot;The Monsters Are on Maple Street&quot; is an adaptation of &quot;The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street&quot; and &quot;Eye of the Beholder&quot; is a remake of an episode from the first series, with Serling still credited as writer.

===Fourth series (2019–2020)===

In December 2012, it was reported that Bryan Singer was developing and executive producing a fourth television series for CBS Television Studios. A writer for the series was not chosen and the program was not pitched to any networks. CBS, which broadcast the first series and second series, was reportedly interested. In February 2013, Singer told &quot;TG Daily&quot; that the project was still in development and that he hoped to direct the pilot and have A-list actors appear on the revival. The following month, he told &quot;IGN&quot; that a writer with whom he had previously worked was in negotiations to join the revival and that he felt &quot;passionate&quot; towards the first series and the planned revival.

In February 2016, it was reported that Ken Levine would write and direct the pilot episode of the revival series. It was also reported that the series would be interactive. In November 2017, it was reported that Jordan Peele was developing a reboot of the series for streaming service CBS All Access with Marco Ramirez serving as potential showrunner. In December 2017, CBS All Access ordered the fourth &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; series to series. It was announced that the series would be produced by CBS Television Studios in association with Monkeypaw Productions and Genre Films. Jordan Peele, Marco Ramirez, and Simon Kinberg will serve as executive producers for the series and collaborate on the premiere episode. Win Rosenfeld and Audrey Chon will also serve as executive producers. Peele was revealed to be the new host and narrator in September 2018, and the new opening sequence was released. The series premiered on April 1, 2019.

The season 1 episode &quot;Nightmare at 30,000 Feet&quot; is based on the first series&#x27; season 5 episode &quot;Nightmare at 20,000 Feet&quot;. The season 2 episode &quot;You Might Also Like&quot; features the Kanamits, who first appeared in the first series&#x27; season 3 episode &quot;To Serve Man&quot;. On February 24, 2021, CBS All Access canceled the series after two seasons.

==Other media==
===Film===

&quot;Twilight Zone: The Movie&quot; is a 1983 feature film produced by Steven Spielberg and John Landis. It starred Dan Aykroyd, Albert Brooks, John Lithgow, Vic Morrow and Scatman Crothers. The film remade three classic episodes of the first series and included one original story. Landis directed the prologue and the first segment &quot;(Time Out&quot;), Spielberg directed the second (Kick the Can), Joe Dante the third (It&#x27;s a Good Life&quot;, and George Miller directed the fourth (Nightmare at 20,000 Feet). Landis&#x27;s segment became notorious for a helicopter accident during filming that caused the deaths of Morrow and two child actors.

====Potential film====
Actor Leonardo DiCaprio is planning to make a new film with Warner Bros., citing &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; as his favorite TV series. Unlike the first film, which was an anthology feature, it will be a big-budget, SFX-laden continuous story possibly based on classic episodes of the series such as &quot;Eye of the Beholder&quot;, &quot;To Serve Man&quot;, or any of the 92 scripts written by Rod Serling, to which Warner Bros. owns the rights. One plot leaked from the script tells about a pilot who time-travels 96 years into the future. &quot;Cloverfield&quot; director Matt Reeves was signed in 2011 to direct the movie, but left in 2012 to direct &quot;Dawn of the Planet of the Apes&quot;. On August 16, 2013, Joseph Kosinski was announced to direct. The studio hired Aron Eli Coleite to pen the screenplay for the film and will not be an anthology but use various elements from the &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; universe. In June 2017, Christine Lavaf was hired to write the script.

===Games===
In 1964, Ideal released a board game, &quot;The Twilight Zone Game&quot;, at the height of the show&#x27;s popularity. The game consisted of a cardboard playing surface, four colored playing pieces, a colored spinning wheel, and 12 &quot;door&quot; playing cards. In 1988, Gigabit Systems, Inc. published a text adventure video game for Amiga and the PC. In March 1992, Midway Games released a wide-body pinball game, &quot;Twilight Zone&quot;, based on the original TV series, as a Bally title. Conceived by Pat Lawlor, it uses Golden Earring&#x27;s hit song &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; (1982) as its theme song. The game sold 15,235 units. It is often regarded as one of the greatest pinball machines of all time. On September 17, 2014, Legacy Interactive and Spark Plug Games released a casual adventure game based on &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;. On July 14, 2022, Fun Train and Pocket Money Games released a Virtual Reality game based on &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; for Meta Quest 2 titled &quot;Twilight Zone VR&quot;.

===Literature===

Serling novelized several of his original scripts, which were published in the anthologies &quot;Stories from the Twilight Zone&quot; (1960), &quot;More Stories from the Twilight Zone&quot; (1961) and &quot;New Stories from the Twilight Zone&quot; (1962); these have all been reprinted several times, including in an omnibus, &quot;The Twilight Zone: Complete Stories&quot; (1980). In 1995, DAW Books published the anthology books &quot;Journeys to the Twilight Zone&quot; (16 stories edited by Carol Serling including Rod Serling&#x27;s &quot;Suggestion&quot;), &quot;Return to the Twilight Zone&quot; (18 stories edited by Carol Serling including Rod Serling&#x27;s &quot;The Sole Survivor&quot;), and &quot;Adventures in the Twilight Zone&quot; (24 stories edited by Carol Serling including Rod Serling&#x27;s &quot;Lindemann&#x27;s Catch&quot;). In September 2009, Tor Books published &quot;Twilight Zone: 19 Original Stories on the 50th Anniversary&quot;, to mark the 50th anniversary of the series. It contains stories by 20 authors such as R. L. Stine and Timothy Zahn, and an introduction by Carol Serling.

====Comic books====
Western Publishing published a &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; comic book, first providing content under contract to publisher Dell Comics for four issues, one in 1961 and three further issues in 1962, with the first two published as part of their long-running &quot;Four Color&quot; anthology series as issue numbers 1173 and 1288, and then two further one-shots numbered separately in Dell&#x27;s unique fashion as 01-860-207 and 12-860-210 (numbered as 01-860-210 on the inside) respectively. Western then restarted the series under its own Gold Key imprint with a formal issue No. 1, which ran 92 issues from 1962 to 1979, with the final issue being published in 1982. Several of the stories were reprinted in their &quot;Mystery Comics Digest&quot;, which mentioned the title on the covers. A wide range of artists worked on the title, including Jack Sparling, Reed Crandall, Lee Elias, George Evans, Russ Jones, Joe Orlando, Jerry Robinson, Mike Sekowsky, Dan Spiegle, Frank Thorne, and Alex Toth. The first published comic book work of artist Frank Miller appeared in issue 84 (June 1978). In 1990, NOW Comics published a single issue of a new series using the title logo from the 1985 revival, featuring an adaptation of Harlan Ellison&#x27;s story &quot;Crazy as a Soup Sandwich&quot;. The issue was reprinted as &quot;Twilight Zones Premiere&quot; in 1991, followed by an eleven-issue second volume (1991–1992) and a four-issue third volume (1993), as well as an annual and a 3-D special in 1993.

In 2008, students at the Savannah College of Art and Design partnered with Walker &amp; Co. to create graphic novels based on eight episodes of the series through 2009. The first four, &quot;Walking Distance&quot;, &quot;The After Hours&quot;, &quot;The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street&quot;, and &quot;The Odyssey of Flight 33&quot;, were released in December 2011. The other four were &quot;The Midnight Sun&quot;, &quot;Deaths-Head Revisited&quot;, &quot;The Big Tall Wish&quot; and &quot;Will the Real Martian Please Stand Up?&quot; Comics publisher Dynamite Entertainment ran a multiple-issue series, written by J. Michael Straczynski and with art by Guiu Vilanova, beginning in December 2013.

===Music===

====Television series====
* Marius Constant composed the theme used for the series from the second season onward. This replaced Bernard Herrmann&#x27;s theme for the first season, though Constant&#x27;s theme is more associated with the recognizable sound of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; and most of its incarnations. The guitar part was performed by jazz guitarist and session musician Howard Roberts on a 1952 Fender Telecaster. Other music contributors for the original television show are Jerry Goldsmith, Leonard Rosenman, Nathan Scott, Fred Steiner, Nathan Van Cleave, René Garriguenc and Franz Waxman.
* The Grateful Dead performed the theme for the 1985 revival series.
* Jonathan Davis of Korn composed the theme music for the 2002 revival series.
* Marco Beltrami and Brandon Roberts composed the music for the 2019 revival.

====Film====
* Jerry Goldsmith composed the music for &quot;Twilight Zone: The Movie&quot; (1983).

====Influence in popular music====
Michael Jackson used samples from The Twilight Zone in his songs &quot;The Lost Children&quot; and &quot;Threatened&quot; from the 2001 album &quot;Invincible&quot;.

The Marketts&#x27; biggest hit, &quot;Out of Limits&quot;, originally entitled &quot;Outer Limits&quot;, was named after the 1963 TV series &quot;The Outer Limits&quot;. Rod Serling sued the Marketts for quoting the four-note motif from &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;, without his approval, which resulted in the change of the title to &quot;Out of Limits&quot;. It reached number 3 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart in 1964. It sold over one million copies, and was awarded a gold disc.

Many other musicians have written and performed music based on &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;, including: 2 Unlimited (&quot;Twilight Zone&quot;), Anthrax (&quot;Intro to Reality&quot;), Average White Band, John Cale, Dr. John, David Dubowski (&quot;To Serve Man&quot;), Golden Earring (&quot;Twilight Zone&quot;), Michael Hurley, Tech N9ne, Iron Maiden (&quot;Twilight Zone&quot;), Mekong Delta (&quot;Twilight Zone&quot;), Van Morrison (&quot;Twilight Zone&quot;), Rush (&quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;), Raymond Scott, Sly &amp; Robbie, Magneto Dayo, The Manhattan Transfer (&quot;Twilight Zone/Twilight Tone&quot;), The Residents, The Ventures (&quot;Twilight Zone&quot;), Panic! at the Disco and John Williams.

===Radio===

Beginning in 2002, episodes of the original &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; were adapted for radio, with Stacy Keach taking Serling&#x27;s role as narrator and produced by Carl Amari of Falcon Picture Group. Each episode features a current Hollywood celebrity, including Jason Alexander, Blair Underwood, Lou Gossett, Jr., Michael York, Jim Caviezel, Jane Seymour, Don Johnson, Sean Astin, Luke Perry and others in the title roles. The series is broadcast on hundreds of radio stations from coast to coast and over Sirius/XM. The station list and episodes for download, including 3 Free episodes are available at the official website at www.twilightzoneradio.com

===Scripts===
Beginning in 2001, Gauntlet Press began publishing collections of original scripts from &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; by Charles Beaumont, Richard Matheson, and Rod Serling. A ten-volume signed, limited edition series of all 92 of Rod Serling&#x27;s scripts, authorized by his wife, Carol Serling, began yearly publication in 2004. Many of the scripts contain handwritten edits by Serling himself and differ in significant ways from the aired versions; most volumes contain an alternate version of a selected script. The script for &quot;The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street&quot; has been published into 7th grade reading books in the form of a play.

===Stage productions===
Live theatre productions of the original episodes can be seen in Los Angeles and Seattle, where Theater Schmeater has continuously produced a late-night series, &quot;The Twilight Zone – Live&quot; with permission of the Serling estate, since 1996. In 2009, Masquerade, A Chennai based theater group produced &#x27;Dystopia&#x27;, loosely based on the episodes &quot;The Obsolete Man&quot; and &quot;Five Characters in Search of an Exit&quot;. In 2011, the Penn State University theatre group, No Refund Theatre, produced a stage adaptation of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;. It included the episodes &quot;The Eye of the Beholder&quot;, &quot;The Midnight Sun&quot;, and &quot;Nothing in the Dark&quot;. It was directed by Anthony Arbaiza.

In 2017, Bethesda-Chevy Chase High School produced a live adaptation directed by Adam Graham with permission from CBS, with two shows containing four episodes each. These episodes included &quot;Will The Real Martian Please Stand Up?&quot; and &quot;The Monsters Are Due On Maple Street.&quot; as well as more technically challenging episodes such as &quot;Penny For Your Thoughts&quot; and &quot;The Eye of the Beholder.&quot;

In December 2017 the Almeida Theatre in London are staging the World Premiere production of &#x27;The Twilight Zone&#x27;. Adapted by Anne Washburn and directed by Laurence Olivier Award winner Richard Jones, and will be based on stories from the first series by Rod Serling, Charles Beaumont and Richard Matheson.

===Theme park attraction===
&quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; Tower of Terror is a theme park attraction based on the original &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; series. Designed by Walt Disney Imagineering, the attraction is present at Disney&#x27;s Hollywood Studios in Orlando, Walt Disney Studios Park in Paris and Tokyo DisneySea in Japan. A fourth attraction at Disney California Adventure operated from 2004 to 2017 before being re-themed to Guardians of the Galaxy – Mission: Breakout!. The attraction in Japan is the only one not themed to &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;, due to cultural differences and constraints in licensing for the Oriental Land Company, owner and operator of the Tokyo parks. The ride also served as the inspiration for the 1997 TV film &quot;Tower of Terror&quot;, which bears no connection to &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;.

===Syndication===
&quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; first series is currently in syndication on MeTV Network and Syfy, and the 2002 revival is syndicated on the El Rey Network.

==In popular culture==

In Matt Groening&#x27;s &quot;Futurama&quot;, there is a dystopian TV show called &quot;The Scary Door&quot;, the title sequence, dystopian themes and comedic premise of which are heavily influenced by &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;. One episode of The Scary Door, &quot;The Last Man On Earth,&quot; parodies The Twilight Zone&#x27;s original season 1 episode &quot;Time Enough At Last.&quot;

Many Treehouse Of Horror episodes of &quot;The Simpsons&quot; also reference the show. These include &quot;Treehouse of Horror&quot; (where the family are abducted by aliens, &quot;Hungry Are The Damned&quot;), &quot;Treehouse of Horror III&quot; (which features an evil Krusty The Clown doll, &quot;Clown Without Pity&quot;) and &quot;Treehouse of Horror IV&quot; (where Bart sees a gremlin on the side of the school bus, &quot;Terror at 5 1/2 Feet&quot;). Homer also references the show in the &quot;Homer3&quot; segment of &quot;Treehouse of Horror VI,&quot; when, upon entering the 3rd dimension, he says &quot;It&#x27;s like something out of that twilighty show about that zone&quot;.

&quot;The X-Files&quot; character Robert Matheson is named after one of the original series&#x27; writers.

In &quot;Mad Men&quot;, Paul Kinsey quotes Rod Serling&#x27;s &quot;submitted for your approval&quot; opening and foreshadows the original show&#x27;s cancellation (Season 1, Episode 2), saying &quot;Mitch in Media says CBS might pull the plug -- I&#x27;ll kill myself.&quot;

&quot;The Late Show with Stephen Colbert&quot; aired a skit &quot;The Twilight Zone: Just The Twists&quot; on February 1, 2016 and on January 22, 2024, where the host claims to get access to unreleased alternative versions of episodes.

The video game &quot;Alan Wake&quot; contains an in-universe series called &quot;Night Springs&quot;, episodes of which the player can find on televisions scattered through the game. The episodes mirror &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;&#x27;s intro, theme song, and storytelling style, complete with an announcer impersonating Rod Serling&#x27;s voice and narration.

Many bands and artists have released songs dedicated to the show, with some titled &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;/&quot;Twilight Zone&quot;, as listed above. John Grant briefly mentions the show&#x27;s title in the song &quot;Sigourney Weaver&quot;, from his 2010 album, &quot;Queen of Denmark&quot;. British post-punk band The Fall released a song called &quot;Time Enough At Last&quot; appearing on their &quot;&quot; album. The song recounts the events of the original &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; episode of the same name and also appears on the band&#x27;s 2003 compilation album of the same name. Mathcore duo Serling is named after the shows creator, Rod Serling. All songs, lyrics, and albums of theirs discuss particular &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; episodes and themes.

==See also==

Science fiction on television
==References==
==Bibliography==

* Albarella, Tony, ed. &quot;As Timeless as Infinity: The Complete Twilight Zone Scripts of Rod Serling&quot;. Colorado Springs, CO: Gauntlet Press.
* *&quot;Vol. 1&quot; (2004). .
* *&quot;Vol. 2&quot; (2005). .
* *&quot;Vol. 3&quot; (2006). .
* *&quot;Vol. 4&quot; (2007). .
* *&quot;Vol. 5&quot; (2008). .
* *&quot;Vol. 6&quot; (2009). .
* *&quot;Vol. 7&quot; (2010). .
* Anker, Roger, ed. (2004). &quot;The Twilight Zone Scripts of Charles Beaumont, Vol. 1&quot;. Colorado Springs, CO: Gauntlet Press. .
* DeVoe, Bill. (2008). &quot;Trivia from The Twilight Zone&quot;. Albany, GA: Bear Manor Media. .
* Grams, Martin. (2008). &quot;The Twilight Zone: Unlocking the Door to a Television Classic&quot;. Churchville, MD: OTR Publishing. .
* Presnell, Don and Marty McGee. (2008). &quot;A Critical History of Television&#x27;s The Twilight Zone, 1959–1964&quot;. Jefferson, NC: McFarland. 
* Stanyard, Stewart T. (2007). &quot;Dimensions Behind the Twilight Zone: A Backstage Tribute to Television&#x27;s Groundbreaking Series.&quot; Ecw Press. .
* Wiater, Stanley, ed. (2001). &quot;Richard Matheson&#x27;s The Twilight Zone Scripts, Vol. 1&quot;. Colorado Springs, CO: Gauntlet Press. .
* Wiater, Stanley, ed. (2002). &quot;Richard Matheson&#x27;s The Twilight Zone Scripts, Vol. 2&quot;. Colorado Springs, CO: Gauntlet Press. .
* Zicree, Marc Scott (1982). &quot;The Twilight Zone Companion&quot;. First Edition, Bantam Books. . Second Edition (1992). Silman-James Press; .
==External links==

* first series
* second series
* third series
* fourth series
* Encyclopedia of Television
* &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; Scifi.com Page
* &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; Revisited
* Fan Site
* &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; first series at CVTA
* &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; second series at CVTA
* &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; actors interviewed, October, 2015</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q196600" start="33" end="48" title="media franchise" label="media franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q23653" start="62" end="71" title="anthology series" label="anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q435920" start="101" end="112" title="Rod Serling" label="Rod Serling"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="311" end="318" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="320" end="335" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770859" start="337" end="346" title="Absurdist fiction" label="absurdism"/>
<link wikidata="Q358998" start="348" end="365" title="dystopian fiction" label="dystopian fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q9503" start="367" end="375" title="suspense" label="suspense"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="377" end="383" title="Horror fiction" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="385" end="403" title="Drama (film and television)#Fantasy drama" label="supernatural drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="405" end="417" title="black comedy" label="black comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q590103" start="423" end="445" title="psychological thriller" label="psychological thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705215" start="476" end="483" title="macabre" label="macabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321123" start="487" end="503" title="Twist ending" label="unexpected twist"/>
<link wikidata="Q110248179" start="630" end="635" title="trope (literature)" label="trope"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="638" end="654" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The first series"/>
<link wikidata="Q838368" start="673" end="688" title="black-and-white" label="black-and-white"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="697" end="700" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2676592" start="836" end="853" title="Tales of Tomorrow" label="Tales of Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111468" start="877" end="886" title="Out There (1951 TV series)" label="Out There"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952334" start="913" end="936" title="Science Fiction Theatre" label="Science Fiction Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141890" start="983" end="999" title="The Weird Circle" label="The Weird Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355674" start="1023" end="1034" title="Dimension X (radio program)" label="Dimension X"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042761" start="1061" end="1072" title="X Minus One" label="X Minus One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251336" start="1148" end="1161" title="Norman Corwin" label="Norman Corwin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1196" end="1210" title="Twilight Zone: The Movie" label="a feature film"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1219" end="1228" title="Twilight Zone: Rod Serling&amp;#x27;s Lost Classics" label="a TV film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228924" start="1239" end="1251" title="The Twilight Zone (radio series)" label="radio series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852950" start="1263" end="1281" title="Twilight Zone literature" label="various literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776103" start="1283" end="1305" title="The Twilight Zone Tower of Terror" label="theme park attractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186399" start="1324" end="1332" title="spin-off (media)" label="spin-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q559270" start="1408" end="1421" title="The Twilight Zone (1985 TV series)" label="second series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581244" start="1486" end="1498" title="The Twilight Zone (2002 TV series)" label="third series"/>
<link wikidata="Q206272" start="1506" end="1509" title="UPN" label="UPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q57270033" start="1525" end="1564" title="The Twilight Zone (2019 TV series)" label="fourth &amp;quot;Twilight Zone&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371986" start="1576" end="1588" title="Jordan Peele" label="Jordan Peele"/>
<link wikidata="Q27903045" start="1606" end="1620" title="CBS All Access" label="CBS All Access"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="1647" end="1655" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q435920" start="1853" end="1864" title="Rod Serling" label="Rod Serling"/>
<link wikidata="Q865585" start="1878" end="1890" title="pulp magazine" label="pulp fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="1949" end="1955" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="1957" end="1967" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="1969" end="1972" title="war" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="1974" end="1981" title="society" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088288" start="2153" end="2158" title="1950s in television" label="1950s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248101" start="2562" end="2572" title="Studio One (American TV series)" label="Studio One"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="2728" end="2739" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="2788" end="2797" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="2938" end="2941" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q356055" start="2954" end="2962" title="teleplay" label="teleplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005629" start="3237" end="3251" title="William Bendix" label="William Bendix"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="3262" end="3275" title="psychoanalyst" label="psychoanalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q312107" start="3292" end="3305" title="Martin Balsam" label="Martin Balsam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33447" start="3649" end="3665" title="temporal paradox" label="temporal paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q966656" start="4393" end="4404" title="Bert Granet" label="Bert Granet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019190" start="4433" end="4462" title="Westinghouse Desilu Playhouse" label="Westinghouse Desilu Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q472535" start="4650" end="4660" title="Desi Arnaz" label="Desi Arnaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112762" start="4909" end="4919" title="Jack Gould" label="Jack Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="4929" end="4947" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2675185" start="5190" end="5209" title="Where Is Everybody?" label="Where Is Everybody?"/>
<link wikidata="Q653916" start="5236" end="5249" title="Television pilot" label="pilot episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109582" start="5500" end="5506" title="TVLand" label="TVLand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="5538" end="5541" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="5654" end="5661" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016561" start="5870" end="5884" title="Darryl Hickman" label="Darryl Hickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q507664" start="5886" end="5897" title="Jesse White (actor)" label="Jesse White"/>
<link wikidata="Q15051786" start="5899" end="5916" title="Bartlett Robinson" label="Bartlett Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q949161" start="5928" end="5941" title="Three Stooges" label="Three Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q705408" start="5949" end="5959" title="Joe DeRita" label="Joe DeRita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958511" start="6441" end="6457" title="Charles Beaumont" label="Charles Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q40640" start="6459" end="6471" title="Ray Bradbury" label="Ray Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q948870" start="6473" end="6489" title="Earl Hamner, Jr." label="Earl Hamner, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q325422" start="6491" end="6513" title="George Clayton Johnson" label="George Clayton Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q325130" start="6515" end="6531" title="Richard Matheson" label="Richard Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934890" start="6533" end="6546" title="Reginald Rose" label="Reginald Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687871" start="6552" end="6562" title="Jerry Sohl" label="Jerry Sohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q191050" start="6646" end="6660" title="Ambrose Bierce" label="Ambrose Bierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q590532" start="6662" end="6674" title="Jerome Bixby" label="Jerome Bixby"/>
<link wikidata="Q534599" start="6676" end="6688" title="Damon Knight" label="Damon Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305122" start="6690" end="6702" title="John Collier (fiction writer)" label="John Collier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142173" start="6708" end="6721" title="Lewis Padgett" label="Lewis Padgett"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="7032" end="7043" title="Nuclear warfare" label="nuclear war"/>
<link wikidata="Q207066" start="7045" end="7056" title="McCarthyism" label="McCarthyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532199" start="7062" end="7075" title="mass hysteria" label="mass hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633816" start="7165" end="7201" title="The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street" label="The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627116" start="7218" end="7247" title="I Am the Night—Color Me Black" label="I Am the Night—Color Me Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626472" start="7348" end="7357" title="The Masks (The Twilight Zone)" label="The Masks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019040" start="7371" end="7387" title="I Dream of Genie" label="I Dream of Genie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634018" start="7404" end="7426" title="Mr. Denton on Doomsday" label="Mr. Denton on Doomsday"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="7438" end="7448" title="allegories" label="allegories"/>
<link wikidata="Q208555" start="7450" end="7458" title="parables" label="parables"/>
<link wikidata="Q693" start="7463" end="7469" title="fables" label="fables"/>
<link wikidata="Q325487" start="7784" end="7796" title="Mike Wallace" label="Mike Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q277720" start="8334" end="8347" title="in medias res" label="in medias res"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660820" start="8433" end="8451" title="A World of His Own" label="A World of His Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q946859" start="8469" end="8480" title="Keenan Wynn" label="Keenan Wynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q747779" start="8760" end="8769" title="videotape" label="videotape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663208" start="8994" end="9004" title="Twenty Two (The Twilight Zone)" label="Twenty Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711049" start="9018" end="9024" title="Static (The Twilight Zone)" label="Static"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727886" start="9038" end="9053" title="The Whole Truth (The Twilight Zone)" label="The Whole Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621692" start="9067" end="9091" title="The Lateness of the Hour (The Twilight Zone)" label="The Lateness of the Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155307" start="9105" end="9126" title="The Night of the Meek" label="The Night of the Meek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618946" start="9144" end="9162" title="Long Distance Call" label="Long Distance Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927449" start="9957" end="9970" title="Buck Houghton" label="Buck Houghton"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="10005" end="10025" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336758" start="10073" end="10083" title="greenlight" label="greenlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136498" start="10289" end="10302" title="Alan Brennert" label="Alan Brennert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255565" start="10327" end="10343" title="Her Pilgrim Soul" label="Her Pilgrim Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q29621" start="10354" end="10370" title="J. Neil Schulman" label="J. Neil Schulman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248269" start="10384" end="10401" title="Profile in Silver" label="Profile in Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255565" start="10593" end="10610" title="Night of the Meek" label="Night of the Meek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255565" start="10624" end="10635" title="Shadow Play (The Twilight Zone, 1985)" label="Shadow Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255565" start="10649" end="10664" title="The After Hours (1986 The Twilight Zone)" label="The After Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656925" start="10681" end="10695" title="A Game of Pool (The Twilight Zone, 1985)" label="A Game of Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255565" start="10715" end="10738" title="Dead Woman&amp;#x27;s Shoes" label="Dead Woman&amp;#x27;s Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13633732" start="10771" end="10792" title="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Shoes (The Twilight Zone)" label="Dead Man&amp;#x27;s Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q325130" start="11094" end="11110" title="Richard Matheson" label="Richard Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q705780" start="12538" end="12552" title="Patrick Bergin" label="Patrick Bergin"/>
<link wikidata="Q614130" start="12598" end="12611" title="mad scientist" label="mad scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q235020" start="12689" end="12699" title="Amy Irving" label="Amy Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q315864" start="12704" end="12713" title="Gary Cole" label="Gary Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q203960" start="12818" end="12834" title="James Earl Jones" label="James Earl Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345971" start="12906" end="12926" title="Gannett News Service" label="Gannett News Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="13049" end="13058" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q206272" start="13397" end="13400" title="UPN" label="UPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q182763" start="13427" end="13442" title="Forest Whitaker" label="Forest Whitaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145739" start="13557" end="13584" title="It&amp;#x27;s Still a Good Life" label="It&amp;#x27;s Still a Good Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466184" start="13612" end="13633" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Good Life (The Twilight Zone)" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Good Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633816" start="13647" end="13679" title="The Monsters Are on Maple Street" label="The Monsters Are on Maple Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633816" start="13712" end="13748" title="The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street" label="The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422682" start="13765" end="13784" title="Eye of the Beholder (2003 The Twilight Zone episode)" label="Eye of the Beholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629160" start="13806" end="13838" title="Eye of the Beholder (The Twilight Zone, 1959)" label="an episode from the first series"/>
<link wikidata="Q220751" start="13952" end="13964" title="Bryan Singer" label="Bryan Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576666" start="14035" end="14057" title="CBS Television Studios" label="CBS Television Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646993" start="14371" end="14377" title="A-list" label="A-list"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="14443" end="14446" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155636" start="14672" end="14682" title="Ken Levine (game developer)" label="Ken Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371986" start="14845" end="14857" title="Jordan Peele" label="Jordan Peele"/>
<link wikidata="Q27903045" start="14918" end="14932" title="CBS All Access" label="CBS All Access"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576666" start="15139" end="15161" title="CBS Television Studios" label="CBS Television Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q30638085" start="15182" end="15203" title="Monkeypaw Productions" label="Monkeypaw Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q22807052" start="15208" end="15219" title="Genre Films" label="Genre Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q219507" start="15254" end="15267" title="Simon Kinberg" label="Simon Kinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q98769310" start="15358" end="15371" title="Win Rosenfeld" label="Win Rosenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793913" start="15697" end="15721" title="Nightmare at 20,000 Feet" label="Nightmare at 20,000 Feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911630" start="15873" end="15885" title="To Serve Man (The Twilight Zone)" label="To Serve Man"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16004" end="16028" title="Twilight Zone: The Movie" label="Twilight Zone: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="16070" end="16086" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q51564" start="16091" end="16102" title="John Landis" label="John Landis"/>
<link wikidata="Q105221" start="16115" end="16126" title="Dan Aykroyd" label="Dan Aykroyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q356303" start="16128" end="16141" title="Albert Brooks" label="Albert Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q311271" start="16143" end="16155" title="John Lithgow" label="John Lithgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q453204" start="16157" end="16167" title="Vic Morrow" label="Vic Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q501996" start="16172" end="16188" title="Scatman Crothers" label="Scatman Crothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q455279" start="16403" end="16412" title="Joe Dante" label="Joe Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q446960" start="16457" end="16470" title="George Miller (director)" label="George Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q14814571" start="16564" end="16583" title="Twilight Zone accident" label="helicopter accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="16684" end="16701" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="16738" end="16749" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629160" start="16986" end="17005" title="Eye of the Beholder (The Twilight Zone, 1959)" label="Eye of the Beholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911630" start="17019" end="17031" title="To Serve Man (The Twilight Zone)" label="To Serve Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q123742" start="17228" end="17239" title="Cloverfield" label="Cloverfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q931613" start="17255" end="17266" title="Matt Reeves" label="Matt Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220194" start="17340" end="17370" title="Dawn of the Planet of the Apes" label="Dawn of the Planet of the Apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444076" start="17398" end="17413" title="Joseph Kosinski" label="Joseph Kosinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795532" start="17456" end="17472" title="Aron Eli Coleite" label="Aron Eli Coleite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143118" start="17988" end="18002" title="text adventure" label="text adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="18003" end="18013" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="18018" end="18023" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="18032" end="18034" title="Personal computer" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q149947" start="18051" end="18063" title="Midway Games" label="Midway Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q653928" start="18085" end="18092" title="pinball" label="pinball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047418" start="18105" end="18118" title="Twilight Zone (pinball)" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851974" start="18164" end="18169" title="Bally Manufacturing" label="Bally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090346" start="18190" end="18200" title="Pat Lawlor" label="Pat Lawlor"/>
<link wikidata="Q728049" start="18210" end="18224" title="Golden Earring" label="Golden Earring"/>
<link wikidata="Q738875" start="18247" end="18260" title="Twilight Zone (Golden Earring song)" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517241" start="18418" end="18436" title="Legacy Interactive" label="Legacy Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="18593" end="18608" title="Virtual reality" label="Virtual Reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q99620218" start="18657" end="18669" title="Meta Quest 2" label="Meta Quest 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646630" start="19117" end="19126" title="DAW Books" label="DAW Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647037" start="19595" end="19604" title="Tor Books" label="Tor Books"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19621" end="19679" title="Twilight Zone: 19 Original Stories on the 50th Anniversary" label="Twilight Zone: 19 Original Stories on the 50th Anniversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q333123" start="19773" end="19784" title="R. L. Stine" label="R. L. Stine"/>
<link wikidata="Q434029" start="19789" end="19801" title="Timothy Zahn" label="Timothy Zahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744153" start="19862" end="19880" title="Western Publishing" label="Western Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289818" start="19983" end="19994" title="Dell Comics" label="Dell Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528585" start="20123" end="20133" title="Four Color" label="Four Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="20140" end="20149" title="anthology" label="anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534616" start="20400" end="20416" title="Gold Key Comics" label="Gold Key imprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948820" start="20582" end="20603" title="Mystery Comics Digest" label="Mystery Comics Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115267" start="20707" end="20720" title="Jack Sparling" label="Jack Sparling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423005" start="20722" end="20735" title="Reed Crandall" label="Reed Crandall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811795" start="20737" end="20746" title="Lee Elias" label="Lee Elias"/>
<link wikidata="Q324633" start="20748" end="20760" title="George Evans (comics)" label="George Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381159" start="20762" end="20772" title="Russ Jones" label="Russ Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281152" start="20774" end="20785" title="Joe Orlando" label="Joe Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339641" start="20787" end="20801" title="Jerry Robinson" label="Jerry Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q724848" start="20803" end="20816" title="Mike Sekowsky" label="Mike Sekowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214423" start="20818" end="20829" title="Dan Spiegle" label="Dan Spiegle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754181" start="20831" end="20843" title="Frank Thorne" label="Frank Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364628" start="20849" end="20858" title="Alex Toth" label="Alex Toth"/>
<link wikidata="Q207676" start="20906" end="20918" title="Frank Miller" label="Frank Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954986" start="20962" end="20972" title="NOW Comics" label="NOW Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="21085" end="21099" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183280" start="21119" end="21143" title="Crazy as a Soup Sandwich" label="Crazy as a Soup Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020699" start="21389" end="21423" title="Savannah College of Art and Design" label="Savannah College of Art and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744666" start="21555" end="21571" title="Walking Distance" label="Walking Distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2970547" start="21585" end="21600" title="The After Hours" label="The After Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633816" start="21614" end="21650" title="The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street" label="The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666557" start="21668" end="21692" title="The Odyssey of Flight 33" label="The Odyssey of Flight 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724416" start="21758" end="21774" title="The Midnight Sun (The Twilight Zone)" label="The Midnight Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2770678" start="21788" end="21809" title="Deaths-Head Revisited" label="Deaths-Head Revisited"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754699" start="21823" end="21840" title="The Big Tall Wish" label="The Big Tall Wish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705611" start="21857" end="21895" title="Will the Real Martian Please Stand Up?" label="Will the Real Martian Please Stand Up?"/>
<link wikidata="Q965905" start="21919" end="21941" title="Dynamite Entertainment" label="Dynamite Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342033" start="22106" end="22121" title="Marius Constant" label="Marius Constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q296804" start="22206" end="22222" title="Bernard Herrmann" label="Bernard Herrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="22430" end="22434" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q855091" start="22435" end="22444" title="guitarist" label="guitarist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="22449" end="22465" title="session musician" label="session musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631895" start="22466" end="22480" title="Howard Roberts" label="Howard Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q175391" start="22491" end="22497" title="Fender Musical Instruments Corporation" label="Fender"/>
<link wikidata="Q623103" start="22498" end="22508" title="Telecaster" label="Telecaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q235077" start="22572" end="22587" title="Jerry Goldsmith" label="Jerry Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346580" start="22589" end="22605" title="Leonard Rosenman" label="Leonard Rosenman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969334" start="22607" end="22619" title="Nathan Scott (composer)" label="Nathan Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q979738" start="22621" end="22633" title="Fred Steiner" label="Fred Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969392" start="22635" end="22652" title="Nathan Van Cleave" label="Nathan Van Cleave"/>
<link wikidata="Q213611" start="22674" end="22686" title="Franz Waxman" label="Franz Waxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="22690" end="22707" title="The Grateful Dead" label="The Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q559270" start="22736" end="22755" title="The Twilight Zone (1985 TV series)" label="1985 revival series"/>
<link wikidata="Q270692" start="22759" end="22773" title="Jonathan Davis" label="Jonathan Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80304" start="22777" end="22781" title="Korn" label="Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581244" start="22815" end="22834" title="The Twilight Zone (2002 TV series)" label="2002 revival series"/>
<link wikidata="Q465754" start="22838" end="22852" title="Marco Beltrami" label="Marco Beltrami"/>
<link wikidata="Q63940544" start="22857" end="22872" title="Brandon Roberts (composer)" label="Brandon Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q235077" start="22930" end="22945" title="Jerry Goldsmith" label="Jerry Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22975" end="22999" title="Twilight Zone: The Movie" label="Twilight Zone: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="23050" end="23065" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44376" start="23198" end="23208" title="Invincible (Michael Jackson album)" label="Invincible"/>
<link wikidata="Q278776" start="23217" end="23229" title="The Marketts" label="The Marketts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111553" start="23255" end="23268" title="Out of Limits" label="Out of Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q839437" start="23363" end="23379" title="The Outer Limits (1963 TV series)" label="The Outer Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="23606" end="23635" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q373899" start="23636" end="23641" title="record chart" label="chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="23702" end="23711" title="music recording sales certification" label="gold disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q222900" start="23819" end="23830" title="2 Unlimited" label="2 Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858013" start="23838" end="23851" title="Twilight Zone (2 Unlimited song)" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q109871" start="23860" end="23867" title="Anthrax (American band)" label="Anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339948" start="23875" end="23891" title="Intro to Reality" label="Intro to Reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q583556" start="23900" end="23918" title="Average White Band" label="Average White Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q45909" start="23920" end="23929" title="John Cale" label="John Cale"/>
<link wikidata="Q511074" start="23931" end="23939" title="Dr. John" label="Dr. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911630" start="23963" end="23975" title="To Serve Man (The Twilight Zone)" label="To Serve Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q728049" start="23984" end="23998" title="Golden Earring" label="Golden Earring"/>
<link wikidata="Q738875" start="24006" end="24019" title="Twilight Zone (Golden Earring song)" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5817598" start="24028" end="24042" title="Michael Hurley (musician)" label="Michael Hurley"/>
<link wikidata="Q359303" start="24044" end="24053" title="Tech N9ne" label="Tech N9ne"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="24055" end="24066" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q967500" start="24074" end="24087" title="Twilight Zone (Iron Maiden song)" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052867" start="24096" end="24108" title="Mekong Delta" label="Mekong Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835415" start="24116" end="24129" title="The Principle of Doubt" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q272203" start="24138" end="24150" title="Van Morrison" label="Van Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141736" start="24158" end="24171" title="Veedon Fleece" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="24180" end="24184" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770863" start="24192" end="24209" title="The Twilight Zone (Rush song)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334617" start="24218" end="24231" title="Raymond Scott" label="Raymond Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q576723" start="24233" end="24249" title="Sly &amp;amp; Robbie" label="Sly &amp;amp; Robbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431787" start="24265" end="24287" title="The Manhattan Transfer" label="The Manhattan Transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736145" start="24295" end="24322" title="Extensions (The Manhattan Transfer album)" label="Twilight Zone/Twilight Tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q947955" start="24331" end="24344" title="The Residents" label="The Residents"/>
<link wikidata="Q770732" start="24346" end="24358" title="The Ventures" label="The Ventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772187" start="24366" end="24379" title="The Ventures in Space" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q277551" start="24388" end="24407" title="Panic! at the Disco" label="Panic! at the Disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q131285" start="24412" end="24425" title="John Williams" label="John Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q315090" start="24544" end="24555" title="Stacy Keach" label="Stacy Keach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633816" start="25655" end="25691" title="The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street" label="The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783926" start="26052" end="26062" title="Masquerade (Theatre Group)" label="Masquerade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="26066" end="26073" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655183" start="26161" end="26177" title="The Obsolete Man" label="The Obsolete Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685624" start="26194" end="26230" title="Five Characters in Search of an Exit" label="Five Characters in Search of an Exit"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="26251" end="26272" title="Penn State University" label="Penn State University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26517" end="26532" title="Anthony Arbaiza" label="Anthony Arbaiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897974" start="26544" end="26576" title="Bethesda-Chevy Chase High School" label="Bethesda-Chevy Chase High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="26649" end="26652" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839111" start="26985" end="27000" title="Almeida Theatre" label="Almeida Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768877" start="27098" end="27111" title="Anne Washburn" label="Anne Washburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28470" start="27128" end="27150" title="Laurence Olivier Award" label="Laurence Olivier Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326936" start="27158" end="27171" title="Richard Jones (director)" label="Richard Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140930" start="27449" end="27473" title="Walt Disney Imagineering" label="Walt Disney Imagineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345090" start="27504" end="27535" title="Disney&amp;#x27;s Hollywood Studios" label="Disney&amp;#x27;s Hollywood Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q764906" start="27548" end="27572" title="Walt Disney Studios Park" label="Walt Disney Studios Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202341" start="27586" end="27601" title="Tokyo DisneySea" label="Tokyo DisneySea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229098" start="27635" end="27662" title="Disney California Adventure" label="Disney California Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27716" end="27760" title="Guardians of the Galaxy – Mission: Breakout!" label="Guardians of the Galaxy – Mission: Breakout!"/>
<link wikidata="Q868679" start="27912" end="27933" title="Oriental Land Company" label="Oriental Land Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q255299" start="28041" end="28056" title="Tower of Terror (1997 film)" label="Tower of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303733" start="28217" end="28221" title="MeTV" label="MeTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="28234" end="28238" title="Syfy" label="Syfy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5352017" start="28282" end="28296" title="El Rey Network" label="El Rey Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q43994" start="28326" end="28339" title="Matt Groening" label="Matt Groening"/>
<link wikidata="Q73622" start="28353" end="28361" title="Futurama" label="Futurama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198638" start="28688" end="28707" title="Time Enough at Last" label="Time Enough At Last"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="28759" end="28771" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239412" start="28823" end="28842" title="Treehouse of Horror (The Simpsons episode)" label="Treehouse of Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599128" start="28933" end="28956" title="Treehouse of Horror III" label="Treehouse of Horror III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444196" start="29052" end="29074" title="Treehouse of Horror IV" label="Treehouse of Horror IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361433" start="29248" end="29270" title="Treehouse of Horror VI" label="Treehouse of Horror VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744" start="29413" end="29424" title="The X-Files" label="The X-Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q223977" start="29524" end="29531" title="Mad Men" label="Mad Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151598" start="29798" end="29832" title="The Late Show with Stephen Colbert" label="The Late Show with Stephen Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q575505" start="30050" end="30059" title="Alan Wake" label="Alan Wake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30534" end="30549" title="#Influence_in_popular_music" label="as listed above"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927517" start="30670" end="30686" title="Queen of Denmark (album)" label="Queen of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q909916" start="30717" end="30725" title="The Fall (band)" label="The Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198638" start="30852" end="30915" title="Time Enough at Last" label="the original &amp;quot;Twilight Zone&amp;quot; episode of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q336059" start="31182" end="31211" title="Science fiction on television" label="Science fiction on television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775556" start="31853" end="31866" title="Martin Grams" label="Grams, Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303647" start="32124" end="32133" title="McFarland &amp;amp; Company" label="McFarland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53393" wikidata="Q378008" url="?curid=53393" title="History of Taiwan">
<text>The history of the island of Taiwan dates back tens of thousands of years to the earliest known evidence of human habitation. The sudden appearance of a culture based on agriculture around 3000 BC is believed to reflect the arrival of the ancestors of today&#x27;s Taiwanese indigenous peoples. People from China gradually came into contact with Taiwan by the time of the Yuan dynasty (1271–1368) and Han Chinese people started settling there by the early 17th century. The island became known by the West when Portuguese explorers discovered it in the 16th century and named it Formosa. Between 1624 and 1662, the south of the island was colonized by the Dutch headquartered in Zeelandia in present-day Anping, Tainan whilst the Spanish built an outpost in the north, which lasted until 1642 when the Spanish fortress in Keelung was seized by the Dutch. These European settlements were followed by an influx of Hoklo and Hakka immigrants from Fujian and Guangdong.

In 1662, Koxinga defeated the Dutch and established a base of operations on the island. His descendants were defeated by the Qing dynasty in 1683 and their territory in Taiwan was annexed by the Qing dynasty. Over two centuries of Qing rule, Taiwan&#x27;s population increased by over two million and became majority Han Chinese due to illegal cross-strait migrations from mainland China and encroachment on Taiwanese indigenous territory. Due to the continued expansion of Chinese settlements, Qing-governed territory eventually encompassed the entire western plains and the northeast. This process accelerated in the later stages of Qing rule when settler colonization of Taiwan was actively encouraged. The Qing ceded Taiwan and Penghu to Japan after losing the First Sino-Japanese War in 1895. Taiwan experienced industrial growth and became a productive rice- and sugar-exporting Japanese colony. During the Second Sino-Japanese War it served as a base for invasions of China, and later Southeast Asia and the Pacific during World War II.

In 1945, following the end of hostilities in World War II, the nationalist government of the Republic of China (ROC), led by the Kuomintang (KMT), took control of Taiwan. The legality and nature of its control of Taiwan, including transfer of sovereignty, is debated. In 1949, after losing control of mainland China in the Chinese Civil War, the ROC government under the KMT withdrew to Taiwan where Chiang Kai-shek declared martial law. The KMT ruled Taiwan (along with the islands of Kinmen, Wuqiu and the Matsu) as a single-party state for forty years until democratic reforms in the 1980s. The first-ever direct presidential election was held in 1996. During the post-war period, Taiwan experienced rapid industrialization and economic growth known as the &quot;Taiwan Miracle&quot;, and was one of the &quot;Four Asian Tigers&quot;.

==Prehistory==

In the Late Pleistocene, sea levels were about lower than at present, exposing the floor of the shallow Taiwan Strait as a land bridge. A concentration of vertebrate fossils has been found in the channel between the Penghu Islands and Taiwan, including a partial jawbone designated Penghu 1, apparently belonging to a previously unknown species of genus &quot;Homo&quot;, dated 450,000 to 190,000 years ago. The oldest evidence of modern human presence on Taiwan consists of fragments and a tooth found at Chouqu and Gangzilin, in Zuojhen District, estimated to be between 20,000 and 30,000 years old. The oldest artefacts are chipped-pebble tools of the Paleolithic Changbin culture found in Changbin, Taitung, dated 15,000 to 5,000 years ago. The same culture is found at sites at Eluanbi on the southern tip of Taiwan, persisting until 5,000 years ago. Analysis of spores and pollen grains in sediment of Sun Moon Lake suggests that traces of slash-and-burn agriculture started in the area 11,000 years ago, and ended 4,200 years ago, when abundant remains of rice cultivation were found. At the beginning of the Holocene 10,000 years ago, sea levels rose, forming the Taiwan Strait and cutting off the island from the Asian mainland.

In 2011, the ~8,000-year-old Liangdao Man skeleton was found on Liang Island. The only Paleolithic burial that has been found on Taiwan was in Chenggong in the southeast, dating from about 4000 BC.

Around 3,000 BC, the Neolithic Dapenkeng culture abruptly appeared and quickly spread around the coast. Their sites are characterised by corded-ware pottery, polished stone adzes and slate points. The inhabitants cultivated rice and millet, but were also heavily reliant on marine shells and fish. Most scholars believe this culture is not derived from the Changbin culture, but was brought across the Strait by the ancestors of today&#x27;s Taiwanese aborigines, speaking early Austronesian languages. Some of these people later migrated from Taiwan to the islands of Southeast Asia and throughout the Pacific and Indian Oceans.
Malayo-Polynesian languages are now spoken across a huge area, but form only one branch of the Austronesian family, the rest of whose branches are found only on Taiwan.
Trade links with the Philippine archipelago continued from the early 2nd millennium BC, including the use of jade from eastern Taiwan in the Philippine jade culture.

The Dapenkeng culture was succeeded by a variety of cultures throughout the island, including the Tahu and Yingpu.
Iron appeared in such cultures as the Niaosung Culture.
The earliest metal artifacts were trade goods, but by around 400 AD wrought iron was being produced locally using bloomeries, a technology possibly introduced from the Philippines.

==Chinese contact and settlement==

Early Chinese histories refer to visits to eastern islands that some historians identify with Taiwan. Troops of the Three Kingdoms state of Eastern Wu are recorded visiting an island known as Yizhou in the spring of 230. Some scholars have identified this island as Taiwan while others do not. The &quot;Book of Sui&quot; relates that Emperor Yang of the Sui dynasty sent three expeditions to a place called &quot;Liuqiu&quot; early in the 7th century. The Liuqiu described by the &quot;Book of Sui&quot; produced little iron, had no writing system, taxation, or penal code, and was ruled by a king. The natives used stone blades and practiced slash-and-burn agriculture. Later the name Liuqiu (whose characters are read in Japanese as &quot;Ryukyu&quot;) referred to the island chain to the northeast of Taiwan, but some scholars believe it may have referred to Taiwan in the Sui period.

During the Yuan dynasty (1271–1368), Han Chinese people started visiting Taiwan. The Yuan emperor Kublai Khan sent officials to the Ryukyu Kingdom in 1292 to demand its loyalty, but the officials ended up in Taiwan and mistook it for Ryukyu. After three soldiers were killed, the delegation immediately retreated. Another expedition was sent in 1297. Wang Dayuan visited Taiwan in 1349 and mentioned the presence of Chuhou pottery from modern Lishui, suggesting that Chinese merchants had already visited the island.

By the early 16th century, increasing numbers of Chinese fishermen, traders and pirates were visiting the southwestern part of the island. Some merchants from Fujian were familiar enough with the indigenous peoples of Taiwan to speak Formosan languages. The people of Fujian sailed closer to Taiwan in the mid-16th century to trade with Japan while evading Ming authorities. Chinese who traded in Southeast Asia also began taking an East Sea Compass Course (&quot;dongyang zhenlu&quot;) that passed southwestern and southern Taiwan. Some of them traded with the Taiwanese aborigines. Taiwan was referred to as &quot;Xiaodong dao&quot; (&quot;little eastern island&quot;) and &quot;Dahui guo&quot; (&quot;the country of Dahui&quot;), a corruption of Tayouan, a tribe that lived on an islet near modern Tainan from which the name &quot;Taiwan&quot; is derived. By the late 16th century, Chinese from Fujian were settling in southwestern Taiwan. In 1593, Ming officials started issuing licenses for Chinese junks to trade in northern Taiwan, acknowledging already existing illegal trade.

Initially Chinese merchants arrived in northern Taiwan and sold iron and textiles to the aboriginal peoples in return for coal, sulfur, gold, and venison. Later the southwest became the primary destination for its mullet fish. Some fishing junks camped on Taiwan&#x27;s shores and many began trading with the indigenous people for deer products. The southwestern Taiwanese trade was of minor importance until after 1567 when it was used as a way to circumvent the ban on Sino-Japanese trade. The Chinese bought deerskins from the aborigines and sold them to the Japanese for a large profit.

Chen Di visited Taiwan in 1603 on an expedition against the Wokou pirates led by Ming general Shen Yourong. The pirates were defeated and they met a native chieftain who presented them with gifts. Chen recorded these events in an account of Taiwan known as &quot;Dongfanji&quot; (An Account of the Eastern Barbarians) and described the natives of Taiwan and their lifestyle. Chen Di&#x27;s book also indicates a substantial number of Chinese settlers who were living together with the indigenous people on Taiwan.

When a Portuguese ship sailed past southwestern Taiwan in 1596, several of its crew members who had been shipwrecked there in 1582 noticed that the land had become cultivated, presumably by settlers from Fujian. When the Dutch arrived in 1623, they found about 1,500 Chinese visitors and residents. A small minority brought Chinese plants with them and grew crops such as apples, oranges, bananas, watermelons. Some estimates of the Chinese population put it at 2,000 over two villages, one of which would become Tainan. There was also a significant population of Chinese living in an aboriginal village where the villagers spoke a creole language incorporating many Chinese words.

== Dutch and Spanish colonies (1624–1668)==
===Contact and establishment===
The name Formosa (福爾摩沙) dates from 1542, when Portuguese sailors noted it on their maps as &quot;Ilha Formosa&quot; (Portuguese for &quot;beautiful island&quot;). In 1582, the survivors of a Portuguese shipwreck spent 45 days battling malaria and aborigines before returning to Macau.

The Dutch East India Company (VOC) came to the area in search of an Asian trade and military base. Defeated by the Portuguese at the Battle of Macau in 1622, they attempted to occupy Penghu, but were driven off by the Ming authorities in 1624. They then built Fort Zeelandia on the islet of Tayowan off the southwest coast. On the adjacent mainland, they built a smaller brick fort, Fort Provintia.

===Piracy===
The Europeans worked with and also fought against Chinese pirates. The pirate Li Dan mediated between Ming Chinese forces and the Dutch at Penghu. Chinese fishermen paid 10 percent of their catch to the pirates for a document guaranteeing their safety. The VOC also entered the protection business; this was one of the first taxes levied on the colony. In July 1626, the Council of Formosa ordered all Chinese living or trading in Taiwan to obtain a residence permit. This eventually became a head tax and major source of income for the Dutch.

Zheng Zhilong became pirate chief in 1625 and pillaged under the Dutch flag, selling them the spoils. Chinese officials asked the Dutch for help against Zheng in return for trading rights. The Dutch failed and Zheng attacked the city of Xiamen. In 1628, Chinese authorities awarded him with an official title and imperial rank. Zheng became the &quot;Patrolling Admiral&quot; responsible for clearing the coast of pirates, and eliminated his competitors. In the summer of 1633, a Dutch fleet and the pirate Liu Xiang carried out a successful sneak attack, destroying Zheng&#x27;s fleet. On 22 October 1633, Zheng forces lured the Dutch fleet and their pirate allies into an ambush and defeated them. The Dutch reconciled with Zheng and he arranged for more Chinese trade in Taiwan. In 1637, Liu was defeated by Zheng.

===Japanese trade===
The Japanese had been trading for Chinese products in Taiwan since before the Dutch arrived in 1624. In 1609, the Tokugawa shogunate sent an exploratory mission to the island. In 1616, Murayama Tōan sent 13 vessels to conquer Taiwan. The fleet was dispersed by a typhoon.

In 1625, Batavia ordered the governor of Taiwan to prevent the Japanese from trading because they paid more for silk. The Dutch also restricted Japanese trade with the Ming dynasty. The loss of Japanese trade made trade in Taiwan far less profitable. After 1635, the shogun forbade Japanese from going abroad and eliminated the Japanese threat to the company. The VOC expanded into previous Japanese markets in Southeast Asia.

===Spanish Formosa===
In 1626, the Spanish Empire, viewing the Dutch presence on Taiwan as a threat to their colony in the Philippines, established a settlement at Santísima Trinidad on the northeast coast (modern Keelung), building Fort San Salvador. They also built Fort Santo Domingo in the northwest (modern Tamsui) in 1629 but abandoned it by 1638 due to conflicts with the local population. The small colony was plagued by disease, faced hostile locals, and received little support from Manila, who viewed the fortresses as a drain on their resources.

In August 1641, the Dutch and their native allies tried to take the Spanish fortresses manned by a small Spanish-Kampanpagan-Cagayano force but abandoned the attempt when the commander realised they had insufficient cannon to mount a successful siege. In August 1642, a second Dutch invasion with a larger and better equipped force succeeded in capturing the forts. The Spanish as well as Filipinos plus Hispanic-Americans, who had manned the fortresses, dispersed to live with the natives or retreated to the Philippines.

===Dutch colonization===


According to Salvador Diaz, initially there were only 320 Dutch soldiers and they were &quot;short, miserable, and very dirty.&quot; Dutch ships wrecked at Liuqiu in 1624 and 1631; their crews were killed by the inhabitants. In 1633, an expedition consisting of 250 Dutch soldiers, 40 Chinese pirates, and 250 Taiwanese natives were sent against Liuqiu Island but met with little success.

The Dutch allied with Sinkan, a small village that provided them with firewood, venison and fish. In 1625, they bought land from the Sinkanders and built the town of Sakam for Dutch and Chinese merchants. Initially the other villages maintained peace with the Dutch. In 1625, the Dutch attacked 170 Chinese pirates in Wankan but were driven off. Encouraged by the Dutch failure, Mattau warriors raided Sinkan. The Dutch returned and drove off the pirates. The people of Sinkan then attacked Mattau and Baccluan, and sought protection from Japan. In 1629, Pieter Nuyts visited Sinkan with 60 musketeers. After Nuyts left, the musketeers were killed in an ambush by Mattau and Soulang warriors. On 23 November 1629, an expedition set out and burned most of Baccluan, killing many of its people, who the Dutch believed harbored proponents of the previous massacre. Baccluan, Mattau, and Soulang people continued to harass company employees until late 1633 when Mattau and Soulang went to war with each other.

In 1635, 475 soldiers from Batavia arrived in Taiwan. By this point even Sinkan was on bad terms with the Dutch. Soldiers were sent into the village and arrested those who plotted rebellion. In the winter of 1635 the Dutch defeated Mattau and Baccluan. In 1636, a large expedition was sent against Liuqiu Island. The Dutch and their allies chased about 300 inhabitants into caves, sealed the entrances, and killed them with poisonous fumes. The native population of 1100 was removed from the island. They were enslaved with the men sent to Batavia while the women and children became servants and wives for the Dutch officers. The Dutch planned to depopulate the outlying islands. The villages of Taccariang, Soulang, and Tevorang were also pacified. In 1642, the Dutch massacred the people of Liuqiu island again.

The Dutch estimated in 1650 that there were around 50,000 natives in the western plains region; the Dutch Formosa ruled around &quot;315 tribal villages with a total population of around 68,600, estimated 40–50% of the entire indigenes of the island&quot;. The Dutch tried to convince the natives to give up hunting and adopt sedentary farming but their efforts were unsuccessful. The VOC administered the island and its predominantly aboriginal population until 1662. They set up a tax system and schools to teach romanized script of Formosan languages and evangelize Christianity. They tried to teach the native children the Dutch language but the effort was abandoned after failing to produce good results. The native Taiwanese religion was primarily animist. Practices like mandatory abortion, marital infidelity, nakedness, and non-observation of the Christian Sabbath were considered sinful. The Bible was translated into the native languages. This was the first entrance of Christianity into Taiwan.

The Dutch levied a tax on all imports and exports. A tax was also levied on every non-Dutch person above the age of six. This poll tax was highly unpopular and the cause the major insurrections in 1640 and 1652. A tax was imposed on hunting through licenses for pit-traps and snaring. Although its control was mainly limited to the western plain of the island, the Dutch systems were adopted by succeeding occupiers. The Dutch originally sought to use their castle Zeelandia at Tayowan as a trading base between Japan and China, but soon realized the potential of the huge deer populations that roamed Taiwan&#x27;s western regions.

===Chinese settlers===
 
The VOC encouraged Chinese migration to Taiwan and provided a military and administrative structure for Chinese immigration. It advertised to the Chinese a number of economic benefits and even paid them to move to Taiwan. Thousands of Chinese, mostly young single men, became rice and sugar planters.

In 1625, the company started advertising Provintia as a site of settlement. The next year the town caught fire and both the Chinese and company personnel left. In 1629, the natives of Mattau and Soulang attacked Sakam and chased away the inhabitants of Provintia. In 1632, the company encouraged the Chinese to plant sugarcane in Sakam. In the spring of 1635, 300 Chinese laborers arrived. The Chinese initially cultivated rice but lost interest in the crop by 1639 due to lack of access to water. This was addressed in the early 1640s and rice production resumed. Various industries sprung up and in the 1640s the Dutch began to tax them, causing some discontent. After 1648, nearly all company revenue came from the Chinese.

The Chinese were allowed to own property in a limited area. The Dutch attempted to prevent the Chinese from mingling with the natives. The natives traded meat and hides for salt, iron, and clothing from Chinese traders. In 1634 the Dutch ordered the Chinese to sell deerskins to only the company. By 1636, Chinese hunters were entering previously native lands cleared by the Dutch. Commercial hunters replaced the natives and by 1638 the future of the deer population was in question. Restrictions on hunting were implemented.

In 1636, Favorolang, the largest aboriginal village north of Mattau, killed three Chinese and wounded several others. From August to November, Favrolangers appeared near Fort Zeelandia and captured a Chinese fishing vessel. The next year the Dutch and their native allies defeated Favorolang. The expedition was paid for by the Chinese populace. When peace negotiations failed, the Dutch blamed a group of Chinese at Favorolang. The Favorolangers continued their attacks until 1638. In 1640 an incident involving the capture of a Favorolang leader and the ensuing death of three Dutch hunters near Favorolang resulted in the banning of Chinese hunters from Favorolang territory. The Dutch blamed the Chinese and orders were given to restrict Chinese residency and travel. No Chinese vessel was allowed around Taiwan unless it carried a license. An expedition was ordered to chase away the Chinese from the land and to subjugate the natives to the north. In November 1642, an expedition set out northward, killing 19 natives and 11 Chinese. A policy banning any Chinese from living north of Mattau was implemented. Later the Chinese were allowed to conduct trade in Favorolang with a permit. The Favorolangers were told to capture any Chinese who did not possess a permit.

In the late 1630s, Batavia started pressuring the authority in Taiwan to increase revenues. The Dutch started collecting voluntary donations from the Chinese. In addition to a 10 percent tax on numerous products and real estate sales, they also implemented a residency-permit tax. Chinese settlers began protesting the residency tax, that the Dutch harassed them for pay. The Dutch thought the Chinese were exploiting the natives by selling at high prices. The sale of rights to trade with aborigines was not just a way to raise profits but to keep track of the Chinese and prevent them from mingling with the natives.

On 8 September 1652, a Chinese farmer, Guo Huaiyi, and an army of peasants attacked Sakam. Most of the Dutch were able to find refuge but others were captured and executed. Over the next two days, natives and Dutch killed around 500 Chinese. On 11 September, four or five thousand Chinese rebels clashed with the company soldiers and their native allies. The rebels fled; some 4,000 Chinese were killed. The rebellion and its ensuing massacre destroyed the rural labor force. Although the crops survived almost unscathed, there was a below average harvest for 1653. However thousands of Chinese migrated to Taiwan due to war on the mainland and a modest recovery of agriculture occurred. Anti-Chinese measures increased. Natives were reminded to watch the Chinese and not to engage with them. However, in terms of military preparations, little was done. In May 1654, Fort Zeelandia was afflicted by locusts, a plague, and an earthquake.

===End of Dutch rule===
Zheng Chenggong, known in Dutch sources as Koxinga, studied at the Imperial Academy in Nanjing. When Beijing fell in 1644 to rebels, Chenggong and his followers declared their loyalty to the Ming dynasty and he was bestowed the title Guoxingye (Lord of the Imperial surname). Chenggong continued the resistance against the Qing from Xiamen. In 1650 he planned a major offensive from Guangdong. The Qing deployed a large army to the area and Chenggong decided to ferry his army along the coast but a storm hindered his movements. The Qing launched a surprise attack on Xiamen, forcing him to return to protect it. From 1656 to 1658 he planned to take Nanjing. Chenggong encircled Nanjing on 24 August 1659. Qing reinforcements arrived and broke Chenggong&#x27;s army, forcing them to retreat to Xiamen. In 1660 the Qing embarked on a coastal evacuation policy to starve Chenggong of his source of livelihood. Some of the rebels during the Guo Huaiyi rebellion had expected aid from Chenggong and some company officials believed that the rebellion had been incited by him.

In the spring of 1655 no silk junks arrived in Taiwan. Some company officials suspected that this was a plan by Chenggong to harm them. In 1655, the governor of Taiwan received a letter from Chenggong referring to the Chinese in Taiwan as his subjects. He commanded them to stop trading with the Spanish. Chenggong directly addressed the Chinese leaders in Taiwan rather than Dutch authorities, stating that he would withhold his junks from trading in Taiwan if the Dutch would not guarantee their safety. Chenggong had increased foreign trade by sending junks to various regions and Batavia was wary of this competition. Batavia sent a small fleet to Southeast Asian ports to intercept Chenggong&#x27;s junks. One junk was captured but another junk managed to escape.
The Taiwanese trade slowed and for several months in late 1655 and early 1656 not a single Chinese vessel arrived in Tayouan. Even low-cost goods grew scarce and the value of aboriginal products fell. The system of selling Chinese merchants the right to trade in aboriginal villages fell apart. On 9 July 1656, a junk flying Chenggong&#x27;s flag arrived at Fort Zeelandia. Chenggong wrote that he was angry with the Dutch but since Chinese people lived in Taiwan, he would allow them to trade on the Chinese coast for 100 days so long as only Taiwanese products were sold. Chinese merchants began leaving. Chenggong confiscated a Chinese junk from Tayouan trading pepper in Xiamen, causing Chinese merchants to abort their trade voyages. Chinese merchants refused to buy the company&#x27;s foreign wares and even sold their own foreign wares, causing prices to collapse.

Chinese merchants in aboriginal villages ran out of goods to trade for aboriginal products. Chinese farmers also suffered due to the exodus of Chinese. By the end of 1656, Chinese farmers were asking for relief from debts and many could barely find food for themselves.
Chenggong retreated from his stronghold in Amoy (Xiamen city) and attacked the Dutch colony in Taiwan in the hope of establishing a strategic base to marshal his troops to retake his base at Amoy. On 23 March 1661, Zheng&#x27;s fleet set sail from Kinmen with a fleet carrying around 25,000 soldiers and sailors. The fleet arrived at Tayouan on 2 April. Zheng&#x27;s forces routed 240 Dutch soldiers at Baxemboy Island in the Bay of Taiwan and landed at the bay of &quot;Luermen&quot;. Three Dutch ships attacked the Chinese junks and destroyed several until their main warship exploded. The remaining ships were unable to keep Zheng from controlling the waters around Taiwan.

On 4 April, Fort Provintia surrendered to Zheng&#x27;s forces. Following a nine-month siege, Chenggong captured the Dutch fortress Zeelandia and established a base in Taiwan. The Dutch held out at Keelung until 1668 when they withdrew from Taiwan completely.

== Kingdom of Tungning (1661–1683)==

===Conquest===

Koxinga renamed Zeelandia to Anping and Provintia to Chikan. On 29 May 1662, Chikan was renamed to &quot;Ming Eastern Capital&quot; (&quot;Dongdu Mingjing&quot;). Later &quot;Eastern Capital&quot; (&quot;Dongdu&quot;) was renamed &quot;Dongning&quot; (Wades Giles: Tungning), which means &quot;Eastern Pacification,&quot; by Zheng Jing, Koxinga&#x27;s son. One prefecture and two counties (Tianxing and Wannian) were established in Taiwan.

Koxinga died on 23 June 1662. Chinese nationalists in the 20th century invoked Koxinga for his patriotism and political loyalty against Qing and Western influence.

===Retreat to Taiwan===
Zheng Jing&#x27;s succession was contested by Zheng Miao, Zheng Chenggong&#x27;s fifth son. Zheng Jing arrived in Taiwan in December 1662 and defeated his enemies. The infighting caused some followers to defect to the Qing. By 1663, some 3,985 officials and officers, 40,962 soldiers, 64,230 civilians, and 900 ships in Fujian had defected from Zheng territory. To combat population decline, Zheng Jing promoted migration to Taiwan. Between 1665 and 1669 a large number of Fujianese moved to Taiwan. Some 9,000 Chinese were brought to Taiwan by Zheng Jing.

The Qing dynasty enacted a sea-ban to starve out the Zheng forces. In 1663, the writer Xia Lin testified that the Zhengs were short on supplies and the people suffered tremendous hardship. The Dutch attacked Zheng ships in Xiamen but failed to take the town. The Dutch assisted the Qing in combat against the Zheng fleet in October 1663, resulting in the capture of Zheng bases in Xiamen and Kinmen. The remaining Zheng forces fled southward and completely evacuated from the mainland coast in the spring of 1664. Qing-Dutch forces attempted to invade Taiwan twice in December 1664 and again in 1666 but were impacted by adverse weather. The Dutch continued to attack Zheng ships occasionally but were unable to take back the island.
After Zheng Jing was ejected from the mainland, the Qing tried to settle the conflict through negotiation. In 1669 the Qing offered Zheng significant autonomy in Taiwan if they shaved their heads in the Manchu style. Zheng Jing declined and insisted on a relationship with the Qing similar to Korea. In 1670 and 1673, Zheng forces seized vessels on their way to the mainland. In 1671, Zheng forces raided the coast of Zhejiang and Fujian. In 1674, Zheng Jing joined the Revolt of the Three Feudatories and recaptured Xiamen. He imported war material and made an alliance with Geng Jingzhong in Fujian. They fell afoul of each other not long afterward. Zheng captured Quanzhou and Zhangzhou in 1674. After Geng and other rebels surrendered to the Qing in 1676 and 1677, the tide turned against the Zheng forces. Quanzhou was lost to the Qing on 12 March 1677 and then Zhangzhou and Haicheng on 5 April. Zheng forces counterattacked and retook Haicheng in August. Zheng naval forces blockaded Quanzhou and tried to retake the city in August 1678 but they were forced to retreat when Qing reinforcements arrived. Zheng forces suffered heavy casualties in a battle in January 1679. On 20 March 1680, the Qing fleet led by Wan Zhengse defeated Zheng naval forces near Quanzhou. Many Zheng commanders and soldiers defected to the Qing. Xiamen was abandoned. On 10 April, Zheng Jing&#x27;s war on the mainland came to a close. Zheng Jing died in early 1681.

===Sinicization===
Zheng Jing never relinquished the trappings of a Ming government, enabling him to draw support from Ming loyalists. In Taiwan, the Six Ministries were established, however oversight of all affairs was given to military leaders. Zheng&#x27;s family and officers remained at the top of the administration. They enacted programs of agricultural and infrastructural development. By 1666, grain harvests were more than capable of sustaining the population. Zheng also advised commoners to improve their dwellings and for temples dedicated to the Buddha and local Fujianese deities to be constructed. An Imperial Academy and Confucian Shrine were established in 1665 and 1666 while regular civil service examinations were implemented.

Zheng dispatched teachers to aboriginal tribes to provide them with supplies and teach them more advanced farming techniques. Schools were set up to teach the aboriginal people the Chinese language and those who refused were punished. The expansion of Chinese settlements often came at the expense of aboriginal tribes, causing rebellions flared up over the course of Zheng rule. In one campaign, several hundred Shalu tribes people in modern Taichung were killed. The Chinese population in Taiwan more than doubled under Zheng rule. Zheng disbanded the troops and turned them into military colonies.

By the start of 1684, a year after the end of Zheng rule, areas under cultivation in Taiwan had tripled in size since the end of the Dutch era in 1660. Zheng merchant fleets continued to operate between Japan and Southeast Asian countries, reaping profits as a center of trade. They extracted a tax from traders for safe passage through the Taiwan Strait. Zheng Taiwan held a monopoly on certain commodities such as deer skin and sugarcane, which sold at a high price in Japan. Zheng Taiwan achieved greater economic diversification than the profit-driven Dutch colony and cultivated more types of grain, vegetables, fruits, and seafood. By the end of Zheng rule in 1683, the government was extracting over 30% more annual income in silver than under the Dutch in 1655. Sugar exports exceeded Dutch figures in 1658 while deerskin output remained the same.

===Shi Lang===
Shi Lang led the Qing conquest of Zheng Taiwan. He was originally a military leader working under Zheng Zhilong, the father of Zheng Chenggong. He had a falling out with Chenggong. After escaping imprisonment by Chenggong, Shi Lang defected to the Qing dynasty and participated in a successful assault on a Zheng stronghold. In 1658, Shi was made Deputy Commander of Tongan and continued to participate in campaigns against Zheng forces. Shi relayed information about Zheng internal conflict between Chenggong and his son to Beijing. The Qing established a naval force in Fujian in 1662 and appointed Shi Lang as the commander. Shi advocated for more aggressive action against the Zhengs. On 15 May 1663, Shi attacked the Zheng fleet and succeeded in killing and capturing Zheng forces. From 18 to 20 November, the Dutch fought sea battles against Zheng forces while Shi took Xiamen. In 1664, Shi assembled a fleet of 240 ships, and in conjunction with 16,500 troops, chased remaining Zheng forces south. They failed to dislodge the last Zheng stronghold. After the defection of Zheng commander Zhou Quanbin, Zheng Jing pulled out from the remaining mainland stronghold in the spring of 1664.

===End of Zheng rule===

Shi Lang was instructed to arrange a peace mission to Taiwan but he did not believe Zheng Jing would accept the terms. He warned that if the Zhengs built up their strength, they would pose a serious danger. Shi detailed his plans to invade Taiwan; he argued that securing Taiwan would render garrisons unnecessary and reduce the defense spending. In 1681, Li Guangdi recommended Shi Lang to be the coordinator of the invasion force. Shi was reappointed as naval chief of Fujian on 10 September 1681. Shi&#x27;s plan was to take Penghu first. The Governor-general Yao Qisheng disagreed and proposed a two pronged attack on Tamsui and Penghu at the same time. Shi thought the proposal was unrealistic and requested to be put in total control over the entire invasion force. Kangxi denied the request.

In Taiwan, Zheng Jing&#x27;s death resulted in a coup. Zheng Keshuang murdered his brother Zheng Kezang. Political turmoil, heavy taxes, an epidemic in the north, a large fire that caused the destruction of more than a thousand houses, and suspicion of collusion with the Qing caused more Zheng followers to defect to the Qing. Zheng&#x27;s deputy Commander Liu Bingzhong surrendered with his ships and men from Penghu. Orders from the Kangxi Emperor to invade Taiwan reached Yao Qisheng and Shi Lang on 6 June 1682. The invasion fleet met with unfavorable winds and was forced to turn back. Conflict between Yao and Shi led to Yao&#x27;s removal in November. On 18 November 1682, Shi Lang was authorized to assume the role of supreme commander and Yao was relegated to logistics. Two attempts to sail to Penghu in February 1683 failed due to a shift in winds.

Shi&#x27;s fleet of 238 ships and over 21,000 men set sail on 8 July 1683.The next day, Shi&#x27;s fleet approached small islands to the northwest of Penghu. The Qing forces were met by 200 Zheng ships. Following an exchange of gunfire, the Qing were forced to retreat with Zheng forces in pursuit. The Qing vanguard led by Lan Li provided cover fire for a withdrawal. The Zheng side also suffered heavy losses, making Liu reluctant to pursue the disarrayed Qing forces. On 11 July, Shi regrouped his squadrons and requested reinforcements at Bazhao. On 16 July, reinforcements arrived. Shi divided the main striking force into eight squadrons of seven ships with himself leading from the middle. Two flotillas of 50 small ships sailed in different directions as a diversion. The remaining vessels served as rear reinforcements.

The battle took place in the bay of Magong. The Zheng garrison fired at the Qing ships and then set sail from the harbor with about 100 ships to meet the Qing forces. Shi concentrated fire on one big enemy ship at a time until all of Zheng&#x27;s battle ships were sunk by the end of 17 July. Approximately 12,000 Zheng forces perished. Liu escaped to Taiwan while the garrison commanders surrendered. The Qing captured Penghu on 18 July. Shi Lang arrived in Taiwan on 5 October 1683 to supervise the surrender, which went smoothly. Zheng Keshuang and other leaders shaved their head in the Manchu style. The use of the Ming calendar in Taiwan was ended.

== Qing dynasty (1683–1895)==

===Annexation===
Shi Lang remained in Taiwan for 98 days before returning to Fujian on 29 December 1683. In Fujian, some officials from the central government advocated for transporting all of Taiwan&#x27;s inhabitants to the mainland and abandoning the island. One argued that defending Taiwan was impossible and increasing defense expenditures was unfavorable.

Shi opposed abandoning Taiwan, arguing that this would leave it open to other enemies. He assured that defending Taiwan would only take 10,000 men and reduce garrison forces on the coast. Shi convinced all the attendees at the Fujian conference, with the exception of Subai, that it was in their best interests to annex Taiwan. On 6 March 1684, Kangxi accepted Shi&#x27;s proposal to set up permanent military establishments in Penghu and Taiwan and authorized the establishment of Taiwan Prefecture, divided into three counties, as a prefecture of Fujian Province.

===Taiwan administration===
The Qing initially forbade mainlanders from moving to Taiwan and sent most of the people back to the mainland, after which the official population of Taiwan was only 50,000. Manpower shortage compelled local officials to solicit migrants from the mainland despite restrictions. Sometimes even warships transported civilians to Taiwan. By 1711, illegal migrants amounted to tens of thousands yearly. Individuals such as Lin Qianguang, a native of Fujian Province, entered Taiwan. He held office in Taiwan from 1687 to 1691 but lived in Taiwan for several years beforehand. He wrote one of the first accounts of aboriginal life in Taiwan in 1685.

The first recorded regulation on the permit system was made in 1712 but it probably existed as early as 1684. Its purpose was to reduce population pressure on Taiwan. The government believed that Taiwan was unable to support a larger population before leading to conflict. Regulations banned migrants from bringing their families. To prevent undesirables from entering Taiwan, the government recommended only allowing those who had property or relatives in Taiwan to enter Taiwan. A regulation to this effect was implemented in 1730.

Over the 18th century, regulations on migration remained largely consistent. Early regulations focused on the character of permit receivers while later regulations reiterated measures such as patrolling and punishment. The only changes were to the status of families. Families were barred from entering Taiwan to ensure that migrants would return to their families. The overwhelmingly male migrants had few prospects and thus married locally, resulting in the idiom &quot;has Tangshan father, no Tangshan mother&quot; (). Marrying aboriginal women was prohibited in 1737 on the grounds that it interfered in aboriginal life and was used as a means to claim aboriginal land.

Migrant families were allowed to enter Taiwan legally for a period between 1732 and 1740. In 1739, opposition to family migrations claimed that vagrants and undesirables were taking advantage of the system. Families were barred again from 1740 to 1746. In 1760, family crossings to Taiwan became legal again for a short period. Starting in 1771, Qing restrictions on cross-strait migration relaxed as they realized that the policies were unenforceable. Even during periods of legal migration, more individuals chose to hire illegal ferry service than to deal with official procedures. After lifting restrictions on family crossings in 1760, only 277 people requested permits after a year, the majority of them being government employees. In comparison, within a ten-month period in 1758–1759, nearly 60,000 people were arrested for illegal crossings. In 1790, an office was set up to manage civilian travel between Taiwan and the mainland, and the Qing government ceased to actively interfere in cross-strait migration. In 1875, all restrictions on entering Taiwan were repealed.

===Settler expansion (1684–1795)===

From 1661 to 1796, the Qing restricted expansion of territory in Taiwan. Taiwan was garrisoned with 8,000 soldiers at key ports and civil administration was kept to a minimum. Three prefectures nominally covered the entire western plains but effective administration covered a smaller area. A permit was required for settlers to go beyond the mid-point of the western plains. In 1715, the governor-general of Fujian-Zhejiang recommended land reclamation in Taiwan but the Kangxi Emperor was worried that this would cause instability and conflicts.

Under the reign of the Yongzheng Emperor (r. 1722–1735), the Qing extended control over the entire western plains to better control settlers and maintain security. This was not an active colonization policy but a reflection of continued illegal crossings and land reclamation. After the Zhu Yigui uprising in 1721, Lan Dingyuan, an advisor to Lan Tingzhen, who led forces against the rebellion, advocated for land reclamation to strengthen government control over Chinese settlers and to incorporate aboriginals under their administration.

Under the reign of the Qianlong Emperor (r. 1735–1796), the administrative structure of Taiwan remained largely unchanged. After the Lin Shuangwen rebellion in 1786, Qianlong agreed that leaving fertile lands to unproductive aborigines only attracted illegal settlers. The Qing did little to administer the aborigines and rarely tried to impose control over them. Aborigines were classified into two categories: acculturated aborigines (&quot;shufan&quot;) and non-acculturated aborigines (&quot;shengfan&quot;). To the Qing, &quot;shufan&quot; were aborigines who paid taxes and had adopted Han Chinese culture. When the Qing annexed Taiwan, there were 46 aboriginal villages under government control, likely inherited from the Zheng regime. In the Yongzheng period, 108 aboriginal villages submitted as a result of enticement from the regional commander, Lin Liang. &quot;Shengfan&quot; who paid taxes but did not practice Han Chinese culture were called &quot;guihua shengfan&quot; (submitted non-acculturated aborigines).

The Qianlong administration forbade enticing aborigines to submit due to fear of conflict. In the early Qianlong period, there were 299 named aboriginal villages. Records show 93 &quot;shufan&quot; villages and 61 &quot;guihua shengfan&quot; villages. The number of &quot;shufan&quot; villages remained stable throughout the Qianlong period. Two aboriginal affairs sub-prefects were appointed to manage aboriginal affairs in 1766. One in charge of the north and the other in charge of the south. Boundaries were built to keep the mountain aborigines out of settlement areas. The policy of marking settler boundaries and segregating them from aboriginal territories became official policy in 1722. Fifty-four stelae were used to mark crucial points along the boundary. Settlers were forbidden from crossing into aboriginal territory but settler encroachment continued, and the boundaries were rebuilt in 1750, 1760, 1784, and 1790. Settlers were forbidden from marrying aborigines as marriage was one way to obtain land.

===Administrative expansion (1796–1874)===
Qing quarantine policies were maintained in the early 19th century but attitudes towards aboriginal territory shifted. Local officials repeatedly advocated for colonization, especially in the cases of Gamalan and Shuishalian in modern Yilan County in northeastern Taiwan. The Kavalan people had started paying taxes as early as the Kangxi period (r. 1661–1722), but they were non-acculturated aborigines.

In 1787, a Chinese settler named Wu Sha tried to colonize Gamalan but was defeated. The next year, the Taiwan prefect, Yang Tingli, was convinced to support Wu Sha. Yang recommended colonization of Gamalan to the Fujian governor but the governor refused. In 1797, a new Tamsui sub-prefect supported Wu in his colonization efforts despite the ban. Wu&#x27;s successors were unable to register their land on government registers. Local officials could not officially recognize it.

In 1806 the pirate fleet of Cai Qian was within the vicinity of Gamalan. Taiwan Prefect Yang argued that abandoning Gamalan would cause trouble on the frontier. Later another pirate band tried to occupy Gamalan. Yang recommended establishing administration and land surveys in Gamalan. In 1809, the emperor ordered for Gamalan to be incorporated. An imperial decree for the formal incorporation of Gamalan was issued and a Gamalan sub-prefect was appointed.

Unlike Gamalan, debates on Shuishalian (upstream areas of the Zhuoshui River and Wu River) resulted in its continued status as a forbidden area. Six aboriginal villages occupied the flat and fertile basin area of Shuishalian. The aboriginals had submitted as early as 1693 but they remained non-acculturated. In 1814, some settlers obtained reclamation permits through fabricating land lease requests. In 1816, government troops evicted the settlers. Multiple officials recommended opening up Shuishalian between 1823 and 1848, but these recommendations were ignored. The subject of land reclamation continued to be a topic of discussion and the Tamsui subprefecture gazetteer in 1871 openly called for colonization.

===Expansion in reaction to crises (1875–1895)===
In 1874, Japan invaded southern Taiwan in what is known as the Mudan Incident (Japanese invasion of Taiwan (1874)). For six months Japanese soldiers occupied southern Taiwan until the Qing paid an indemnity in return for their withdrawal.

The imperial commissioner for Taiwan, Shen Baozhen, recommended subjugating the aborigines and populating their territory with Chinese settlers to prevent Japanese encroachment. The administration of Taiwan was expanded and campaigns against the aborigines were launched. Starting in 1874, mountain roads were built and aborigines were brought into formal submission. In 1875, the ban on entering Taiwan was lifted. In 1877, 21 guidelines on subjugating aborigines and opening the mountains were issued. Agencies for recruiting settlers were established. Efforts to promote settlement in Taiwan petered out soon after.

The Sino-French War broke on in 1883 and the French occupied Keelung in northern Taiwan in 1884. The French army withdrew in 1885. Efforts to colonize aboriginal territory were renewed under Liu Mingchuan, the Taiwan defense commissioner. In 1887, Taiwan became its own province. During Liu&#x27;s tenure, Taiwan&#x27;s capital was shifted to modern Taichung. Taipei was built up as a temporary capital and then became the permanent capital in 1893. Liu&#x27;s efforts to increase revenues were mixed due to foreign pressure to reduce levies. A cadastral reform survey was undertaken from June 1886 to January 1890 that met with opposition in the south. The receipts from the land tax reform fell short of expectations.

Electric lighting, modern weaponry, a railway, cable and telegraph lines, a local steamship service, and industrial machinery were introduced to Taiwan. A telegraph line from Tainan to Tamsui was constructed in 1886–88 and a railway connecting Keelung, Taipei, and Hsinchu was built. These efforts met with mixed results. The telegraph line only functioned in bursts of a week due to a difficult overland connection and the railway required an overhaul, serviced small rolling stock, and carried little freight. Taiwan attracted few laborers and few settlers went to Taiwan due to the aborigines and harsh climate. Governor Liu was criticized for the high cost and little gain of colonization activities. Liu resigned in 1891 and the colonization efforts ceased.

A Taiwan Pacification and Reclamation Head Office was established. By 1887, roughly 90,000 aborigines had formally submitted to Qing rule. This number increased to 148,479 aborigines over the following years. However the cost of getting them to submit was exorbitant. The Qing offered them materials and paid village chiefs monthly allowances. Not all the aborigines were under effective control and land reclamation in eastern Taiwan occurred at a slow pace. From 1884 to 1891, Liu launched more than 40 military campaigns against the aborigines with 17,500 soldiers. A third of the invasion force was killed or disabled in the conflict.

By the end of the Qing period, the western plains were developed farmland areas with about 2.5 million Chinese inhabitants. The mountainous areas were still largely autonomous and aboriginal land loss occurred at a relatively slow pace. However, by the last years of Qing rule, most of the plains aborigines had been acculturated to Han culture, around 20–30% could speak their mother tongues, and they gradually lost their land ownership and rent collection rights.

===Rebellions===


In 1723, aborigines along the central coastal plain rebelled. Troops from southern Taiwan were sent to put down this revolt, but in their absence, Han settlers in Fengshan County rose up in revolt. By 1732, five different ethnic groups were in revolt but the rebellion was defeated by the end of the year. During the Qianlong period (1735–1796), the 93 &quot;shufan&quot; acculturated aborigine villages never rebelled and over 200 non-acculturated aboriginal villages submitted. During the 200 years of Qing rule in Taiwan, the plains aborigines rarely rebelled against the government and the mountain aborigines were left to their own devices until the last 20 years of Qing rule. Most rebellions were caused by Han settlers.

In 1720, there was an upset in Taiwan due to increased taxation. They gathered around Zhu Yigui and supported him in an anti-Qing rebellion. Hakka leader Lin Junying from the south also joined the rebellion. In March 1720, Zhu and Lin attacked Taiwan County. In less than two weeks, the rebels had defeated Qing forces across Taiwan. The Hakka troops left Zhu to follow Lin north. The Qing sent a fleet under the command of Shi Shibian; the rebellion was defeated and Zhu was executed.

In 1786, members of the Tiandihui society were arrested for failing to make tax payments. The Tiandihui broke into the jail and rescued their members. When Qing troops were sent to arrest Lin Shuangwen, the leader of the Tiandihui led his forces to defeat the Qing troops. Many of the rebel army&#x27;s troops came from new arrivals from mainland China who could not find land. Lin attacked Changhua County, killing 2,000 civilians. In early 1787, 50,000 Qing troops under Li Shiyao were sent to put down the rebellion. Lin tried to enlist the support of the Hakka people but they sent their troops to support the Qing. Despite the Tiandihui&#x27;s ostensibly anti-Qing stance, its members were generally anti-government and were not motivated by ethnic or national interest, resulting in social discord. In 1788, 10,000 Qing troops led by Fuk&#x27;anggan and Hailanqa were sent to Taiwan and defeated the rebellion; Lin was executed.

===Invasions===


By 1831, the East India Company decided it no longer wanted to trade with the Chinese on their terms and planned more aggressive measures. Given the strategic and commercial value of Taiwan, there were British suggestions in 1840 and 1841 to seize the island. William Huttman wrote to Lord Palmerston pointing out &quot;China&#x27;s benign rule over Taiwan and the strategic and commercial importance of the island.&quot; He suggested that Taiwan could be occupied with only a warship and less than 1,500 troops, and the English would be able to spread Christianity among the natives as well as develop trade. In 1841, during the First Opium War, the British tried to scale the heights around the harbor of Keelung three times but failed. The British transport ship &quot;Nerbudda&quot; became shipwrecked near Keelung Harbour due to a typhoon. In October 1841, HMS &quot;Nimrod&quot; sailed to Keelung to search for the &quot;Nerbudda&quot; survivors, but after Captain Joseph Pearse found out that they were sent south for imprisonment, he ordered the bombardment of the harbour and destroyed 27 sets of cannon before returning to Hong Kong. The brig &quot;Ann&quot; also shipwrecked in March 1842. The commanders of Taiwan, Dahonga and Yao Ying, filed a disingenuous report to the emperor, claiming to have defended against an attack from the Keelung fort. Most of the survivors—over 130 from the &quot;Nerbudda&quot; and 54 from the &quot;Ann&quot;—were executed in Tainan in August 1842. The false report was later discovered and the officials in Taiwan punished.

On 12 March 1867, the American barque &quot;Rover&quot; shipwrecked offshore off of southern Taiwan. The captain, his wife, and some men escaped. The Koaluts (Guizaijiao) tribe of the Paiwan people captured and killed them. Two rescue attempts failed. Le Gendre, the US Consul, demanded that the Qing send troops to help him negotiate with the aborigines. On 10 September, Garrison Commander Liu Mingcheng led 500 Qing troops to southern Taiwan with Le Gendre. The aboriginal chief, Tanketok (Toketok), explained that a long time ago the white men came and almost exterminated the Koaluts tribe and their ancestors passed down their desire for revenge. They agreed that the mountain aborigines would help the castaways. It was later discovered that Tanketok did not have absolute control over the tribes. Le Gendre castigated China as a semi-civilized power for not seizing the territory of a &quot;wild race&quot;.

In December 1871, a Ryukyuan vessel shipwrecked on the southeastern tip of Taiwan and 54 sailors were killed by aborigines. The shipwreck and murder of the sailors came to be known as the Mudan incident, although it did not take place in Mudan (J. Botan), but at Kuskus (Gaoshifo). The Ryukyu Kingdom did not ask Japanese officials for help regarding the shipwreck. Instead its king, Shō Tai, sent a reward to Chinese officials in Fuzhou for the return of the 12 survivors. The Mudan incident did not immediately cause any concern in Japan; it was not until April 1874 that it became an international concern. The Imperial Japanese Army started urging the government to invade Taiwan in 1872 with the Mudan incident as casus belli. The king of Ryukyu was dethroned by Japan and preparations for an invasion of Taiwan were undertaken in the same year. On 17 May 1874, Saigō Jūdō led the main force, 3,600 strong, aboard four warships. They invaded indigenous territory in southern Taiwan. On 3 June, they burnt all the villages that had been occupied. On 1 July, the new leader of the Mudan tribe and the chief of Kuskus surrendered. The Japanese settled in and established large camps with no intention of withdrawing, but in August and September 600 soldiers fell ill. The death toll rose to 561. Negotiations with Qing China began on 10 September. The Western Powers pressured China not to cause bloodshed with Japan as it would negatively impact the coastal trade. The resulting Peking Agreement was signed on 30 October. Japan gained the recognition of Ryukyu as its vassal and an indemnity payment of 500,000 taels. Japanese troops withdrew from Taiwan on 3 December.

During the Sino-French War, the French invaded Taiwan during the Keelung Campaign in 1884. On 5 August 1884, Sébastien Lespès bombarded Keelung&#x27;s harbor and destroyed the gun placements. The next day, the French attempted to take Keelung but failed to defeat the larger Chinese force led by Liu Mingchuan and were forced to withdraw. On 1 October, Amédée Courbet landed with 2,250 French forces and defeated a smaller Chinese force, capturing Keelung. French efforts to capture Tamsui failed. The French shelled Tamsui, destroying not only the forts but also foreign buildings. Some 800 French troops landed on Shalin beach near Tamsui but they were repelled by Chinese forces. The French imposed a blockade Taiwan from 23 October 1884 until April 1885 but the execution was not completely effective. French ships around mainland China&#x27;s coast attacked any junk they could find and captured its occupants to be shipped to Keelung for constructing defensive works. However, for every junk the French captured, another five junks arrived with supplies at Takau and Anping. The immediate effect of the blockade was a sharp in decline of legal trade and income.

In late January 1885, Chinese forces suffered a serious defeat around Keelung. Although the French captured Keelung they were unable to move beyond its perimeters. In March the French tried to take Tamsui again and failed. At sea, the French bombarded Penghu on 28 March. Penghu surrendered on 31 March but many of the French soon grew ill and 1,100 soldiers and later 600 more were debilitated. An agreement was reached on 15 April 1885 and an end to hostilities was announced. The French evacuation from Keelung was completed on 21 June 1885 and Penghu remained under Chinese control.

===End of Qing rule===
As part of the settlement for losing the Sino-Japanese War, the Qing empire ceded the islands of Taiwan and Penghu to Japan on April 17, 1895, according to the terms of the Treaty of Shimonoseki. The loss of Taiwan would become a rallying point for the Chinese nationalist movement in the years that followed.

== Japanese Empire (1895–1945)==

The acquisition of Taiwan by Japan was the result of Prime Minister Itō Hirobumi&#x27;s &quot;southern strategy&quot; adopted during the First Sino-Japanese War in 1894–95. Itō and Mutsu Munemitsu, the minister of foreign affairs, stipulated that Penghu and Taiwan must be ceded to Japan. These conditions were met during the signing of the Treaty of Shimonoseki on 17 April 1895. Taiwan and Penghu were transferred to Japan on 2 June.

The period of Japanese rule in Taiwan has been divided into three periods under according to policies: military suppression (1895–1915), : assimilation (1915–37), and : Japanization (1937–45). A separate policy for aborigines was implemented. The matter of assimilation, , was tied to the admonition &quot;impartiality and equal favor&quot; (&quot;isshi dōjin&quot;) for all imperial subjects under the Japanese Emperor. Conceptually this colonial ideal conveyed the idea that metropolitan Japanese (&quot;naichijin&quot;) imparted their superior culture to the subordinate islanders (&quot;hontōjin&quot;), who would share the common benefits.

=== Armed resistance ===

The colonial authorities encountered violent opposition in Taiwan. Five months of sustained warfare occurred after the 1895 invasion and partisan attacks continued until 1902. For the first two years the colonial authority relied mainly on military force. On 20 May, Qing officials were ordered to leave their posts. General mayhem and destruction ensued in the following months.

Japanese forces landed on the coast of Keelung on 29 May. After the fall of Taipei on 7 June, local militia and partisan bands continued the resistance. In the south, a small Black Flag force led by Liu Yongfu delayed Japanese landings. Governor Tang Jingsong attempted to carry out anti-Japanese resistance efforts as the Republic of Formosa. The Green Standard Army and Yue soldiers from Guangxi took to looting and pillaging. Taipei&#x27;s gentry elite sent Koo Hsien-jung to Keelung to invite the advancing Japanese forces to proceed to Taipei and restore order. The Republic, established on 25 May, disappeared 12 days later when its leaders left for the mainland. Liu Yongfu formed a temporary government in Tainan before escaping as Japanese forces closed in. Between 200,000 and 300,000 people fled Taiwan in 1895. Chinese residents in Taiwan were given the option of selling their property and leaving by May 1897, or become Japanese citizens. From 1895 to 1897, an estimated 6,400 people sold their property and left Taiwan.

Armed resistance by Hakka villagers broke out in the south. A series of attacks led by &quot;local bandits&quot; or &quot;rebels&quot; lasted throughout the next seven years. After 1897, uprisings by Chinese nationalists were commonplace. , a member of the Tongmenghui, was arrested and executed along with 200 others in 1913. In June 1896, 6,000 Taiwanese were slaughtered in the Yunlin Massacre. From 1898 to 1902, some 12,000 &quot;bandit-rebels&quot; were killed in addition to the 6,000–14,000 killed in the initial resistance war of 1895.

Major armed resistance was largely crushed by 1902 but minor rebellions started occurring again in 1907, such as the Beipu uprising by Hakka and Saisiyat people in 1907, Luo Fuxing in 1913 and the Tapani Incident of 1915. The Beipu uprising occurred on 14 November 1907 when a group of Hakka insurgents killed 57 Japanese officers and members of their family. In response, 100 Hakka men and boys were killed in the village of Neidaping. Luo Fuxing was an overseas Taiwanese Hakka involved with the Tongmenghui. He planned a rebellion against the Japanese with 500 fighters, resulting in the execution of more than 1,000 Taiwanese by Japanese police. Luo was killed on 3 March 1914. In 1915, Yu Qingfang organized a religious group that defied Japanese authority. In the Tapani incident, 1,413 members of Yu&#x27;s group were captured. Yu and 200 of his followers were executed. After the Tapani rebels were defeated, Andō Teibi ordered a massacre. Military police in Tapani and Jiasian lured out anti-Japanese militants with a pardon. They were told to line up in a field, dig holes, and were then executed by firearm. According to oral tradition, some 5,000–6,000 people died in this incident.

=== Non-violent resistance ===

Nonviolent means of resistance such as the Taiwanese Cultural Association (TCA), founded by Chiang Wei-shui in 1921, continued after most violent means were exhausted. Chiang joined the &quot;Chinese United Alliance&quot; founded by Sun Yat-sen. He saw Taiwanese people as Japanese nationals of Han Chinese ethnicity and wished to position the TCA as an intermediary between China and Japan. The TCA also aimed to establish independence for Taiwan. Statements of self determination were possible at the time due to the relatively progressive era of Taishō Democracy. &quot;Taiwan is Taiwan people&#x27;s Taiwan&quot; became a common position for all anti-Japanese groups. In December 1920, Lin Hsien-tang and 178 Taiwanese residents filed a petition seeking self-determination. It was rejected.

The TCA had over 1,000 members of various backgrounds from across Taiwan except in indigenous areas. The TCA promoted vernacular Chinese language. In 1923 the TCA co-founded &quot;Taiwan People&#x27;s News&quot; which was published in Tokyo and then shipped to Taiwan. It was subjected to censorship and seven or eight issues were banned. Chiang and others applied to set up a parliament for Taiwan that was deemed illegal. In 1923, 99 Alliance members were arrested and 18 were tried in court. Thirteen were convicted. Chiang was imprisoned more than ten times.

The TCA split in 1927 to form the New TCA and the Taiwanese People&#x27;s Party, which both Chiang and Lin left for. The New TCA later became a subsidiary of the Taiwanese Communist Party and the only organization advocating Taiwanese independence. The TPP brought forth issues such as Japanese opium trafficking, the inhumane treatment of the Seediq people, and revealed the colonial authority&#x27;s use of poisonous gas. In February 1931, the TPP was terminated. Chiang died on 23 August.

=== Assimilation movement ===
In 1914, Itagaki Taisuke briefly led a Taiwan assimilation movement as a response to appeals from influential Taiwanese spokesmen. In December 1914, Itagaki formally inaugurated the Taiwan Dōkakai, an assimilation society. Within a week, over 3,000 Taiwanese and 45 Japanese residents joined the society. After Itagaki left later that month, leaders of the society were arrested and its Taiwanese members detained or harassed. In January 1915, the Taiwan Dōkakai was disbanded.

Japanese colonial policy sought to strictly segregate the Japanese and Taiwanese population until 1922. Taiwanese students who moved to Japan for their studies were able to associate more freely with Japanese and took to Japanese ways more readily than their island counterparts. However full assimilation was rare.

An attempt to fully Japanize the Taiwanese people was made during the &quot;kōminka&quot; period (1937–45). The reasoning was that only as fully assimilated subjects could Taiwan&#x27;s inhabitants fully commit to Japan&#x27;s war and national aspirations. The &quot;kōminka&quot; movement was generally unsuccessful and few Taiwanese became &quot;true Japanese&quot; due to the short time period and large population. In terms of acculturation under controlled circumstances, it can be considered relatively effective.

=== Education ===
A system of elementary common schools taught Japanese language and culture, Classical Chinese, Confucian ethics, and practical subjects like science. The emphasis was on Japanese language and ethics while Classical Chinese was included to mollify upper-class Taiwanese parents. These schools served a small percentage of the Taiwanese population and Japanese children attended their own primary schools. Post-elementary education was rare for Taiwanese people and a portion of the population continued to enroll in Qing-style private schools due to limited access to government educational institutions. Most boys attended Chinese schools while a smaller portion trained at religious schools. Elementary education was offered to those Taiwanese who could afford it.

The gentry was urged to promote the &quot;new learning&quot; and those invested in the Chinese education style were resentful of the proposal. Younger Taiwanese started participating in community affairs in the 1910s. Many were concerned about obtaining modern educational facilities and the discrimination they faced in obtaining spots at the few government schools. Local leaders in Taichung campaigned for the inauguration of the Taichū Middle School but faced opposition from Japanese officials.

In 1922, an integrated school system was introduced opening common and primary schools to both Taiwanese and Japanese based on Japanese language proficiency. Few Taiwanese children could speak fluent Japanese and only the children of wealthy Taiwanese families with close ties to Japanese settlers were allowed to study alongside Japanese children. The number of Taiwanese at formerly Japanese-only elementary schools was limited to 10 percent. Some Taiwanese sought secondary education and opportunities in Japan and Manchukuo. In 1943, primary education became compulsory, and by the next year nearly three out of four children were enrolled in primary school. By 1922, around 2,000 Taiwanese students were enrolled in metropolitan Japan, increasing to 7,000 by 1942.

=== Japanization ===
After full-scale war with China in 1937, the &quot;&quot;kōminka&quot;&quot; imperial Japanization project was implemented to ensure the Taiwanese would remain subjects of the Japanese Emperor rather than support a Chinese victory. The goal was to make sure the Taiwanese people did not develop a sense of national identity. Although the stated goal was to assimilate the Taiwanese, in practice the process segregated the Japanese into their discrete areas, despite co-opting Taiwanese leaders. The organization was responsible for increasing war propaganda, donation drives, and regimenting Taiwanese life.

As part of the policies, Chinese language in newspapers and education were removed. China and Taiwan&#x27;s history were erased from the curriculum. Chinese language use was discouraged. However even some members of model &quot;national language&quot; families from well-educated Taiwanese households failed to learn Japanese to a conversational level. A name-changing campaign was launched in 1940 to replace Chinese names with Japanese ones. Seven percent of the Taiwanese had done so by the end of the war. Characteristics of Taiwanese culture considered &quot;un-Japanese&quot; or undesirable were banned or discouraged. The Taiwanese were encouraged to pray at Shinto shrines. Some officials removed religious idols and artifacts from native places of worship.

===Aboriginal policies===

Japan continued the Qing classification of aborigines. Acculturated aborigines lost their aboriginal status. Han Chinese and &quot;shufan&quot; were both treated as Taiwanese by the Japanese. Below them were the semi-acculturated and non-acculturated &quot;barbarians&quot; outside normal administrative units and Japanese law. According to the &quot;Sōtokufu&quot; (Office of the Governor-General), mountain aborigines were animals under international law. The &quot;Sōtokufu&quot; declared all unreclaimed and forest land in Taiwan as government property, forbidding any new use of forest land. The Japanese authority denied aboriginal rights to their property and land. Han and acculturated aborigines were forbidden from any contractual relationships with aborigines. The aborigines could not enjoy property ownership and acculturated aborigines lost their rent holder rights under the new property laws.

Initially the Japanese spent most of their time fighting Chinese insurgents and the government took on a more conciliatory approach towards aborigines. In 1903, the government implemented harsher policies. It expanded guard lines to restrict the aborigines&#x27; living space. Sakuma Samata launched a five-year plan for aboriginal management, attacking aborigines and using landmines and electrified fences to force them into submission.

A small portion of land was set aside for aboriginal use. From 1919 to 1934, aborigines were relocated to out of the way areas. A small compensation for land use was initially given out but discontinued later on. In 1928, each aborigine was allotted three hectares of reserve land. Some of the allotted land was taken away and it was discovered that the aboriginal population was bigger than the estimated 80,000. The allotted land was reduced but they were not adhered to anyways. In 1930, the government relocated aborigines to the foothills. They were given less than half the originally promised land, or one-eighth of their ancestral lands.

Aboriginal resistance lasted until the early 1930s. By 1903, indigenous rebellions had resulted in the deaths of 1,900 Japanese. In 1911, an army invaded Taiwan&#x27;s mountainous areas and by 1915, many aboriginal villages had been destroyed. The Atayal and Bunun resisted the hardest. The last major aboriginal rebellion, the Musha (Wushe) Uprising occurred on 27 October 1930 when the Seediq people launched the last headhunting party. Seediq warriors led by Mona Rudao attacked police stations and the Musha Public School. Approximately 350 students, 134 Japanese, and 2 Han Chinese were killed. The armed conflict ended in December when the Seediq leaders committed suicide. According to a 1933-year book, wounded people in the war against the aboriginals numbered around 4,160, with 4,422 civilians dead and 2,660 military personnel killed. After the Musha Incident, the government took a more conciliatory stance towards the aborigines.

===Japanese colonists===
Japanese commoners started arriving in Taiwan in April 1896. Japanese migrants were encouraged to move to Taiwan but few did during the colony&#x27;s early years. Concern that Japanese children born in Taiwan would not be able to understand Japan resulted in primary schools conducting trips to Japan in the 1910s. Japanese police officers were encouraged to learn the Minnan and Hakka languages. Police officers who passed language examinations received allowances and promotions. By the late 1930s, Japanese people made up about 5.4 percent of Taiwan&#x27;s population but owned a disproportionate amount of high quality land (20–25 percent of cultivated land) as well as the majority of large land holdings. The government assisted them in acquiring land and coerced Chinese land owners to sell. Japanese sugar companies owned 8.2 percent of the arable land.

There were almost 350,000 Japanese civilians living in Taiwan by the end of World War II. Offspring of intermarriage were considered Japanese if their Taiwanese mother chose Japanese citizenship or if their Taiwanese father did not apply for ROC citizenship. As many as half the Japanese who left Taiwan after 1945 were born in Taiwan. The Taiwanese seized or attempted to occupy property they believed were unfairly obtained in previous decades. Japanese assets were collected and the ROC government retained most of it for their use. Chen Yi, who was in charge of Taiwan, removed Japanese bureaucrats and police officers from their posts. A survey found that 180,000 Japanese civilians wished to leave for Japan while 140,000 wished to stay. From February to May, the vast majority of Japanese left Taiwan for Japan.

===Industrialization===
Under the colonial government, Taiwan was introduced to a unified system of weights and measures, a centralized bank, education facilities to increase skilled labor, farmers&#x27; associations, and other institutions. Transportation and communications systems as well as facilities for travel between Japan and Taiwan were developed. Construction of large scale irrigation facilities and power plants followed. Agricultural development was the goal of colonial projects and the objective was for Taiwan to provide Japan with food and raw materials. Fertilizer and production facilities were imported from Japan. Textile and paper industries were developed near the end of Japanese rule for self-sufficiency. All modern and large enterprises were owned by the Japanese.

The Taiwan rail system connecting the south and the north and the Kīrun and Takao ports were completed to facilitate transport and shipping of raw material and agricultural products. Exports increased fourfold. Fifty-five percent of agricultural land was covered by dam-supported irrigation systems. Food production increased fourfold and sugar cane production increased 15-fold between 1895 and 1925. Taiwan became a major foodbasket serving Japan&#x27;s economy. A health care system was established. The average lifespan for a Taiwanese resident was 60 years by 1945.

Taiwan&#x27;s real GDP per capita peaked in 1942 at $1,522 and declined to $693 by 1944. Wartime bombing caused significant damage to cities and harbors. The railways and factories were either badly damaged or destroyed. Only 40 percent of the railroads were usable and over 200 factories were bombed. Of Taiwan&#x27;s four electrical power plants, three were destroyed. Damage to agriculture was relatively contained but most developments came to a halt and irrigation facilities were abandoned. Since all key positions were held by Japanese, their departure left Taiwan with a severe lack of trained personnel. Inflation was rampant as a result of the war. Taiwan&#x27;s standards of living did not recover until the 1960s.

===World War II===


As Japan embarked on full-scale war with China in 1937, it began expanding Taiwan&#x27;s industrial capacity to manufacture war material. The Imperial Japanese Navy operated heavily out of Taiwan. The &quot;South Strike Group&quot; was based out of the Taihoku Imperial University. Taiwan was used as a launchpad for the invasion of Guangdong in late 1938 and for the occupation of Hainan in February 1939. A joint planning and logistical center was established in Taiwan to assist Japan&#x27;s southward advance after the bombing of Pearl Harbor. Taiwan served as a base for Japanese naval and air attacks on Luzon until the surrender of the Philippines in May 1942. It served as a rear staging ground for attacks on Myanmar. As the war turned against Japan in 1943, Taiwan suffered due to Allied submarine attacks on Japanese shipping. In the latter part of 1944, Taiwan was bombed in U.S. air raids. An estimated 16,000–30,000 civilians were killed. By 1945, Taiwan was isolated from Japan.

Starting in July 1937, Taiwanese began to play a role on the battlefield, initially in noncombatant positions. Taiwanese people were not recruited for combat until late in the war. In 1942, the Special Volunteer System was implemented, allowing even aborigines to be recruited as part of the Takasago Volunteers. From 1937 to 1945, over 207,000 Taiwanese were employed by the Japanese military. Roughly 50,000 went missing in action or died, another 2,000 were disabled, 21 were executed for war crimes, and 147 were sentenced to imprisonment for two or three years. Some Taiwanese ex-Japanese soldiers claim they were coerced and did not choose to join the army. Racial discrimination was commonplace despite rare occasions of camaraderie. After Japan&#x27;s surrender, the Taiwanese ex-Japanese soldiers were abandoned by Japan and no transportation back to Taiwan or Japan was provided. Many of them faced difficulties in mainland China, Taiwan, and Japan. An organization of Taiwanese ex-Japanese soldiers tried to get the Japanese government to pay their unpaid wages several decades later. They failed.

Between 1,000 and 2,000 Taiwanese women were part of the comfort women system. Aboriginal women served Japanese military personnel in the mountainous region of Taiwan. They were first recruited as housecleaning and laundry workers for soldiers, then they were coerced into providing sex. They were gang-raped and served as comfort women in the evening hours. Han Taiwanese women from low income families were also part of the comfort women system. Some were pressured into it by financial reasons while others were sold by their families. However some women from well to do families also ended up as comfort women. More than half were minors with some as young as 14. Very few women who were sent overseas understood what the true purpose of their journey was. Some of the women believed they would be serving as nurses. Taiwanese women were told to provide sexual services to the Japanese military &quot;in the name of patriotism to the country.&quot; By 1940, brothels were set up in Taiwan to service Japanese males.

===End of Japanese rule===
In 1942, after the United States entered the war against Japan and on the side of China, the Chinese government under the Kuomintang renounced all treaties signed with Japan and made Taiwan&#x27;s return to China one of the wartime objectives. In the Cairo Declaration of 1943, the Allied Powers declared the return of Taiwan (including the Pescadores) to the Republic of China. The Cairo Declaration was never signed and is not legally binding. In 1945, Japan surrendered with the signing of the instrument of surrender and ended its rule in Taiwan. The territory was put under the administration of the ROC in 1945 by the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration. Japanese forces in China and Taiwan surrendered to Chiang Kai-shek and on 25 October 1945, Governor-General Rikichi Andō handed over the administration of Taiwan and Penghu to Chen Yi. On 26 October, the government of the Republic of China declared that Taiwan had become a province of China, however the Allied Powers did not recognize this unilateral declaration.

In accordance with the provisions of Article 2 of the San Francisco Peace Treaty, the Japanese formally renounced the territorial sovereignty of Taiwan and Penghu islands. The Republic of China and Japan signed the Treaty of Taipei on April 28, 1952, which some consider to be legal support for the ROC&#x27;s claim to Taiwan as &quot;de jure&quot; territory. The treaty states that all treaties, conventions, and agreements between China and Japan prior to 9 December 1941 were null and void. This is supported by Japanese court decisions such as in 1956 stating that Taiwan and the Penghu islands came to belong to the ROC on the date the Treaty of Taipei came into force. The official position of the Government of Japan is that Japan did not in the Treaty of Taipei express that Taiwan and Penghu belong to the ROC, that the Treaty of Taipei could not make any disposition which is in violation of Japan&#x27;s renouncing Taiwan and Penghu in the San Francisco Peace Treaty, and that the status of Taiwan and Penghu remain to be determined by the Allied Powers in the future.

Some scholars argue that no post-World War II treaties ceded the territories to any specific state. According to Taiwan Civil Society, the Cairo Declaration that had as one of its main clauses the restoration of territories taken from the Chinese by Japan to the Republic of China (Manchuria, Formosa, Pescadores), was not a binding declaration. The Cairo Declaration was considered outdated by Winston Churchill in 1952, who denied that Taiwan was under Chinese sovereignty or that the Chinese Nationalists represented China and that they only occupied Taiwan militarily. It was not recognized by Anthony Eden in 1955, who said there was a difference of opinion on which Chinese authority to hand it over to. In 1954 and 1960, the United States denied that the issue of sovereignty over Taiwan and the Penghu islands had been settled, although it accepted that they were under ROC control, the exercise of Chinese authority over Taiwan, and that the ROC was the legal government of China.

Scholars and politicians have argued over the international status of Taiwan based on the Theory of the Undetermined Status of Taiwan, with talking points revolving around President Truman&#x27;s statement on the status of Taiwan in 1950, lack of specificity on the transfer of Taiwan in the 1951 San Francisco peace treaty, and the absence of explicit provisions on the return of Taiwan to China in the 1952 Treaty of Taipei. The Theory of the Undetermined Status of Taiwan is supported by some politicians and jurists to this day, such as the Government of the United States and the Japanese diplomatic circle.

== Republic of China (1945–present)==

===Taiwan under martial law===

After Japan&#x27;s surrender, most of Taiwan&#x27;s (approximately 300,000) Japanese residents were expelled.

The Republic of China established the Taiwan Provincial Government in September 1945 and proclaimed October 25 1945, the day on which the Japanese surrendered, &quot;Taiwan Retrocession Day&quot;. By 1938 about 309,000 Japanese lived in Taiwan. Between the Japanese surrender of Taiwan in 1945 and April 25, 1946, the Republic of China forces repatriated 90% of the Japanese living in Taiwan to Japan. During the immediate postwar period, the Kuomintang (KMT) administration on Taiwan was repressive and corrupt compared to the preceding Japanese rule, leading to local discontent. Anti-mainlander violence flared on 28 February 1947. During the ensuing crackdown by the KMT administration, in what became known as the February 28 Incident, tens of thousands of people were killed or arrested, and the incident became a taboo topic. The Memorial Foundation of 228 was established to provide compensation for the victims of the crackdown. From 1995 to 2006, the foundation approved compensation in 2,264 cases. Being controlled by the Republic of China, Taiwan inherited the international pronouncement of the ROC government including the 1932 Note Verbale to France, where China declared that its southernmost territory was the Paracels.

From the 1930s onward the Chinese Civil War was underway in mainland China between Chiang Kai-shek&#x27;s ROC government and the Chinese Communist Party led by Mao Zedong. When the Communists gained complete control of mainland China in 1949, two million refugees, predominantly from the Nationalist government, military, and business community, fled to Taiwan. On October 1 1949, the People&#x27;s Republic of China (P.R.C.) was founded in mainland China by the victorious communists; several months earlier, Chiang Kai-shek had established a provisional ROC capital in Taipei and moved his Nanjing-based government there after fleeing Chengdu. Under Nationalist rule, the mainlanders dominated the government and civil services.

The KMT viewed their retreat to Taiwan as a temporary one; Chiang Kai-shek said, &quot;Prepare for one year, counter-attack in two years, sweep out the enemy in three years and succeed within five years.&quot; This led them to prioritize military armament and preparation over economic development.

===Economic development===
The KMT took control of Taiwan&#x27;s monopolies, which had been owned by the Japanese before World War II. They nationalized approximately 17% of Taiwan&#x27;s GNP and voided Japanese bond certificates held by Taiwanese investors. These real estate holdings, as well as American aid such as the China Aid Act and the Sino-American Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction, helped to ensure that Taiwan would recover quickly from war. The Kuomintang government also moved the entire gold reserve from the Chinese mainland to Taiwan, and used this reserve to stabilize the newly issued New Taiwan dollar and put a stop to hyperinflation.

From 1950 to 1965, Taiwan received a total of $1.5 billion in economic aid and $2.4 billion in military aid from the United States. In 1965, when Taiwan had established a solid financial base, all American aid ceased. Having accomplished that, ROC premier Chiang Ching-kuo (the son of Chiang Kai-shek) started state projects such as the Ten Major Construction Projects, which provided the infrastructure for building a strong export-driven economy.

=== Democratic reforms ===

After Chiang Kai-shek died in April 1975, he was succeeded to the presidency by Yen Chia-kan, while his son Chiang Ching-kuo succeeded to the leadership of the Kuomintang and became president in 1978. Formerly the head of the feared secret police, Chiang Ching-kuo recognized that gaining foreign support to secure the ROC&#x27;s future security required reform. His administration saw a gradual loosening of political controls, a transition towards democracy, and moves toward the Taiwanization of the regime. Opponents of the Nationalists were no longer forbidden to hold meetings or publish papers. Though opposition political parties were still illegal, when the Democratic Progressive Party was established as the first opposition party in 1986, President Chiang decided against dissolving the group or persecuting its leaders. Its candidates officially ran in elections as independents in the Tangwai movement. In the following year, Chiang ended martial law and allowed family visits to mainland China. Chiang selected Lee Teng-hui to be his vice president. The move followed other reforms giving more power to native born citizens and calmed anti-KMT sentiments.

===Democratic period===

The 2000 presidential election marked the end of the Kuomintang (KMT) rule. DPP candidate Chen Shui-bian won a three-way race. In 2004, President Chen was re-elected to a second four-year term after an assassination attempt which occurred the day before the election. Police investigators have said that the most likely suspect is believed to have been Chen Yi-hsiung, who was later found dead.

In 2007, President Chen proposed a policy of Four Wants and One Without, which in substance states that Taiwan wants independence; Taiwan wants the rectification of its name; Taiwan wants a new constitution; Taiwan wants development; and Taiwanese politics is without the question of left or right, but only the question of unification or independence. The reception of this proposed policy in Taiwanese general public was unclear. It, however, was met with a cold reception by both the PRC and the United States. The PRC Foreign Minister emphasised that the Anti-Secession Law was not a piece of unenforceable legislation, while the US Department of State spokesman Sean McCormack described Chen&#x27;s policy as &quot;unhelpful&quot;.

The KMT also retained control of the legislature in the Legislative Yuan elections in January 2008. In the presidential election in May 2008, KMT candidate Ma Ying-jeou ran on a platform supporting friendlier relations with mainland China and economic reforms, and defeated DPP candidate Frank Hsieh with 58.48% of the vote.

On the same day President Chen left office, losing presidential immunity, the Supreme Prosecutor&#x27;s Office announced that they were launching an inquiry into corruption charges regarding Chen. Later in 2008, members of his administration, including Chiou I-jen, a former National Security Council secretary-general, and Yeh Sheng-mao, former director-general of the Ministry of Justice&#x27;s Investigation Bureau, were arrested on corruption charges. Chiou I-jen was found not guilty, while Yeh Sheng-mao was convicted and sentenced to 10 years in prison.

Ma was re-elected, and the KMT retained its majority in the Legislative Yuan, in combined elections in January 2012.

In March and April 2014, students protesting against undemocratic methods used by the KMT occupied the parliament building. In the end, the government agreed to put on hold the ratification of an agreement with China which they had pushed through without proper debate. This event had far reaching consequences, and changed the mood of the electorate. In the combined elections in January 2016 the opposition candidate for president, Tsai Ing-wen, of the DPP won with 56% of the vote, and the opposition DPP was catapulted into an outright majority in the parliament. The election marked the first time a non-KMT party won a majority in the legislature.

The local elections held on November 24, 2018, resulted in a major setback for the DPP majority and led to President Tsai Ing-wen resignation as leader of the party. The DPP lost a total of nine legislative seats, giving the KMT control of the majority of the 22 seats. KMT mayoral candidates won in New Taipei City, Taichung and Kaohsiung, the latter of which has been a political stronghold for the DPP for 20 years.

In May 2019, Taiwan became the first country in Asia to legalise same-sex marriage. By the end of the 2010s the semiconductor industry in Taiwan had become globally dominant with TSMC the global leader in high end semiconductor fabrication. The industry became so important that it was seen by many as a &quot;silicon shield&quot; protecting the country from China.

In January, 2020, Tsai Ing-wen was re-elected in the presidential election. In the parliamentary election President Tsai&#x27;s Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) won majority 61 out of 113 seats. The Kuomintang (KMT) won 38 seats.

The February 2022 full military Russian invasion of Ukraine changed Taiwanese public perceptions of the Chinese threat and what could be done to counter it. The invasion led to a quickening of Taiwan&#x27;s post-authoritarian military reform, new weapons acquisitions, and significantly higher military spending, as well as public and private investment in civil defense. The August 2022 visit by Nancy Pelosi to Taiwan resulted in increased tensions between Taiwan and China while reinforcing US-Taiwan ties. In response to the trip the PLA conducted military exercises around Taiwan, included missile launches which overflew Taiwan.

In January 2024, William Lai Ching-te of the ruling Democratic Progressive Party won Taiwan&#x27;s presidential elections. However, no party won a majority in the simultaneous Taiwan&#x27;s legislative election for the first time since 2004, meaning 51 seats for the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), 52 seats for the Kuomintang (KMT), and the Taiwan People&#x27;s Party (TPP) secured eight seats.

== See also ==
* History of Taiwanese historiography
* Geography of Taiwan
* Timeline of Taiwanese history
* Economic history of Taiwan
* Han Taiwanese
* Foreign relations of Taiwan
* History of Asia, East Asia, China, &amp; Japan
* Japanese expansionism &amp; Taiwanese opium policy
* &quot;Knowing Taiwan&quot;
* Military dependents&#x27; village
* Politics of the Republic of China
* Taiwan independence movement &amp; Chinese unification

== Notes ==
== References ==
===Citations===
=== Cited sources ===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
* and .
* 
*
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
*
*
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
*
*
* 
*
* . Reprinted 1995, SMC Publishing, Taipei. 
*
* 
*
*
* 
*
*
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
===General references===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Reuters, &quot;Taiwan election shooting suspect dead,&quot; (2005)|reference=Reuters. &quot;&quot;Taiwan election shooting suspect dead,&quot; 7 March 2005&quot;.
* 
* Accessed 3/16/2007.

=== Historiography and memory ===
* 
* Ts&#x27; ai, Hui-yu Caroline. &quot;Diaries and Everyday Life in Colonial Taiwan.&quot; &quot;Japan Review&quot; (2013): 145–168. online
==External links==

* Taiwan&#x27;s 400 years of history, from &quot;Taiwan, Ilha Formosa&quot; (a pro-independence organization)
* Reed Institute&#x27;s Formosa Digital Library 
* History of Taiwan from FAPA (a pro-independence organization)
* Taiwan History China Taiwan Information Center (PRC perspective)
* Museum Fort Santo Domingo Exhibition in Tamsui about the Dutch history of Taiwan
* Taiwan Memory-Digital Photo Museum Taiwan old photos digital museum plan 
* America and Taiwan, 1943–2004 
* Time Mapping Taiwan – YouTube</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q22528" start="19" end="35" title="island of Taiwan" label="island of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="170" end="181" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q216839" start="265" end="293" title="Taiwanese indigenous peoples" label="Taiwanese indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="307" end="312" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="372" end="384" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="401" end="412" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="497" end="505" title="Western world" label="the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="511" end="521" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q22528" start="579" end="586" title="Formosa" label="Formosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q699446" start="639" end="661" title="Dutch Formosa" label="colonized by the Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q20706255" start="679" end="688" title="Fort Zeelandia (Taiwan)" label="Zeelandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q703607" start="704" end="718" title="Anping, Tainan" label="Anping, Tainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q74049" start="747" end="767" title="Spanish Formosa" label="outpost in the north"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420445" start="802" end="818" title="Santisima Trinidad (Taiwan)" label="Spanish fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q249996" start="822" end="829" title="Keelung" label="Keelung"/>
<link wikidata="Q703914" start="912" end="917" title="Hoklo people" label="Hoklo"/>
<link wikidata="Q660947" start="922" end="927" title="Hakka people" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="944" end="950" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="955" end="964" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q197615" start="976" end="983" title="Koxinga" label="Koxinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q152855" start="1021" end="1039" title="Kingdom of Tungning" label="base of operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1092" end="1104" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q391189" start="1147" end="1174" title="Taiwan under Qing rule" label="annexed by the Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q717373" start="1682" end="1694" title="1895 Japanese Conquest of Taiwan" label="ceded Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q918799" start="1699" end="1705" title="Penghu" label="Penghu"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="1732" end="1755" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="1880" end="1904" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q524272" start="1959" end="1973" title="South-East Asian theatre of World War II" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="1978" end="1989" title="Pacific War" label="the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1997" end="2009" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="2075" end="2097" title="nationalist government" label="nationalist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="2105" end="2122" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="2141" end="2151" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="2313" end="2327" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="2335" end="2352" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165653" start="2387" end="2405" title="Chinese Nationalist Party retreat to Taiwan" label="withdrew to Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="2412" end="2427" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="2437" end="2448" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q249870" start="2498" end="2504" title="Kinmen" label="Kinmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q706550" start="2506" end="2511" title="Wuqiu, Kinmen" label="Wuqiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q609255" start="2520" end="2525" title="Matsu islands" label="Matsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="2532" end="2550" title="single-party state" label="single-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q431657" start="2621" end="2649" title="1996 Republic of China presidential election" label="direct presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q701364" start="2778" end="2792" title="Taiwan Miracle" label="Taiwan Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190918" start="2825" end="2842" title="Four Asian Tigers" label="Four Asian Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q498831" start="2874" end="2890" title="Late Pleistocene" label="Late Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q127031" start="2971" end="2984" title="Taiwan Strait" label="Taiwan Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="3022" end="3032" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19121886" start="3149" end="3157" title="Penghu 1" label="Penghu 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="3227" end="3231" title="Homo" label="Homo"/>
<link wikidata="Q708207" start="3398" end="3414" title="Zuojhen District" label="Zuojhen District"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="3522" end="3533" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3534" end="3550" title="Changbin culture" label="Changbin culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q712769" start="3560" end="3577" title="Changbin, Taitung" label="Changbin, Taitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q707309" start="3650" end="3657" title="Eluanbi" label="Eluanbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q177332" start="3735" end="3740" title="spore" label="spore"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="3746" end="3752" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="3763" end="3771" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q716206" start="3775" end="3788" title="Sun Moon Lake" label="Sun Moon Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="3813" end="3827" title="slash-and-burn" label="slash-and-burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q106611631" start="3930" end="3946" title="rice cultivation" label="rice cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="3983" end="3991" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q10883341" start="4170" end="4182" title="Liang Island" label="Liang Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q708626" start="4249" end="4258" title="Chenggong, Taitung" label="Chenggong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9884947" start="4336" end="4353" title="Dapenkeng culture" label="Dapenkeng culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q216839" start="4747" end="4767" title="Taiwanese aborigines" label="Taiwanese aborigines"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="4784" end="4806" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q143158" start="4935" end="4962" title="Malayo-Polynesian languages" label="Malayo-Polynesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="5125" end="5147" title="Philippines" label="Philippine archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q175089" start="5213" end="5217" title="jade" label="jade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5245" end="5268" title="Philippine jade culture" label="Philippine jade culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675680" start="5369" end="5373" title="Tahu culture" label="Tahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q949415" start="5378" end="5384" title="Yingpu culture" label="Yingpu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024092" start="5424" end="5440" title="Niaosung Culture" label="Niaosung Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="5510" end="5522" title="wrought iron" label="wrought iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q964257" start="5556" end="5566" title="bloomery" label="bloomeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="5610" end="5621" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q185043" start="5776" end="5790" title="Three Kingdoms" label="Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q274488" start="5800" end="5810" title="Eastern Wu" label="Eastern Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10942054" start="5852" end="5858" title="Yizhou (island)" label="Yizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156924" start="5964" end="5975" title="Book of Sui" label="Book of Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419" start="5995" end="6007" title="Emperor Yang of Sui" label="Emperor Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="6015" end="6026" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969231" start="6074" end="6080" title="Liuqiu (medieval)" label="Liuqiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="6304" end="6318" title="slash-and-burn" label="slash-and-burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897416" start="6402" end="6408" title="Ryukyu" label="Ryukyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="6561" end="6573" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="6587" end="6598" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="6648" end="6659" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28025" start="6682" end="6696" title="Ryukyu Kingdom" label="Ryukyu Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q835720" start="6901" end="6912" title="Wang Dayuan" label="Wang Dayuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q58294" start="6993" end="6999" title="Lishui" label="Lishui"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="7227" end="7233" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q715278" start="7302" end="7320" title="Formosan languages" label="Formosan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q140631" start="7869" end="7875" title="Tainan" label="Tainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="8020" end="8024" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q699303" start="8746" end="8753" title="Chen Di" label="Chen Di"/>
<link wikidata="Q697605" start="8806" end="8811" title="Wokou" label="Wokou"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="9893" end="9908" title="creole language" label="creole language"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="10066" end="10076" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="10077" end="10084" title="Portuguese Empire" label="sailors"/>
<link wikidata="Q266680" start="10103" end="10107" title="Portolan chart" label="maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="10137" end="10147" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="10255" end="10262" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="10298" end="10303" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="10310" end="10334" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q704333" start="10439" end="10454" title="Battle of Macau" label="Battle of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q918799" start="10489" end="10495" title="Penghu" label="Penghu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053924" start="10506" end="10540" title="Sino–Dutch conflicts" label="driven off by the Ming authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q20706255" start="10566" end="10580" title="Fort Zeelandia (Taiwan)" label="Fort Zeelandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q714431" start="10689" end="10703" title="Fort Provintia" label="Fort Provintia"/>
<link wikidata="Q652211" start="11264" end="11277" title="Zheng Zhilong" label="Zheng Zhilong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11806" end="11818" title="Battle of Liaoluo Bay#Dutch surprise attack" label="sneak attack"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11949" end="11962" title="Battle of Liaoluo Bay#Chinese counterattack" label="defeated them"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="12218" end="12236" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968573" start="12289" end="12302" title="Murayama Tōan" label="Murayama Tōan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="12840" end="12854" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199818" start="12908" end="12939" title="Spanish Philippines" label="their colony in the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420445" start="12969" end="12987" title="Santísima Trinidad (Taiwan)" label="Santísima Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q249996" start="13019" end="13026" title="Keelung" label="Keelung"/>
<link wikidata="Q713077" start="13073" end="13091" title="Fort Santo Domingo" label="Fort Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q570509" start="13117" end="13123" title="Tamsui" label="Tamsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="13298" end="13304" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q24839239" start="13414" end="13450" title="Battle of San Salvador (1641)" label="tried to take the Spanish fortresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q15904347" start="13634" end="13655" title="Battle of San Salvador (1642)" label="second Dutch invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q714431" start="14471" end="14476" title="Fort Provintia" label="Sakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q709043" start="14860" end="14872" title="Pieter Nuyts" label="Pieter Nuyts"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="16643" end="16659" title="Romanization" label="romanized script"/>
<link wikidata="Q715278" start="16663" end="16681" title="Formosan languages" label="Formosan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="16686" end="16709" title="Evangelism" label="evangelize Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="16755" end="16769" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch language"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="16882" end="16889" title="animism" label="animist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116511" start="16984" end="17001" title="Christian Sabbath" label="Christian Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165289" start="21285" end="21295" title="Guo Huaiyi" label="Guo Huaiyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165289" start="21321" end="21335" title="Guo Huaiyi rebellion" label="attacked Sakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q197615" start="22208" end="22223" title="Zheng Chenggong" label="Zheng Chenggong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="22295" end="22302" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870442" start="22309" end="22321" title="Jiashen Incident" label="Beijing fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="22399" end="22411" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q68744" start="22541" end="22547" title="Xiamen" label="Xiamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="22591" end="22600" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q68744" start="25241" end="25247" title="Xiamen" label="Xiamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q699446" start="25271" end="25283" title="Dutch Formosa" label="Dutch colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q249870" start="25440" end="25446" title="Kinmen" label="Kinmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20706255" start="26001" end="26010" title="Fort Zeelandia (Taiwan)" label="Zeelandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208442" start="26436" end="26447" title="Wades Giles" label="Wades Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q84018" start="26509" end="26519" title="Zheng Jing" label="Zheng Jing"/>
<link wikidata="Q84018" start="26814" end="26824" title="Zheng Jing" label="Zheng Jing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="27376" end="27388" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q249870" start="27764" end="27770" title="Kinmen" label="Kinmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="28524" end="28532" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q112501" start="28576" end="28607" title="Revolt of the Three Feudatories" label="Revolt of the Three Feudatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533128" start="28682" end="28696" title="Geng Jingzhong" label="Geng Jingzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q68695" start="28773" end="28781" title="Quanzhou" label="Quanzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q68814" start="28786" end="28795" title="Zhangzhou" label="Zhangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q706894" start="29708" end="29722" title="Six Ministries" label="Six Ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="30118" end="30124" title="Buddha" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="30261" end="30286" title="imperial examinations" label="civil service examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q245023" start="30750" end="30758" title="Taichung" label="Taichung"/>
<link wikidata="Q701449" start="31781" end="31789" title="Shi Lang" label="Shi Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q652211" start="31879" end="31892" title="Zheng Zhilong" label="Zheng Zhilong"/>
<link wikidata="Q197615" start="31908" end="31923" title="Zheng Chenggong" label="Zheng Chenggong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025342" start="32148" end="32154" title="Tong&amp;#x27;an District" label="Tongan"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="32306" end="32313" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q84018" start="32890" end="32900" title="Zheng Jing" label="Zheng Jing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11095476" start="33356" end="33366" title="Li Guangdi" label="Li Guangdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436375" start="33563" end="33574" title="Yao Qisheng" label="Yao Qisheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q570509" start="33622" end="33628" title="Tamsui" label="Tamsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q84015" start="33855" end="33869" title="Zheng Keshuang" label="Zheng Keshuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q84031" start="33891" end="33903" title="Zheng Kezang" label="Zheng Kezang"/>
<link wikidata="Q706727" start="35205" end="35211" title="Wangan, Penghu" label="Bazhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q701428" start="35528" end="35534" title="Magong" label="Magong"/>
<link wikidata="Q84015" start="36025" end="36039" title="Zheng Keshuang" label="Zheng Keshuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726430" start="37025" end="37042" title="Taiwan Prefecture" label="Taiwan Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="37092" end="37107" title="Fujian Province" label="Fujian Province"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38795" end="38803" title="Names of China#Tang" label="Tangshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="40521" end="40527" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="40528" end="40536" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="40584" end="40598" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q317839" start="40684" end="40701" title="Yongzheng Emperor" label="Yongzheng Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q698943" start="40948" end="40957" title="Zhu Yigui" label="Zhu Yigui"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="41225" end="41241" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q499468" start="41335" end="41358" title="Lin Shuangwen rebellion" label="Lin Shuangwen rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q718347" start="43494" end="43501" title="Kavalan people" label="Gamalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q237258" start="43528" end="43540" title="Yilan County, Taiwan" label="Yilan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q837355" start="44207" end="44215" title="Cai Qian" label="Cai Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q708374" start="44700" end="44714" title="Zhuoshui River" label="Zhuoshui River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208125" start="44719" end="44727" title="Dadu River (Taiwan)" label="Wu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="45415" end="45420" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q703942" start="45469" end="45483" title="Mudan Incident" label="Mudan Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q703942" start="45485" end="45519" title="Japanese invasion of Taiwan (1874)" label="Japanese invasion of Taiwan (1874)"/>
<link wikidata="Q657787" start="45684" end="45696" title="Shen Baozhen" label="Shen Baozhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q706183" start="46270" end="46285" title="Sino-French War" label="Sino-French War"/>
<link wikidata="Q249996" start="46327" end="46334" title="Keelung" label="Keelung"/>
<link wikidata="Q707594" start="46457" end="46470" title="Liu Mingchuan" label="Liu Mingchuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q32081" start="46536" end="46544" title="Taiwan Province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q245023" start="46616" end="46624" title="Taichung" label="Taichung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="46626" end="46632" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="49195" end="49203" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q698943" start="49693" end="49702" title="Zhu Yigui" label="Zhu Yigui"/>
<link wikidata="Q660947" start="49748" end="49753" title="Hakka people" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q213387" start="50118" end="50127" title="Tiandihui" label="Tiandihui"/>
<link wikidata="Q499468" start="50282" end="50295" title="Lin Shuangwen" label="Lin Shuangwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q698065" start="50934" end="50949" title="Fuk&amp;#x27;anggan" label="Fuk&amp;#x27;anggan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="51061" end="51079" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="51333" end="51348" title="Lord Palmerston" label="Lord Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q191282" start="51678" end="51693" title="First Opium War" label="First Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q249996" start="51755" end="51762" title="Keelung" label="Keelung"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020789" start="52506" end="52524" title="Nerbudda incident" label="executed in Tainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149898" start="52674" end="52694" title="Rover incident" label="shipwrecked offshore"/>
<link wikidata="Q715238" start="52802" end="52815" title="Paiwan people" label="Paiwan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208167" start="53555" end="53563" title="Ryukyuan people" label="Ryukyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q710356" start="53723" end="53737" title="Mudan incident (1871)" label="Mudan incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q28025" start="53821" end="53835" title="Ryukyu Kingdom" label="Ryukyu Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372454" start="53919" end="53926" title="Shō Tai" label="Shō Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q703942" start="54205" end="54218" title="Japanese invasion of Taiwan (1874)" label="invade Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q98090884" start="54290" end="54299" title="Ryūkyū Disposition" label="dethroned"/>
<link wikidata="Q699674" start="54402" end="54412" title="Saigō Jūdō" label="Saigō Jūdō"/>
<link wikidata="Q706183" start="55220" end="55235" title="Sino-French War" label="Sino-French War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851850" start="55274" end="55290" title="Keelung Campaign" label="Keelung Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510198" start="55318" end="55334" title="Sébastien Lespès" label="Sébastien Lespès"/>
<link wikidata="Q249996" start="55345" end="55352" title="Keelung" label="Keelung"/>
<link wikidata="Q482156" start="55562" end="55576" title="Amédée Courbet" label="Amédée Courbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q570509" start="55692" end="55698" title="Tamsui" label="Tamsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q918799" start="56630" end="56636" title="Penghu" label="Penghu"/>
<link wikidata="Q918799" start="57097" end="57103" title="Penghu" label="Penghu"/>
<link wikidata="Q269655" start="57162" end="57183" title="Treaty of Shimonoseki" label="Treaty of Shimonoseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q174971" start="57402" end="57414" title="Itō Hirobumi" label="Itō Hirobumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="57471" end="57494" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q704098" start="57515" end="57530" title="Mutsu Munemitsu" label="Mutsu Munemitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q269655" start="57675" end="57696" title="Treaty of Shimonoseki" label="Treaty of Shimonoseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="58174" end="58190" title="Japanese Emperor" label="Japanese Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q717373" start="58567" end="58575" title="Japanese invasion of Taiwan (1895)" label="invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q249996" start="58863" end="58870" title="Keelung" label="Keelung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="58900" end="58906" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58951" end="58975" title="Anti-Japanese colonialism in Taiwan#Resistance to the Japanese invasion" label="continued the resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331363" start="58999" end="59009" title="Black Flag Army" label="Black Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q709550" start="59023" end="59033" title="Liu Yongfu" label="Liu Yongfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q701499" start="59070" end="59083" title="Tang Jingsong" label="Tang Jingsong"/>
<link wikidata="Q319881" start="59147" end="59166" title="Republic of Formosa" label="Republic of Formosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552020" start="59172" end="59191" title="Green Standard Army" label="Green Standard Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033959" start="59196" end="59199" title="Yue Chinese" label="Yue"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="59214" end="59221" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q698083" start="59285" end="59299" title="Koo Hsien-jung" label="Koo Hsien-jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q140631" start="59538" end="59544" title="Tainan" label="Tainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870709" start="59860" end="59876" title="Battle of Changhsing" label="Armed resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q660947" start="59880" end="59885" title="Hakka people" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q950326" start="60117" end="60128" title="Tongmenghui" label="Tongmenghui"/>
<link wikidata="Q10902675" start="60523" end="60537" title="Beipu uprising" label="Beipu uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q333484" start="60551" end="60566" title="Saisiyat people" label="Saisiyat people"/>
<link wikidata="Q707864" start="60603" end="60618" title="Tapani Incident" label="Tapani Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q201326" start="61323" end="61333" title="Andō Teibi" label="Andō Teibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q708690" start="61373" end="61379" title="Yujing District" label="Tapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q715951" start="61384" end="61391" title="Jiasian District" label="Jiasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q754479" start="61634" end="61664" title="Nonviolent resistance" label="Nonviolent means of resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676606" start="61677" end="61707" title="Taiwanese Cultural Association" label="Taiwanese Cultural Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q698031" start="61726" end="61741" title="Chiang Wei-shui" label="Chiang Wei-shui"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="61867" end="61878" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q711757" start="62183" end="62199" title="Taishō Democracy" label="Taishō Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q700772" start="63044" end="63073" title="Taiwanese People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Taiwanese People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q708044" start="63156" end="63181" title="Taiwanese Communist Party" label="Taiwanese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q707464" start="63338" end="63351" title="Seediq people" label="Seediq people"/>
<link wikidata="Q456380" start="63526" end="63541" title="Itagaki Taisuke" label="Itagaki Taisuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q245023" start="66004" end="66012" title="Taichung" label="Taichung"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623" start="66638" end="66647" title="Manchukuo" label="Manchukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="66918" end="66943" title="Japanese invasion of China" label="full-scale war with China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17991037" start="66963" end="66982" title="Kōminka movement (Taiwan)" label="&amp;quot;kōminka&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="68187" end="68193" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q216839" start="68358" end="68368" title="Taiwanese indigenous peoples" label="aborigines"/>
<link wikidata="Q701676" start="70560" end="70566" title="Atayal people" label="Atayal"/>
<link wikidata="Q701704" start="70571" end="70576" title="Bunun people" label="Bunun"/>
<link wikidata="Q714535" start="70640" end="70662" title="Musha Incident" label="Musha (Wushe) Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q707464" start="70700" end="70713" title="Seediq people" label="Seediq people"/>
<link wikidata="Q697065" start="70774" end="70784" title="Mona Rudao" label="Mona Rudao"/>
<link wikidata="Q36495" start="71651" end="71657" title="Southern Min" label="Minnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33375" start="71662" end="71667" title="Hakka language" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="72221" end="72233" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q709887" start="72681" end="72688" title="Chen Yi (Kuomintang)" label="Chen Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q715304" start="73763" end="73781" title="Rail transport in Taiwan" label="Taiwan rail system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="74039" end="74049" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="74098" end="74108" title="Sugarcane" label="sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="75100" end="75125" title="Japanese invasion of China" label="full-scale war with China"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="75221" end="75243" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150938" start="75286" end="75304" title="The Japanese Navy Taiwan and South Pacific Mandate political project" label="South Strike Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q32746" start="75332" end="75359" title="Taihoku Imperial University" label="Taihoku Imperial University"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="75461" end="75467" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="75602" end="75625" title="bombing of Pearl Harbor" label="bombing of Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="75689" end="75694" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="75722" end="75733" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="75797" end="75804" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676607" start="76123" end="76146" title="Taiwanese Imperial Japan Serviceman" label="role on the battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q714215" start="76366" end="76385" title="Takasago Volunteers" label="Takasago Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q713540" start="77241" end="77254" title="comfort women" label="comfort women"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="78354" end="78364" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q702120" start="78483" end="78500" title="1943 Cairo Declaration" label="Cairo Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="78514" end="78527" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22528" start="78551" end="78557" title="Taiwan (island)" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q918799" start="78573" end="78583" title="Pescadores" label="Pescadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q665554" start="78729" end="78752" title="Japanese Instrument of Surrender" label="instrument of surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q699140" start="78856" end="78911" title="United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration" label="United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="78964" end="78979" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q203012" start="79021" end="79033" title="Rikichi Andō" label="Rikichi Andō"/>
<link wikidata="Q709887" start="79089" end="79096" title="Chen Yi (Kuomintang)" label="Chen Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q392541" start="79334" end="79360" title="San Francisco Peace Treaty" label="San Francisco Peace Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q707269" start="79495" end="79511" title="Treaty of Taipei" label="Treaty of Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190574" start="79984" end="80003" title="Government of Japan" label="Government of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q702120" start="80500" end="80517" title="1943 Cairo Declaration" label="Cairo Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="80756" end="80773" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="80959" end="80971" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129171" start="81442" end="81485" title="Theory of the Undetermined Status of Taiwan" label="Theory of the Undetermined Status of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="81524" end="81540" title="President Truman" label="President Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="81897" end="81928" title="Government of the United States" label="Government of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036444" start="82137" end="82145" title="World War II evacuation and expulsion" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q15643588" start="82186" end="82214" title="Taiwan Provincial Government" label="Taiwan Provincial Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q697228" start="82321" end="82337" title="Retrocession Day" label="Retrocession Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="82385" end="82391" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360579" start="82735" end="82745" title="waishengren" label="mainlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q244939" start="82867" end="82887" title="February 28 Incident" label="February 28 Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="82968" end="82973" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893413" start="83291" end="83303" title="Diplomatic correspondence" label="Note Verbale"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="83413" end="83430" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="83470" end="83485" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="83516" end="83539" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="83547" end="83557" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165653" start="83733" end="83747" title="Chinese Nationalist Party retreat to Taiwan" label="fled to Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="83772" end="83803" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="83958" end="83964" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="83979" end="83986" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="84024" end="84031" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165653" start="84140" end="84157" title="Chinese Nationalist Party retreat to Taiwan" label="retreat to Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803767" start="84607" end="84610" title="GNP" label="GNP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84742" end="84755" title="China Aid Act" label="China Aid Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931668" start="84764" end="84818" title="Sino-American Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction" label="Sino-American Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046879" start="84929" end="84941" title="official gold reserves" label="gold reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q208526" start="85031" end="85048" title="New Taiwan dollar" label="New Taiwan dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="85067" end="85081" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892491" start="85188" end="85214" title="United States foreign aid" label="aid from the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q702650" start="85328" end="85339" title="Premier of the Republic of China" label="ROC premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q313598" start="85340" end="85356" title="Chiang Ching-kuo" label="Chiang Ching-kuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="85369" end="85384" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q697351" start="85421" end="85452" title="Ten Major Construction Projects" label="Ten Major Construction Projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q887003" start="85628" end="85638" title="President of the Republic of China" label="presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q335219" start="85642" end="85654" title="Yen Chia-kan" label="Yen Chia-kan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313598" start="85670" end="85686" title="Chiang Ching-kuo" label="Chiang Ching-kuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q214183" start="85795" end="85808" title="secret police" label="secret police"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516564" start="86044" end="86057" title="Taiwanization" label="Taiwanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q903822" start="86229" end="86257" title="Democratic Progressive Party" label="Democratic Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q444056" start="86461" end="86477" title="Tangwai movement" label="Tangwai movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="86556" end="86570" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q315528" start="86588" end="86600" title="Lee Teng-hui" label="Lee Teng-hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q710233" start="86763" end="86789" title="2000 ROC presidential election" label="2000 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22368" start="86849" end="86863" title="Chen Shui-bian" label="Chen Shui-bian"/>
<link wikidata="Q714786" start="86886" end="86893" title="2004 Taiwan presidential election" label="In 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090961" start="87112" end="87126" title="Chen Yi-hsiung" label="Chen Yi-hsiung"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367161" start="87200" end="87226" title="Four Wants and One Without" label="Four Wants and One Without"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921172" start="87423" end="87452" title="Left–right political spectrum" label="the question of left or right"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100919" start="87479" end="87490" title="Chinese unification" label="unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q708772" start="87494" end="87506" title="Taiwan independence movement" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q574556" start="87714" end="87732" title="Anti-Secession Law" label="Anti-Secession Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884220" start="87752" end="87777" title="Unenforceable" label="unenforceable legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476754" start="87822" end="87836" title="Sean McCormack" label="Sean McCormack"/>
<link wikidata="Q703937" start="87949" end="87991" title="2008 Republic of China legislative election" label="Legislative Yuan elections in January 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q700833" start="88000" end="88033" title="2008 Republic of China presidential election" label="presidential election in May 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q19216" start="88049" end="88061" title="Ma Ying-jeou" label="Ma Ying-jeou"/>
<link wikidata="Q472310" start="88181" end="88192" title="Frank Hsieh" label="Frank Hsieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4317382" start="88283" end="88291" title="Legal immunity" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101463" start="88472" end="88483" title="Chiou I-jen" label="Chiou I-jen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090892" start="88655" end="88673" title="Chen Shui-bian corruption charges" label="corruption charges"/>
<link wikidata="Q715869" start="88841" end="88857" title="Legislative Yuan" label="Legislative Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15972916" start="88989" end="89021" title="Sunflower Student Movement" label="occupied the parliament building"/>
<link wikidata="Q10845966" start="89258" end="89292" title="2016 Republic of China general election" label="combined elections in January 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q233984" start="89333" end="89345" title="Tsai Ing-wen" label="Tsai Ing-wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q30943218" start="89564" end="89573" title="2018 Taiwanese local elections" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q233984" start="89671" end="89683" title="Tsai Ing-wen" label="Tsai Ing-wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q244898" start="89854" end="89869" title="New Taipei City" label="New Taipei City"/>
<link wikidata="Q245023" start="89871" end="89879" title="Taichung" label="Taichung"/>
<link wikidata="Q181557" start="89884" end="89893" title="Kaohsiung" label="Kaohsiung"/>
<link wikidata="Q104870843" start="90086" end="90118" title="semiconductor industry in Taiwan" label="semiconductor industry in Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q713418" start="90153" end="90157" title="TSMC" label="TSMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q39056239" start="90394" end="90415" title="2020 Taiwanese presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q60287334" start="90424" end="90446" title="2020 Taiwanese legislative election" label="parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="90606" end="90633" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q116736429" start="90917" end="90944" title="Civil defense in Taiwan" label="investment in civil defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q113375803" start="90957" end="90993" title="2022 visit by Nancy Pelosi to Taiwan" label="2022 visit by Nancy Pelosi to Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q113435201" start="91126" end="91158" title="2022 Chinese military exercises around Taiwan" label="military exercises around Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847080" start="91227" end="91247" title="Lai Ching-te" label="William Lai Ching-te"/>
<link wikidata="Q84026635" start="91309" end="91331" title="2024 Taiwanese presidential election" label="presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q112889081" start="91400" end="91420" title="2024 Taiwanese legislative election" label="legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q66029902" start="91556" end="91582" title="Taiwan People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Taiwan People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q119155907" start="91628" end="91663" title="History of Taiwanese historiography" label="History of Taiwanese historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q22528" start="91666" end="91685" title="Geography of Taiwan" label="Geography of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q706948" start="91688" end="91717" title="Timeline of Taiwanese history" label="Timeline of Taiwanese history"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333496" start="91720" end="91746" title="Economic history of Taiwan" label="Economic history of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24007826" start="91749" end="91762" title="Han Taiwanese" label="Han Taiwanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q197428" start="91765" end="91792" title="Foreign relations of Taiwan" label="Foreign relations of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q627531" start="91795" end="91810" title="History of Asia" label="History of Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q831198" start="91812" end="91821" title="History of East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="91823" end="91828" title="History of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q130436" start="91836" end="91841" title="History of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q702868" start="91844" end="91865" title="Japanese expansionism" label="Japanese expansionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158912" start="91872" end="91894" title="Japanese opium policy in Taiwan (1895–1945)" label="Taiwanese opium policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4300967" start="91903" end="91917" title="Knowing Taiwan" label="Knowing Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391818" start="91926" end="91959" title="Military dependents&amp;#x27; village" label="Military dependents&amp;#x27; village"/>
<link wikidata="Q707438" start="91962" end="91995" title="Politics of the Republic of China" label="Politics of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q708772" start="91998" end="92026" title="Taiwan independence movement" label="Taiwan independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100919" start="92033" end="92052" title="Chinese unification" label="Chinese unification"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53395" wikidata="Q131545" url="?curid=53395" title="Harry Houdini">
<text>Erik Weisz (March 24, 1874 – October 31, 1926), known professionally as Harry Houdini ( ), was a Hungarian-American escapologist, illusionist, and stunt performer noted for his escape acts.

Houdini first attracted notice in vaudeville in the United States and then as Harry &quot;Handcuff&quot; Houdini on a tour of Europe, where he challenged police forces to keep him locked up. Soon he extended his repertoire to include chains, ropes slung from skyscrapers, straitjackets under water, and having to escape from and hold his breath inside a sealed milk can with water in it.

In 1904, thousands watched as Houdini tried to escape from special handcuffs commissioned by London&#x27;s &quot;Daily Mirror&quot;, keeping them in suspense for an hour. Another stunt saw him buried alive and only just able to claw himself to the surface, emerging in a state of near-breakdown. While many suspected that these escapes were faked, Houdini presented himself as the scourge of fake spiritualists, pursuing a personal crusade to expose their fraudulent methods. As president of the Society of American Magicians, he was keen to uphold professional standards and expose fraudulent artists. He was also quick to sue anyone who imitated his escape stunts.

Houdini made several movies but quit acting when it failed to bring in money. He was also a keen aviator and became the first man to fly a powered aircraft in Australia.

==Early life==
Erik Weisz was born in Budapest, Kingdom of Hungary to a Jewish family. His parents were Rabbi Mayer Sámuel Weisz (1829–1892) and Cecília Steiner (1841–1913). Houdini was one of seven children: Herman M. (1863–1885), who was Houdini&#x27;s half-brother by Rabbi Weisz&#x27;s first marriage; Nathan J. (1870–1927); Gottfried William (1872–1925); Theodore (1876–1945); Leopold D. (1879–1962); and Carrie Gladys (1882–1959), who was left almost blind after a childhood accident.

Weisz arrived in the United States on July 3, 1878, on the SS &quot;Frisia&quot; with his mother (who was pregnant) and his four brothers. The family changed their name to the German spelling Weiss, and Erik became Ehrich. The family lived in Appleton, Wisconsin, where his father served as rabbi of the Zion Reform Jewish Congregation.

According to the 1880 census, the family lived on Appleton Street in an area that is now known as Houdini Plaza. On June 6, 1882, Rabbi Weiss became an American citizen. Losing his job at Zion in 1882, Rabbi Weiss and family moved to Milwaukee and fell into dire poverty. In 1887, Rabbi Weiss moved with Ehrich to New York City, where they lived in a boarding house on East 79th Street. He was joined by the rest of the family once Rabbi Weiss found permanent housing. As a child, Ehrich Weiss took several jobs, making his public début as a nine-year-old trapeze artist, calling himself &quot;Ehrich, the Prince of the Air.&quot; He was also a champion cross country runner in his youth.

==Magic career==
When Weisz became a professional magician he began calling himself &quot;Harry Houdini&quot;, after the French magician Jean-Eugène Robert-Houdin, after reading Robert-Houdin&#x27;s autobiography in 1890. Weisz incorrectly believed that an &quot;i&quot; at the end of a name meant &quot;like&quot; in French. However, &quot;i&quot; at the end of the name means &quot;of or from&quot; in Hungarian. In later life, Houdini claimed that the first part of his new name, Harry, was an homage to American magician Harry Kellar, whom he also admired, though it was likely adapted from &quot;Ehri&quot;, a nickname for &quot;Ehrich&quot;, which is how he was known to his family.

When he was a teenager, Houdini was coached by the magician Joseph Rinn at the Pastime Athletic Club.
Houdini began his magic career in 1891, but had little success. He appeared in a tent act with strongman Emil Jarrow. He performed in dime museums and sideshows, and even doubled as &quot;The Wild Man&quot; at a circus. Houdini focused initially on traditional card tricks. At one point, he billed himself as the &quot;King of Cards&quot;. Some – but not all – professional magicians would come to regard Houdini as a competent but not particularly skilled sleight-of-hand artist, lacking the grace and finesse required to achieve excellence in that craft. He soon began experimenting with escape acts.

In the early 1890s, Houdini was performing with his brother &quot;Dash&quot; (Theodore) as &quot;The Brothers Houdini&quot;. The brothers performed at the Chicago World&#x27;s Fair in 1893 before returning to New York City and working at Huber&#x27;s Dime Museum for &quot;near-starvation wages&quot;. In 1894, Houdini met a fellow performer, Wilhelmina Beatrice &quot;Bess&quot; Rahner. Bess was initially courted by Dash, but she and Houdini married, with Bess replacing Dash in the act, which became known as &quot;The Houdinis&quot;. For the rest of Houdini&#x27;s performing career, Bess worked as his stage assistant.
Houdini&#x27;s big break came in 1899 when he met manager Martin Beck in St. Paul, Minnesota. Impressed by Houdini&#x27;s handcuffs act, Beck advised him to concentrate on escape acts and booked him on the Orpheum vaudeville circuit. Within months, he was performing at the top vaudeville houses in the country. In 1900, Beck arranged for Houdini to tour Europe. After some days of unsuccessful interviews in London, Houdini&#x27;s British agent Harry Day helped him to get an interview with C. Dundas Slater, then manager of the Alhambra Theatre. He was introduced to William Melville and gave a demonstration of escape from handcuffs at Scotland Yard. He succeeded in baffling the police so effectively that he was booked at the Alhambra for six months. His show was an immediate hit and his salary rose to $300 a week ().
Between 1900 and 1920 he appeared in theatres all over Great Britain performing escape acts, illusions, card tricks and outdoor stunts, becoming one of the world&#x27;s highest paid entertainers. He also toured the Netherlands, Germany, France, and Russia and became widely known as &quot;The Handcuff King&quot;. In each city, Houdini challenged local police to restrain him with shackles and lock him in their jails. In many of these challenge escapes, he was first stripped nude and searched. In Moscow, he escaped from a Siberian prison transport van, claiming that, had he been unable to free himself, he would have had to travel to Siberia, where the only key was kept.

In Cologne, Houdini sued a police officer, Werner Graff, who alleged that he made his escapes via bribery. Houdini won the case when he opened the judge&#x27;s safe (he later said the judge had forgotten to lock it). With his new-found wealth, Houdini purchased a dress said to have been made for Queen Victoria. He then arranged a grand reception where he presented his mother in the dress to all their relatives. Houdini said it was the happiest day of his life. In 1904, Houdini returned to the U.S. and purchased a house for $25,000 (), a brownstone at 278 W. 113th Street in Harlem, New York City.

While on tour in Europe in 1902, Houdini visited Blois with the aim of meeting the widow of Emile Houdin, the son of Jean-Eugène Robert-Houdin, for an interview and permission to visit his grave. He did not receive permission but still visited the grave. Houdini believed that he had been treated unfairly and later wrote a negative account of the incident in his magazine, claiming he was &quot;treated most discourteously by Madame W. Emile Robert-Houdin&quot;. In 1906, he sent a letter to the French magazine &quot;L&#x27;Illusionniste&quot; stating: &quot;You will certainly enjoy the article on Robert Houdin I am about to publish in my magazine. Yes, my dear friend, I think I can finally demolish your idol, who has so long been placed on a pedestal that he did not deserve.&quot;

In 1906, Houdini created his own publication, the &quot;Conjurers&#x27; Monthly Magazine&quot;. It was a competitor to &quot;The Sphinx&quot;, but was short-lived and only two volumes were released until August 1908. Magic historian Jim Steinmeyer has noted that &quot;Houdini couldn&#x27;t resist using the journal for his own crusades, attacking his rivals, praising his own appearances, and subtly rewriting history to favor his view of magic.&quot;
From 1907 and throughout the 1910s, Houdini performed with great success in the United States. He freed himself from jails, handcuffs, chains, ropes, and straitjackets, often while hanging from a rope in sight of street audiences. Because of imitators, Houdini put his &quot;handcuff act&quot; behind him on January 25, 1908, and began escaping from a locked, water-filled milk can. The possibility of failure and death thrilled his audiences. Houdini also expanded his repertoire with his escape challenge act, in which he invited the public to devise contraptions to hold him. These included nailed packing crates (sometimes lowered into water), riveted boilers, wet sheets, mail bags, and even the belly of a whale that had washed ashore in Boston. Brewers in Scranton, Pennsylvania, and other cities challenged Houdini to escape from a barrel after they filled it with beer.

Many of these challenges were arranged with local merchants in one of the first uses of mass tie-in marketing. Rather than promote the idea that he was assisted by spirits, as did the Davenport Brothers and others, Houdini&#x27;s advertisements showed him making his escapes via dematerializing, although Houdini himself never claimed to have supernatural powers.

After much research, Houdini wrote a collection of articles on the history of magic, which were expanded into &quot;The Unmasking of Robert-Houdin&quot; published in 1908. In this book he attacked his former idol Robert-Houdin as a liar and a fraud for having claimed the invention of automata and effects such as aerial suspension, which had been in existence for many years. Many of the allegations in the book were dismissed by magicians and researchers who defended Robert-Houdin. Magician Jean Hugard would later write a full rebuttal to Houdini&#x27;s book.
Houdini introduced the Chinese Water Torture Cell at the Circus Busch in Berlin, Germany, on September 21, 1912. He was suspended upside-down in a locked glass-and-steel cabinet full to overflowing with water, holding his breath for more than three minutes. He would go on performing this escape for the rest of his life.

During his career, Houdini explained some of his tricks in books written for the magic brotherhood. In &quot;Handcuff Secrets&quot; (1909), he revealed how many locks and handcuffs could be opened with properly applied force, others with shoestrings. Other times, he carried concealed lockpicks or keys. When tied down in ropes or straitjackets, he gained wiggle room by enlarging his shoulders and chest, moving his arms slightly away from his body.

His straitjacket escape was originally performed behind curtains, with him popping out free at the end. Houdini&#x27;s brother (who was also an escape artist, billing himself as Theodore Hardeen) discovered that audiences were more impressed when the curtains were eliminated so they could watch him struggle to get out. On more than one occasion, they both performed straitjacket escapes while dangling upside-down from the roof of a building in the same city.

For most of his career, Houdini was a headline act in vaudeville. For many years, he was the highest-paid performer in American vaudeville. One of Houdini&#x27;s most notable non-escape stage illusions was performed at the New York Hippodrome, when he vanished a full-grown elephant from the stage. He had purchased this trick from the magician Charles Morritt. In 1923, Houdini became president of Martinka &amp; Co., America&#x27;s oldest magic company. The business is still in operation today.

He also served as president of the Society of American Magicians ( S.A.M.) from 1917 until his death in 1926. Founded on May 10, 1902, in the back room of Martinka&#x27;s magic shop in New York, the Society expanded under the leadership of Harry Houdini during his term as national president from 1917 to 1926. Houdini was magic&#x27;s greatest visionary: He sought to create a large, unified national network of professional and amateur magicians. Wherever he traveled, he gave a lengthy formal address to the local magic club, made speeches, and usually threw a banquet for the members at his own expense. He said &quot;The Magicians Clubs as a rule are small: they are weak ... but if we were amalgamated into one big body the society would be stronger, and it would mean making the small clubs powerful and worthwhile. Members would find a welcome wherever they happened to be and, conversely, the safeguard of a city-to-city hotline to track exposers and other undesirables&quot;.

For most of 1916, while on his vaudeville tour, Houdini had been recruitingat his own expenselocal magic clubs to join the S.A.M. in an effort to revitalize what he felt was a weak organization. Houdini persuaded groups in Buffalo, Detroit, Pittsburgh, and Kansas City to join. As had happened in London, he persuaded magicians to join. The Buffalo club joined as the first branch, (later assembly) of the Society. Chicago Assembly No. 3 was, as the name implies, the third regional club to be established by the S.A.M., whose assemblies now number in the hundreds. In 1917, he signed Assembly Number Three&#x27;s charter into existence, and that charter and this club continue to provide Chicago magicians with a connection to each other and to their past. Houdini dined with, addressed, and got pledges from similar clubs in Detroit, Rochester, Pittsburgh, Kansas City, Cincinnati and elsewhere. This was the biggest movement ever in the history of magic. In places where no clubs existed, he rounded up individual magicians, introduced them to each other, and urged them into the fold.

By the end of 1916, magicians&#x27; clubs in San Francisco and other cities that Houdini had not visited were offering to become assemblies. He had created the richest and longest-surviving organization of magicians in the world. It now embraces almost 6,000 dues-paying members and almost 300 assemblies worldwide. In July 1926, Houdini was elected for the ninth successive time President of the Society of American Magicians. Every other president has only served for one year. He also was President of the Magicians&#x27; Club of London.

In the final years of his life (1925/26), Houdini launched his own full-evening show, which he billed as &quot;Three Shows in One: Magic, Escapes, and Fraud Mediums Exposed&quot;.

==Notable escapes==
===&quot;Daily Mirror&quot; challenge===

In 1904, the London &quot;Daily Mirror&quot; newspaper challenged Houdini to escape from special handcuffs that it claimed had taken Nathaniel Hart, a locksmith from Birmingham, five years to make. Houdini accepted the challenge for March 17 during a matinée performance at London&#x27;s Hippodrome theatre. It was reported that 4000 people and more than 100 journalists turned out for the much-hyped event. The escape attempt dragged on for over an hour, during which Houdini emerged from his &quot;ghost house&quot; (a small screen used to conceal the method of his escape) several times. At one point he asked if the cuffs could be removed so he could take off his coat. The &quot;Mirror&quot; representative, Frank Parker, refused, saying Houdini could gain an advantage if he saw how the cuffs were unlocked. Houdini promptly took out a penknife and, holding it in his teeth, used it to cut his coat from his body. Some 56 minutes later, Houdini&#x27;s wife appeared on stage and gave him a kiss. Many thought that in her mouth was the key to unlock the special handcuffs. However, it has since been suggested that Bess did not in fact enter the stage at all, and that this theory is unlikely due to the size of the six-inch key. Houdini then went back behind the curtain. After an hour and ten minutes, Houdini emerged free. As he was paraded on the shoulders of the cheering crowd, he broke down and wept. At the time, Houdini said it had been one of the most difficult escapes of his career.

After Houdini&#x27;s death, his friend Martin Beck was quoted in Will Goldston&#x27;s book, &quot;Sensational Tales of Mystery Men&quot;, admitting that Houdini was bested that day and had appealed to his wife, Bess, for help. Goldston goes on to claim that Bess begged the key from the &quot;Mirror&quot; representative, then slipped it to Houdini in a glass of water. It was stated in the book &quot;The Secret Life of Houdini&quot; that the key required to open the specially designed Mirror handcuffs was six inches long, and could not have been smuggled to Houdini in a glass of water. Goldston offered no proof of his account, and many modern biographers have found evidence (notably in the custom design of the handcuffs) that the &quot;Mirror&quot; challenge may have been arranged by Houdini and that his long struggle to escape was pure showmanship. James Randi believes that the only way the handcuffs could have been opened was by using their key, and speculates that it would have been viewed &quot;distasteful&quot; to both the &quot;Mirror&quot; and to Houdini if Houdini had failed the escape.

This escape was discussed in depth on the Travel Channel&#x27;s &quot;Mysteries at the Museum&quot; in an interview with Houdini expert, magician and escape artist Dorothy Dietrich of Scranton&#x27;s Houdini Museum.

A full-sized construction of the same Mirror Handcuffs, as well as a replica of the Bramah style key for them, are on display to the public at The Houdini Museum in Scranton, Pennsylvania. This set of cuffs is believed to be one of only six in the world, some of which are not on display.

===Milk Can Escape===
In 1908, Houdini introduced his own original act, the Milk Can Escape. In this act, Houdini was handcuffed and sealed inside an oversized milk can filled with water and made his escape behind a curtain. As part of the effect, Houdini invited members of the audience to hold their breath along with him while he was inside the can. Advertised with dramatic posters that proclaimed &quot;Failure Means A Drowning Death&quot;, the escape proved to be a sensation. Houdini soon modified the escape to include the milk can being locked inside a wooden chest, being chained or padlocked. Houdini performed the milk can escape as a regular part of his act for only four years, but it has remained one of the acts most associated with him. Houdini&#x27;s brother, Theodore Hardeen, continued to perform the milk can escape and its wooden chest variant into the 1940s.

The American Museum of Magic has the milk can and overboard box used by Houdini.

After other magicians proposed variations on the Milk Can Escape, Houdini claimed that the act was protected by copyright and in 1906, brought a case against John Clempert, one of the most persistent imitators. The matter was settled out of court and Clempert agreed to publish an apology.

===Chinese water torture cell===

Around 1912, the vast number of imitators prompted Houdini to replace his milk can act with the Chinese water torture cell. In this escape, Houdini&#x27;s feet were locked in stocks, and he was lowered upside down into a tank filled with water. The mahogany and metal cell featured a glass front, through which audiences could clearly see Houdini. The stocks were locked to the top of the cell, and a curtain concealed his escape. In the earliest version of the torture cell, a metal cage was lowered into the cell, and Houdini was enclosed inside that. While making the escape more difficult – the cage prevented Houdini from turning – the cage bars also offered protection should the front glass break.

The original cell was built in England, where Houdini first performed the escape for an audience of one person as part of a one-act play he called &quot;Houdini Upside Down&quot;. This was done to obtain copyright protection for the effect, and establish grounds to sue imitators – which he did. While the escape was advertised as &quot;The Chinese Water Torture Cell&quot; or &quot;The Water Torture Cell&quot;, Houdini always referred to it as &quot;the Upside Down&quot; or &quot;USD&quot;. The first public performance of the USD was at the Circus Busch in Berlin, on September 21, 1912. Houdini continued to perform the escape until his death in 1926.

===Suspended straitjacket escape===
One of Houdini&#x27;s most popular publicity stunts was to have himself strapped into a regulation straitjacket and suspended by his ankles from a tall building or crane. Houdini would then make his escape in full view of the assembled crowd. In many cases, Houdini drew tens of thousands of onlookers who brought city traffic to a halt. Houdini would sometimes ensure press coverage by performing the escape from the office building of a local newspaper. In New York City, Houdini performed the suspended straitjacket escape from a crane being used to build the subway. After flinging his body in the air, he escaped from the straitjacket. Starting from when he was hoisted up in the air by the crane, to when the straitjacket was completely off, it took him two minutes and thirty-seven seconds. There is film footage in the Library of Congress of Houdini performing the escape. Films of his escapes are also shown at The Houdini Museum in Scranton, Pennsylvania.

After being battered against a building in high winds during one escape, Houdini performed the escape with a visible safety wire on his ankle so that he could be pulled away from the building if necessary. The idea for the upside-down escape was given to Houdini by a young boy named Randolph Osborne Douglas (March 31, 1895 – December 5, 1956), when the two met at a performance at Sheffield&#x27;s Empire Theatre.

===Overboard box escape===

Another of Houdini&#x27;s most famous publicity stunts was to escape from a nailed and roped packing crate after it had been lowered into water. He first performed the escape in New York&#x27;s East River on July 7, 1912. Police forbade him from using one of the piers, so he hired a tugboat and invited press on board. Houdini was locked in handcuffs and leg-irons, then nailed into the crate which was roped and weighed down with two hundred pounds of lead. The crate was then lowered into the water. He escaped in 57 seconds. The crate was pulled to the surface and found still to be intact, with the manacles inside.

Houdini performed this escape many times, and even performed a version on stage, first at Hamerstein&#x27;s Roof Garden where a tank was specially built, and later at the New York Hippodrome.

===Buried alive stunt===
Houdini performed at least three variations on a buried alive stunt during his career. The first was near Santa Ana, California in 1915, and it almost cost him his life. Houdini was buried, without a casket, in a pit of earth six feet deep. He became exhausted and panicked while trying to dig his way to the surface and called for help. When his hand finally broke the surface, he fell unconscious and had to be pulled from the grave by his assistants. Houdini wrote in his diary that the escape was &quot;very dangerous&quot; and that &quot;the weight of the earth is killing&quot;.

Houdini&#x27;s second variation on buried alive was an endurance test designed to expose mystical Egyptian performer Rahman Bey, who had claimed to use supernatural powers to remain in a sealed casket for an hour. Houdini bettered Bey on August 5, 1926, by remaining in a sealed casket, or coffin, submerged in the swimming pool of New York&#x27;s Hotel Shelton for one and a half hours. Houdini claimed he did not use any trickery or supernatural powers to accomplish this feat, just controlled breathing. He repeated the feat at the YMCA in Worcester, Massachusetts on September 28, 1926, this time remaining sealed for one hour and eleven minutes.

Houdini&#x27;s final buried alive was an elaborate stage escape that featured in his full evening show. Houdini would escape after being strapped in a straitjacket, sealed in a casket, and then buried in a large tank filled with sand. While posters advertising the escape exist (playing off the Bey challenge by boasting &quot;Egyptian Fakirs Outdone!&quot;), it is unclear whether Houdini ever performed buried alive on stage. The stunt was to be the feature escape of his 1927 season, but Houdini died on October 31, 1926. The bronze casket Houdini created for buried alive was used to transport Houdini&#x27;s body from Detroit to New York following his death on Halloween.

==Film career==
In 1906, Houdini started showing films of his outside escapes as part of his vaudeville act. In Boston, he presented a short film called &quot;Houdini Defeats Hackenschmidt&quot;. Georg Hackenschmidt was a famous wrestler of the day, but the nature of their contest is unknown as the film is lost. In 1909, Houdini made a film in Paris for Cinema Lux titled &quot;Merveilleux Exploits du Célèbre Houdini à Paris&quot; (Marvellous Exploits of the Famous Houdini in Paris). It featured a loose narrative designed to showcase several of Houdini&#x27;s famous escapes, including his straitjacket and underwater handcuff escapes. That same year Houdini got an offer to star as Captain Nemo in a silent version of &quot;Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas&quot;, but the project never made it into production.

It is often erroneously reported that Houdini served as special-effects consultant on the Wharton/International cliffhanger serial &quot;The Mysteries of Myra&quot;, shot in Ithaca, New York, because Harry Grossman, director of &quot;The Master Mystery&quot; also filmed a serial in Ithaca at about the same time. The consultants on the serial were pioneering Hereward Carrington and Aleister Crowley.

In 1918, Houdini signed a contract with film producer B. A. Rolfe to star in a 15-part serial, &quot;The Master Mystery&quot; (released in November 1918). As was common at the time, the film serial was released simultaneously with a novel. Financial difficulties resulted in B. A. Rolfe Productions going out of business, but &quot;The Master Mystery&quot; led to Houdini being signed by Famous Players–Lasky Corporation/Paramount Pictures, for whom he made two pictures, &quot;The Grim Game&quot; (1919) and &quot;Terror Island&quot; (1920).

&quot;The Grim Game&quot; was Houdini&#x27;s first full-length movie and is reputed to be his best. Because of the flammable nature of nitrate film and their low rate of survival, film historians considered the film lost. One copy did exist hidden in the collection of a private collector only known to a tiny group of magicians that saw it. Dick Brookz and Dorothy Dietrich of The Houdini Museum in Scranton, Pennsylvania, had seen it twice on the invitation of the collector. After many years of trying, they finally got him to agree to sell the film to Turner Classic Movies, who restored the complete 71-minute film. The film, not seen by the general public for 96 years, was shown by TCM on March 29, 2015, as a highlight of their yearly 4-day festival in Hollywood.
While filming an aerial stunt for &quot;The Grim Game&quot;, two biplanes collided in mid-air with a stuntman doubling Houdini dangling by a rope from one of the planes. Publicity was geared heavily toward promoting this dramatic &quot;caught-on-film&quot; moment, claiming it was Houdini himself dangling from the plane. While filming these movies in Los Angeles, Houdini rented a home in Laurel Canyon. Following his two-picture stint in Hollywood, Houdini returned to New York and started his own film production company called the &quot;Houdini Picture Corporation&quot;. He produced and starred in two films, &quot;The Man from Beyond&quot; (1921) and &quot;Haldane of the Secret Service&quot; (1923). He also founded his own film laboratory business called The Film Development Corporation (FDC), gambling on a new process for developing motion picture film. Houdini&#x27;s brother, Theodore Hardeen, left his own career as a magician and escape artist to run the company. Magician Harry Kellar was a major investor. In 1919 Houdini moved to Los Angeles to film. He resided in 2435 Laurel Canyon Boulevard, a residence owned by Ralph M. Walker. The Houdini Estate, a tribute to Houdini, is located on 2400 Laurel Canyon Boulevard, previously home to Walker himself. The Houdini Estate is subject to controversy, in that it is disputed whether Houdini ever actually made it his home. While there are claims it was Houdini&#x27;s house, others counter that &quot;he never set foot&quot; on the property. It is rooted in Bess&#x27;s parties or seances, etc. held across the street, she would do so at the Walker mansion. In fact, the guesthouse featured an elevator connecting to a tunnel that crossed under Laurel Canyon to the big house grounds (though capped, the tunnel still exists).

Neither Houdini&#x27;s acting career nor FDC found success, and he gave up on the movie business in 1923, complaining that &quot;the profits are too meager&quot;.

In April 2008, Kino International released a DVD box set of Houdini&#x27;s surviving silent films, including &quot;The Master Mystery&quot;, &quot;Terror Island&quot;, &quot;The Man From Beyond&quot;, &quot;Haldane of the Secret Service&quot;, and five minutes from &quot;The Grim Game&quot;. The set also includes newsreel footage of Houdini&#x27;s escapes from 1907 to 1923, and a section from &quot;Merveilleux Exploits du Célébre Houdini à Paris, &quot;although it is not identified as such.

==Aviator==

In 1909, Houdini became fascinated with aviation. He purchased a French Voisin biplane for $5,000 () from the Chilean aviators and Emilio Eduardo Bello, and hired a full-time mechanic, Antonio Brassac. After crashing once, he made his first successful flight on November 26 in Hamburg, Germany.

The following year, Houdini toured Australia and brought along his Voisin biplane with the intention to be the first person to fly in Australia.
::Melbourne people will shortly have an opportunity of witnessing the ascent of a flying machine, for Houdini, whose Voisin bi-plane has arrived, has determined to make a flight before his season closes at the [New] Opera House [in Melbourne, at the end of March]. The 60 to 80 horse-power motor used is of the E.N.V. pattern. The machine has been erected at Diggers&#x27; Rest. &quot;Table Talk&quot;, March 3, 1910.

=== Australian flights ===
====March 18, 1910====
On Friday, March 18, 1910, following more than a month of delays due to inclement weather conditions, Houdini completed one of the first powered aeroplane flights ever made in Australia. He made three flights in his French Voisin biplane, at the Old Plumpton Paddock, at Diggers Rest, Victoria, ranging from 1 minute to 3½ minutesreaching an altitude of 100 ft in one of his flights, and travelling more than two miles in another. Nine of the 30 spectators present on that day signed a certificate verifying Houdini&#x27;s achievement.

====March 20, 1910====
Hampered by the windy conditions on the Saturday, and unable to fly safely, Houdini took to the air again early on Sunday morning, 20 March 20, 1910:
::After a short preliminary flight, lasting 26 sec., Houdini took wing again, and, amid loud applause from the hundred or more spectators, who were on the ground, described three circles at altitudes, varying from 20ft to over 100ft, covering a distance of between three and four miles in 3min 45½sec. &quot;The Argus&quot;, 21 March 1910.

====March 21, 1910====
On Monday morning, 21 March 1910, some 30 spectators witnessed Houdini make an extended flight at Diggers Rest of 7min. 37secs., covering at least 6 miles, at altitudes ranging from 20 ft. to 100 ft. Australian aviator Basil Watson&#x27;s father, mother, and younger sister, Venora, were among the spectators; and their names were included in the list of 16 spectator signatures on the certificate that verified Houdini&#x27;s achievement.

===After Australia===
After completing his Australia tour, Houdini put the Voisin into storage in England. He announced he would use it to fly from city to city during his next music hall tour and even promised to leap from it handcuffed, but he never flew again.

==Debunking spiritualists==

In the 1920s, Houdini turned his energies toward debunking psychics and mediums in order to show how they were taking advantage of the bereaved, a pursuit that was in line with the debunkings by stage magicians since the late nineteenth century.

Houdini&#x27;s training in magic allowed him to expose frauds who had successfully fooled many scientists and academics. He was a member of a &quot;Scientific American&quot; committee that offered a cash prize to any medium who could successfully demonstrate supernatural abilities. None were able to do so, and the prize was never collected. The first to be tested was medium George Valiantine of Wilkes Barre, Pennsylvania. As his fame as a &quot;medium-buster&quot; grew, Houdini took to attending séances in disguise, accompanied by a reporter and a police officer. Possibly the most famous medium he debunked was Mina Crandon, also known as &quot;Margery&quot;.

Joaquín Argamasilla, known as the &quot;Spaniard with X-ray Eyes&quot;, claimed to be able to read handwriting or numbers on dice through closed metal boxes. In 1924, he was exposed by Houdini as a fraud. Argamasilla peeked through his simple blindfold and lifted up the edge of the box so he could look inside it without others noticing. Houdini also investigated the Italian medium Nino Pecoraro, who he considered to be fraudulent.

Houdini&#x27;s exposure of phony mediums inspired other magicians to follow suit, including The Amazing Randi, Dorothy Dietrich, Penn &amp; Teller, and Dick Brookz.

Houdini chronicled his debunking exploits in his book, &quot;A Magician Among the Spirits&quot;, co-authored with C. M. Eddy, Jr., who was not credited. These activities compromised Houdini&#x27;s friendship with Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. Doyle, a firm believer in spiritualism during his later years, refused to give credence to any of Houdini&#x27;s exposés. Doyle came to believe that Houdini was a powerful spiritualist medium and had performed many of his stunts by means of paranormal abilities and was using those abilities to block the powers of the mediums that he was supposedly debunking. This disagreement led to the two men becoming public antagonists and Doyle came to view Houdini as a dangerous enemy.

Before Houdini died, he and his wife agreed that if Houdini found it possible to communicate after death, he would communicate the message &quot;Rosabelle believe&quot;, a secret code which they agreed to use. &quot;Rosabelle&quot; was their favorite song. Bess held yearly séances on Halloween for ten years after Houdini&#x27;s death. She did claim to have contact through Arthur Ford in 1929 when Ford conveyed the secret code, but Bess later said the incident had been faked. The code seems to have been such that it could be broken by Ford or his associates using existing clues. Evidence to this effect was discovered by Ford&#x27;s biographer after he died in 1971. In 1936, after a last unsuccessful séance on the roof of the Knickerbocker Hotel, she put out the candle that she had kept burning beside a photograph of Houdini since his death. In 1943, Bess said that &quot;ten years is long enough to wait for any man.&quot;

The tradition of holding a séance for Houdini continues, held by magicians throughout the world. The Official Houdini Séance was organized in the 1940s by Sidney Hollis Radner, a Houdini aficionado from Holyoke, Massachusetts. Yearly Houdini séances are also conducted in Chicago at the Excalibur nightclub by &quot;necromancer&quot; Neil Tobin on behalf of the Chicago Assembly of the Society of American Magicians; and at the Houdini Museum in Scranton by magician Dorothy Dietrich, who previously held them at New York&#x27;s Magic Towne House with such magical notables as Houdini biographers Walter B. Gibson and Milbourne Christopher. Gibson was asked by Bess Houdini to carry on the original séance tradition. After doing them for many years at New York&#x27;s Magic Towne House, before he died, Walter passed on the tradition of conducting of the Original Séances to Dorothy Dietrich.

In 1926, Harry Houdini hired H. P. Lovecraft and his friend C. M. Eddy, Jr., to write an entire book about debunking religious miracles, which was to be called &quot;The Cancer of Superstition.&quot; Houdini had earlier asked Lovecraft to write an article about astrology, for which he paid $75 (). The article does not survive. Lovecraft&#x27;s detailed synopsis for &quot;Cancer&quot; does survive, as do three chapters of the treatise written by Eddy. Houdini&#x27;s death derailed the plans, as his widow did not wish to pursue the project.

==Appearance and voice recordings==
Unlike the image of the classic magician, Houdini was short and stocky and typically appeared on stage in a long frock coat and tie. Most biographers give his height as , but descriptions vary. Houdini was also said to be slightly bow-legged, which aided in his ability to gain slack during his rope escapes. In the 1997 biography &quot;Houdini!!!: The Career of Ehrich Weiss&quot;, author Kenneth Silverman summarizes how reporters described Houdini&#x27;s appearance during his early career:


Houdini made the only known recordings of his voice on Edison wax cylinders on October 29, 1914, in Flatbush, New York. On them, Houdini practices several different introductory speeches for his famous Chinese Water Torture Cell. He also invites his sister, Gladys, to recite a poem. Houdini then recites the same poem in German. The six wax cylinders were discovered in the collection of magician John Mulholland after his death in 1970. They are part of the David Copperfield collection.

== Legal issues ==
In September 1900, Houdini was summoned by the German police prior to his first performance in the country who suspected his act was fake. Subsequently in Berlin, he was stripped naked and forced to perform an escape routine in front of 300 policemen. Houdini was tightly restrained with &quot;thumbscrews, finger locks, and five different hand and elbow irons&quot;. He was able to escape in 6 minutes, and later used the stunt in advertising. Subsequently in 1901, a newspaper in Cologne accused him of attempting to bribe a police officer in order to rig an escape attempt, and paying a civilian police employee to aid him with another performance. Houdini sued the newspaper and the police officer for slander. As part of the trial, Houdini was asked to open without the aid of tools one of the police officer&#x27;s handcrafted locks, for which the officer had said that Houdini had tried to bribe him. Houdini was able to do so, and won the case.

==Personal life==
Houdini became an active Freemason and was a member of St. Cecile Lodge No. 568 in New York City.

In 1904, Houdini bought a New York City townhouse at 278 West 113th Street in Harlem. He paid US$25,000 () for the five-level, 6,008-square-foot house, which was built in 1895, and lived in it with his wife Bess, and various other relatives until his death in 1926. In March 2018, it was purchased for $3.6 million. A plaque affixed to the building by the Historical Landmark Preservation Center reads, &quot;The magician lived here from 1904 to 1926 collecting illusions, theatrical memorabilia, and books on psychic phenomena and magic.&quot;

In 1919, Houdini moved to Los Angeles to film. He resided in 2435 Laurel Canyon Boulevard, a house of his friend and business associate Ralph M. Walker, who owned both sides of the street, 2335 and 2400, the latter address having a pool where Houdini practiced his water escapes. 2400 Laurel Canyon Boulevard, previously numbered 2398, is presently known as The Houdini Estate, thus named in the honor of Houdini&#x27;s time there, the same estate where Bess Houdini threw a party for 500 magicians years after his death. After decades of abandonment, the estate was acquired in 2006 by José Luis Nazar, a Chilean/American citizen who has restored it to its former splendor.

In 1918, he registered for selective service as Harry Handcuff Houdini.

==Death==
Houdini died on October 31, 1926 at the age of 52 from peritonitis (swelling of the abdomen), possibly related to appendicitis and possibly related to punches to his abdomen he had received about a week and a half earlier.

Witnesses to an incident at Houdini&#x27;s dressing room in the Princess Theatre in Montreal on October 22, 1926, speculated that Houdini&#x27;s death was caused by Jocelyn Gordon Whitehead (1895–1954), who repeatedly struck Houdini&#x27;s abdomen.

The accounts of the witnesses, students named Jacques Price and Sam Smilovitz (sometimes called Jack Price and Sam Smiley), generally corroborated each other. Price said that Whitehead asked Houdini &quot;if he believed in the miracles of the Bible&quot; and &quot;whether it was true that punches in the stomach did not hurt him&quot;. Houdini offered a casual reply that his stomach could endure a lot. Whitehead then delivered &quot;some very hammer-like blows below the belt&quot;. Houdini was reclining on a couch at the time, having broken his ankle while performing several days earlier. Price said that Houdini winced at each blow and stopped Whitehead suddenly in the midst of a punch, gesturing that he had had enough, and adding that he had had no opportunity to prepare himself against the blows, as he did not expect Whitehead to strike him so suddenly and forcefully. Had his ankle not been broken, he would have risen from the couch into a better position to brace himself.

Throughout the evening, Houdini performed in great pain. He had insomnia and remained in constant pain for the next two days, but did not seek medical help. When he finally saw a doctor, he was found to have a fever of and acute appendicitis, and was advised to have immediate surgery. He ignored the advice and decided to go on with the show. When Houdini arrived at the Garrick Theater in Detroit, Michigan, on October 24, 1926, for what would be his last performance, he had a fever of . Despite the diagnosis, Houdini took the stage. He was reported to have passed out during the show, but was revived and continued. Afterwards, he was hospitalized at Detroit&#x27;s Grace Hospital where he died from peritonitis on October 31, aged 52.

It is unlikely that the dressing room incident caused Houdini&#x27;s eventual death, since the effects of sustaining blunt trauma alongside appendicitis is debated in medical literature. Although rare, acute appendicitis which follows after direct abdominal trauma has been observed. One theory suggests that Houdini was unaware that he was suffering from appendicitis, and he might have taken his abdominal pain more seriously had he not coincidentally received blows to the abdomen. According to Adam Begley, it is more likely that Houdini was suffering the effects of appendicitis prior to the punch, and his reluctance to seek medical care delayed potential treatment. 

After taking statements from Price and Smilovitz, Houdini&#x27;s insurance company concluded that the death was due to the dressing-room incident and paid double indemnity.

==Houdini grave site==
Houdini&#x27;s funeral was held on November 4, 1926, in New York, with more than 2,000 mourners in attendance. He was interred in the Machpelah Cemetery in Glendale, Queens, with the crest of the Society of American Magicians inscribed on his grave site. A statuary bust was added to the exedra in 1927, a rarity, because graven images are forbidden in Jewish cemeteries. In 1975, the bust was destroyed by vandals. Temporary busts were placed at the grave until 2011 when a group from the Houdini Museum in Scranton, Pennsylvania, placed a permanent bust with the permission of Houdini&#x27;s family and of the cemetery.

The Society of American Magicians took responsibility for the upkeep of the site, as Houdini had willed a large sum of money to the organization he had grown from one club to 5,000–6,000 dues-paying membership worldwide. The payment of upkeep was abandoned by the society&#x27;s dean George Schindler, who said &quot;Houdini paid for perpetual care, but there&#x27;s nobody at the cemetery to provide it&quot;, adding that the operator of the cemetery, David Jacobson, &quot;sends us a bill for upkeep every year but we never pay it because he never provides any care.&quot; Members of the Society tidy the grave themselves.

Machpelah Cemetery operator Jacobson said that they &quot;never paid the cemetery for any restoration of the Houdini family plot in my tenure since 1988&quot;, claiming that the money came from the cemetery&#x27;s dwindling funds. The granite monuments of Houdini&#x27;s sister, Gladys, and brother, Leopold were also destroyed by vandals. For many years, until recently, the Houdini grave site has been only cared for by Dorothy Dietrich and Dick Brookz of the Houdini Museum in Scranton, Pennsylvania. The Society of American Magicians, at its National Council Meeting in Boca Raton, Florida, in 2013, under the prompting of Dietrich and Brookz, voted to assume the financial responsibilities for the care and maintenance of the Houdini Gravesite. While the actual plot will remain under the control of Machpelah Cemetery management, the Society of American Magicians, with the help of the Houdini Museum in Pennsylvania, will be in charge of the restoration.

Houdini&#x27;s widow, Bess, died of a heart attack on February 11, 1943, aged 67, in Needles, California, while on a train en route from Los Angeles to New York City. She had expressed a wish to be buried next to her husband, but instead was interred 35 miles due north at the Gate of Heaven Cemetery in Westchester County, New York, as her Catholic family refused to allow her to be buried in a Jewish cemetery.

===Proposed exhumation===
On March 22, 2007, Houdini&#x27;s great-nephew (the grandson of his brother Theo) George Hardeen announced that the courts would be asked to allow exhumation of Houdini&#x27;s body to investigate the possibility of Houdini being murdered by spiritualists, as suggested in the biography &quot;The Secret Life of Houdini&quot;.
In a statement given to the Houdini Museum in Scranton, the family of Bess Houdini opposed the application and suggested it was a publicity ploy for the book. &quot;The Washington Post&quot; stated that the press conference was not arranged by the family of Houdini. Instead, the &quot;Post&quot; reported, it was orchestrated by the book&#x27;s authors William Kalush and Larry Sloman, who had hired the public relations firm Dan Klores Communications to promote the book.

In 2008, it was revealed the parties involved had not filed legal papers to perform an exhumation.

==Legacy==
Houdini&#x27;s brother, Theodore Hardeen, who returned to performing after Houdini&#x27;s death, inherited his brother&#x27;s effects and props. Houdini&#x27;s will stipulated that all the effects should be &quot;burned and destroyed&quot; upon Hardeen&#x27;s death. Hardeen sold much of the collection to magician and Houdini enthusiast Sidney Hollis Radner during the 1940s, including the water torture cell. Radner allowed choice pieces of the collection to be displayed at The Houdini Magical Hall of Fame in Niagara Falls, Ontario. In 1995, a fire destroyed the museum. The water torture cell&#x27;s metal frame remained, and it was restored by illusion builder John Gaughan. Many of the props contained in the museum such as the mirror handcuffs, Houdini&#x27;s original packing crate, a milk can, and a straitjacket, survived the fire and were auctioned in 1999 and 2008.

Radner loaned the bulk of his collection for archiving to the Outagamie Museum in Appleton, Wisconsin, but reclaimed it in 2003 and auctioned it in Las Vegas, on October 30, 2004.

Houdini was a &quot;formidable collector&quot;, and bequeathed many of his holdings and paper archives on magic and spiritualism to the Library of Congress, which became the basis for the Houdini collection in cyberspace. Houdini&#x27;s book collecting has been explored in an essay in &quot;The Book Collector.&quot;

In 1934, the bulk of Houdini&#x27;s collection of American and British theatrical material, along with a significant portion of his business and personal papers, and some of his collections of other magicians were sold to pay off estate debts to theatre magnate Messmore Kendall. In 1958, Kendall donated his collection to the Hoblitzelle Theatre Library at the University of Texas at Austin. In the 1960s, the Hoblitzelle Library became part of the Harry Ransom Center. The extensive Houdini collection includes a 1584 first edition of Reginald Scot&#x27;s &quot;Discoverie of Witchcraft&quot; and David Garrick&#x27;s travel diary to Paris from 1751. Some of the scrapbooks in the Houdini collection have been digitized. The collection was exclusively paper-based until April 2016, when the Ransom Center acquired one of Houdini&#x27;s ball weights with chain and ankle cuff. In October 2016, in conjunction with the 90th anniversary of the death of Houdini, the Ransom Center embarked on a major re-cataloging of the Houdini collection to make it more visible and accessible to researchers. The collection reopened in 2018, with its finding aids posted online.

A large portion of Houdini&#x27;s estate holdings and memorabilia was willed to his fellow magician and friend John Mulholland (1898–1970). In 1991, illusionist and television performer David Copperfield purchased all of Mulholland&#x27;s Houdini holdings from Mulholland&#x27;s estate. These are now archived and preserved in Copperfield&#x27;s warehouse at his headquarters in Las Vegas. It contains the world&#x27;s largest collection of Houdini memorabilia and preserves approximately 80,000 items of memorabilia of Houdini and other magicians, including Houdini&#x27;s stage props and material, his rebuilt water torture cabinet and his metamorphosis trunk. It is not open to the public, but tours are available by invitation to magicians, scholars, researchers, journalists and serious collectors.

In a posthumous ceremony on October 31, 1975, Houdini was given a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 7001 Hollywood Blvd.

The Houdini Museum in Scranton, Pennsylvania, bills itself as &quot;the only building in the world entirely dedicated to Houdini&quot;. It is open to the public year-round by reservation. It includes Houdini films, a guided tour about Houdini&#x27;s life and a stage magic show. Magicians Dorothy Dietrich and Dick Brookz opened the facility in 1991. The House of Houdini is a museum and performance venue located at 11, Dísz square in the Buda Castle in Budapest, Hungary. It claims to house the largest collection of original Houdini artifacts in Europe. The Houdini Museum of New York is located at Fantasma Magic, a retail magic manufacturer and seller located in Manhattan. The museum contains several hundred pieces of ephemera, most of which belonged to Harry Houdini.

==In popular culture==
Houdini appears twice in the Canadian television period detective series &quot;Murdoch Mysteries&quot;. In episode 4 of season 2 &quot;Houdini Whodunit&quot; (February 24, 2009) he is portrayed by Joe Dinicol, performing escapes with his brother Leopold and explaining the nature of illusion. In episode 11 of season 13 &quot;Staring Blindly into the Future&quot; (January 13, 2020) he is portrayed by Grisha Pasternak, assisting the police when famous scientists disappear.

==Publications==
Houdini published numerous books during his career (some of which were written by his good friend Walter B. Gibson, the creator of The Shadow).
* &quot;The Right Way to Do Wrong: An Exposé of Successful Criminals&quot; (1906)
* &quot;Handcuff Secrets&quot; (1907)
* &quot;The Unmasking of Robert-Houdin&quot; (1908), a debunking study of Robert-Houdin&#x27;s alleged abilities.
* &quot;Magical Rope Ties and Escapes&quot; (1920)
* &quot;Miracle Mongers and Their Methods&quot; (1920)
* &quot;Houdini&#x27;s Paper Magic&quot; (1921)
* &quot;A Magician Among the Spirits&quot; (1924)
* &quot;Houdini Exposes the Tricks Used by the Boston Medium &quot;Margery&quot;&quot; (1924)
* &quot;Imprisoned with the Pharaohs&quot; (1924), a short story ghostwritten by H. P. Lovecraft.
* &quot;How I Unmask the Spirit Fakers&quot;, article for &quot;Popular Science&quot; (November 1925)
* &quot;How I do My &quot;Spirit Tricks&quot;&quot;, article for &quot;Popular Science&quot; (December 1925)
* &quot;Conjuring&quot; (1926), article for the Encyclopædia Britannica&#x27;s 13th edition.

==Filmography==
* &quot;Merveilleux Exploits du Célébre Houdini à Paris&quot;Cinema Lux (1909)playing himself
* &quot;The Master Mystery&quot;Octagon Films (1918)playing Quentin Locke
* &quot;The Grim Game&quot;Famous Players–Lasky/Paramount Pictures (1919)playing Harvey Handford
* &quot;Terror Island&quot;Famous Players Lasky/Paramount (1920)playing Harry Harper
* &quot;The Man from Beyond&quot;Houdini Picture Corporation (1922)playing Howard Hillary
* &quot;Haldane of the Secret Service&quot;Houdini Picture Corporation/FBO (1923)playing Heath Haldane

== Posters ==
==See also==

* List of magic museums
* List of magicians

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* Gresham, William Lindsay &quot;Houdini: The Man Who Walked Through Walls&quot; (New York: Henry Holt &amp; Co., 1959).
* Henning, Doug with Charles Reynolds. &quot;Houdini: His Legend and His Magic&quot; (New York: Times Books, 1978). .
* Kellock, Harold. &quot;Houdini: His Life-Story&quot; &quot;from the recollections and documents of Beatrice Houdini&quot;, (Harcourt, Brace Co., June 1928).
* Kendall, Lance. &quot;Houdini: Master of Escape&quot; (New York: Macrae Smith &amp; Co., 1960). .
* Meyer, M.D., Bernard C. &quot;Houdini: A Mind in Chains&quot; (New York: E. P. Dutton &amp; Co., 1976). .
* 
* Williams, Beryl &amp; Samuel Epstein. &quot;The Great Houdini: Magician Extraordinary&quot; (New York: Julian Messner, Inc., 1950).

==Further reading==
* &quot;Why Is Houdini?&quot; by Fred Lockley, &quot;Photoplay&quot;, June 1920, p. 50.
* &quot;An Interview with Harry Houdini&quot; by Marcet Haldeman-Julius, &quot;Haldeman-Julius Monthly&quot; Vol. 2.5 (October 1925), pp. 387–397.
* &quot;Houdini&#x27;s Escapes and Magic&quot; by Walter B. Gibson, &quot;Prepared from Houdini&#x27;s private notebooks&quot; Blue Ribbon Books, Inc., 1930. Reveals some of Houdini&#x27;s magic and escape methods (also released in two separate volumes: &quot;Houdini&#x27;s Magic&quot; and &quot;Houdini&#x27;s Escapes&quot;).
* &quot;The Secrets of Houdini&quot; by J.C. Cannell, Hutchinson &amp; Co., London, 1931. Reveals some of Houdini&#x27;s escape methods.
* &quot;Houdini and Conan Doyle: The Story of a Strange Friendship&quot; by Bernard M. L. Ernst, Albert &amp; Charles Boni, Inc., NY, 1932.
* &quot;Sixty Years of Psychical Research&quot; by Joseph Rinn, Truth Seeker Co., 1950, Rinn was a long time close friend of Houdini. Contains detailed information about the last Houdini message (there are 3) and its disclosure.
* &quot;Houdini&#x27;s Fabulous Magic&quot; by Walter B. Gibson and Morris N. Young. Chilton, NY, 1960. Excellent reference for Houdini&#x27;s escapes and some methods (includes the Water Torture Cell).
* &quot;The Houdini Birth Research Committee&#x27;s Report&quot;, Magico Magazine (reprint of report by The Society of American Magicians), 1972. Concludes Houdini was born March 24, 1874, in Budapest.
* &quot;Arthur Ford: The Man Who Talked with the Dead&quot; by Allen Spraggett with William V. Rauscher, 1973, pp. 152–165, Chapter 7, &quot;The Houdini Affair&quot; contains detailed information about the Houdini messages and their disclosure.
* &quot;Mediums, Mystics and the Occult&quot; by Milbourne Christopher, Thomas T. Crowell Co., 1975, pp. 122–145, &quot;Arthur Ford-Messages from the Dead&quot;, contains detailed information about the Houdini messages and their disclosure.
* &quot;Houdini: A Definitive Bibliography&quot; by Manny Weltman, Finders/Seekers Enterprises, Los Angeles, 1991. A Description of the Literary Works of Houdini, includes pamphlets from Weltman&#x27;s collection
* &quot;Believe&quot; by William Shatner and Michael Charles Tobias, Berkeley Books, NY, 1992.
* &quot;Houdini: Escape into Legend, The Early Years: 1862–1900&quot; by Manny Weltman, Finders/Seekers Enterprises, Los Angeles, 1993. Examination of Houdini&#x27;s childhood and early career.
* &quot;Houdini Comes to America&quot; by Ronald J. Hilgert, The Houdini Historical Center, 1996. Documents the Weiss family&#x27;s immigration to the United States on July 3, 1878 (when Ehrich was 4).
* &quot;Houdini Unlocked&quot; by Patrick Culliton, Two volume box set: &quot;The Tao of Houdini&quot; and &quot;The Secret Confessions of Houdini&quot;, Kieran Press, 1997.
* &quot;The Houdini Code Mystery: A Spirit Secret Solved&quot; by William V. Rauscher, Magic Words, 2000.
* &quot;Final Séance: The Strange Friendship Between Houdini and Conan Doyle&quot; by Massimo Polidoro, Prometheus Books, 2001.
* &quot;The Man Who Killed Houdini&quot; by Don Bell, Vehicle Press, 2004. Investigates J. Gordon Whitehead and the events surrounding Houdini&#x27;s death.
* &quot;Disappearing Tricks: Silent Film, Houdini, and the New Magic of the Twentieth Century&quot; by Matthew Solomon, University of Illinois Press, 2010. Contains new information about Houdini&#x27;s early movie career.
* &quot;Houdini Art and Magic&quot; by Brooke Kamin Rapaport, Jewish Museum, 2010. Essays on Houdini&#x27;s life and work are accompanied by interviews with novelist E. L. Doctorow, Teller, Kenneth Silverman, and more.
* &quot;Houdini—the Key&quot; by Patrick Culliton, Kieran Press, 2010. Reveals the authentic working methods of many of Houdini effects, including the Milk Can and Water Torture Cell. Limited to 278 copies.
* &quot;The Life and Afterlife of Harry Houdini&quot; by Joe Posnanski, Avid Reader Press, 2019.
* &quot;Harry and the Highwire&quot;. A fun and inspirational children&#x27;s book about the young Harry Houdini&#x27;s attempts to walk the tightrope. Green Bean Books, 2024.

==External links==
* 
* 
===Archival material collections===
* Harry Houdini Papers &amp; Harry Houdini Collection at the Harry Ransom Center in the University of Texas at Austin 
* Correspondence relating to psychical research: From Houdini to Harry Price from Harry Price Archive, held at Senate House Library, University of London
* The Harry Houdini Collection (archived 2022) From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress
**Harry Houdini Collection (Library of Congress) from The Online Books Page
* Harry Houdini: Topics in Chronicling America A research guide from the Library of Congress
* Search result of &quot;houdini&quot; in the New York Public Library digital collections
===Miscellaneous===
* Timeline of Houdini&#x27;s life from the &quot;Houdini&quot; episode of &quot;American Experience&quot; produced by PBS
* The Houdini Museum in Scranton Pennsylvania
* Houdini Escapes the Smithsonian from Smithsonian Institution Blog</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131545" start="0" end="10" title="Harry Houdini" label="Erik Weisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q131545" start="72" end="85" title="Harry Houdini" label="Harry Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293082" start="116" end="128" title="escape artist" label="escapologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q148442" start="130" end="141" title="illusionist" label="illusionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q465501" start="147" end="162" title="stunt performer" label="stunt performer"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="225" end="235" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q201573" start="552" end="560" title="milk can" label="milk can"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="693" end="705" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q829348" start="977" end="990" title="spiritualism (movement)" label="spiritualists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552361" start="1076" end="1105" title="Society of American Magicians" label="Society of American Magicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="1457" end="1465" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="1467" end="1485" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q469544" start="1491" end="1497" title="History of the Jews in Hungary" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="1523" end="1528" title="Rabbi" label="Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5790107" start="1779" end="1787" title="Theodore Hardeen" label="Theodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1932" end="1945" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q94928" start="2154" end="2173" title="Appleton, Wisconsin" label="Appleton, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="2202" end="2207" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977254" start="2266" end="2277" title="1880 US Census" label="1880 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="2483" end="2492" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2563" end="2576" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818314" start="2618" end="2634" title="79th Street (Manhattan)" label="East 79th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200918" start="2805" end="2819" title="trapeze artist" label="trapeze artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q500050" start="2903" end="2923" title="cross country running" label="cross country runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q148442" start="2989" end="2997" title="magic (illusion)" label="magician"/>
<link wikidata="Q379773" start="3076" end="3101" title="Jean-Eugène Robert-Houdin" label="Jean-Eugène Robert-Houdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="3138" end="3151" title="autobiography" label="autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q356014" start="3464" end="3476" title="Harry Kellar" label="Harry Kellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998297" start="3689" end="3700" title="Joseph Rinn" label="Joseph Rinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371297" start="3836" end="3847" title="Emil Jarrow" label="Emil Jarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277223" start="3865" end="3876" title="dime museum" label="dime museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293082" start="4321" end="4332" title="escapology" label="escape acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5790107" start="4401" end="4405" title="Theodore Hardeen" label="Dash"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="4490" end="4515" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="Chicago World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896361" start="4678" end="4721" title="Bess Houdini" label="Wilhelmina Beatrice &amp;quot;Bess&amp;quot; Rahner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774972" start="5017" end="5028" title="Martin Beck (vaudeville)" label="Martin Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="5032" end="5051" title="St. Paul, Minnesota" label="St. Paul, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q15808" start="5081" end="5090" title="handcuffs" label="handcuffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489837" start="5165" end="5172" title="Orpheum Circuit" label="Orpheum"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="5173" end="5183" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5668319" start="5405" end="5414" title="Harry Day (politician)" label="Harry Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q49262" start="5489" end="5505" title="Alhambra Theatre" label="Alhambra Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015566" start="5528" end="5544" title="William Melville" label="William Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q184619" start="5598" end="5611" title="Scotland Yard" label="Scotland Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430961" start="6165" end="6172" title="shackle" label="shackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778449" start="6252" end="6278" title="strip search" label="stripped nude and searched"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="6283" end="6289" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="6309" end="6316" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="6464" end="6471" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="6559" end="6566" title="bribery" label="bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="6758" end="6772" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q665231" start="7004" end="7014" title="brownstone" label="brownstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="7041" end="7047" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q160927" start="7114" end="7119" title="Blois" label="Blois"/>
<link wikidata="Q379773" start="7182" end="7207" title="Jean-Eugène Robert-Houdin" label="Jean-Eugène Robert-Houdin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7980" end="7990" title="The Sphinx: An Independent Magazine for Magicians" label="The Sphinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198316" start="8088" end="8102" title="Jim Steinmeyer" label="Jim Steinmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q231647" start="8462" end="8474" title="straitjacket" label="straitjacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620264" start="8985" end="8993" title="mail bag" label="mail bag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9020" end="9025" title="Whale#In myth, literature and art" label="whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q271395" start="9071" end="9093" title="Scranton, Pennsylvania" label="Scranton, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187053" start="9281" end="9287" title="tie-in" label="tie-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q39809" start="9288" end="9297" title="marketing" label="marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q478846" start="9372" end="9390" title="Davenport Brothers" label="Davenport Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q204043" start="9467" end="9482" title="Teleportation" label="dematerializing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9669" end="9699" title="The Unmasking of Robert-Houdin" label="The Unmasking of Robert-Houdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001952" start="9867" end="9884" title="Aerial suspension (illusion)" label="aerial suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170858" start="10047" end="10058" title="Jean Hugard" label="Jean Hugard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100683" start="10140" end="10166" title="Chinese Water Torture Cell" label="Chinese Water Torture Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="10190" end="10196" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="10198" end="10205" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351522" start="10725" end="10734" title="lock picking" label="lockpicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q231647" start="10771" end="10783" title="straitjacket" label="straitjacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q23852" start="10885" end="10889" title="Human body" label="body"/>
<link wikidata="Q5790107" start="11070" end="11086" title="Theodore Hardeen" label="Theodore Hardeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="11409" end="11419" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q204583" start="11578" end="11597" title="New York Hippodrome" label="New York Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081107" start="11700" end="11715" title="Charles Morritt" label="Charles Morritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777171" start="11754" end="11772" title="Martinka (company)" label="Martinka &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q7552361" start="11889" end="11918" title="Society of American Magicians" label="Society of American Magicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="14742" end="14754" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="14882" end="14892" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q174295" start="15558" end="15566" title="penknife" label="penknife"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002825" start="16282" end="16295" title="Will Goldston" label="Will Goldston"/>
<link wikidata="Q294918" start="17077" end="17088" title="James Randi" label="James Randi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17114098" start="17398" end="17421" title="Mysteries at the Museum" label="Mysteries at the Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16041108" start="17629" end="17641" title="Bramah lock" label="Bramah style"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912790" start="17688" end="17706" title="The Houdini Museum" label="The Houdini Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q271395" start="17710" end="17732" title="Scranton, Pennsylvania" label="Scranton, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5790107" start="18613" end="18629" title="Theodore Hardeen" label="Theodore Hardeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744475" start="18722" end="18746" title="American Museum of Magic" label="American Museum of Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q87451522" start="18958" end="18971" title="John Clempert" label="John Clempert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484064" start="19300" end="19306" title="stocks" label="stocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q239788" start="19374" end="19382" title="mahogany" label="mahogany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="20035" end="20044" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="20392" end="20398" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20724" end="20730" title="Straitjacket#Escape techniques" label="escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="21088" end="21094" title="New York City Subway" label="subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291853" start="21776" end="21800" title="Randolph Osborne Douglas" label="Randolph Osborne Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="21875" end="21884" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q212862" start="22131" end="22141" title="East River" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="Q204583" start="22730" end="22749" title="New York Hippodrome" label="New York Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q861534" start="22826" end="22838" title="Premature burial" label="buried alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="23906" end="23930" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="24638" end="24645" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="24681" end="24690" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="24805" end="24811" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q947695" start="24889" end="24908" title="Georg Hackenschmidt" label="Georg Hackenschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046049" start="25381" end="25393" title="Captain Nemo" label="Captain Nemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183565" start="25423" end="25461" title="Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas" label="Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q217346" start="25691" end="25707" title="Ithaca, New York" label="Ithaca, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q386059" start="25877" end="25896" title="Hereward Carrington" label="Hereward Carrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="25901" end="25917" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833896" start="25974" end="25985" title="B. A. Rolfe" label="B. A. Rolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751682" start="26007" end="26013" title="serial (film)" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281183" start="26021" end="26039" title="The Master Mystery" label="The Master Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360829" start="26195" end="26218" title="Rolfe Photoplays Inc." label="B. A. Rolfe Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739165" start="26308" end="26340" title="Famous Players–Lasky Corporation" label="Famous Players–Lasky Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="26341" end="26359" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q152442" start="26398" end="26411" title="The Grim Game" label="The Grim Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984781" start="26435" end="26448" title="Terror Island" label="Terror Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26599" end="26611" title="Nitrocellulose#Film" label="nitrate film"/>
<link wikidata="Q749719" start="27020" end="27041" title="Turner Classic Movies" label="Turner Classic Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="27588" end="27599" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q462539" start="27626" end="27639" title="Laurel Canyon, Los Angeles, California" label="Laurel Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988197" start="27856" end="27875" title="The Man from Beyond" label="The Man from Beyond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782536" start="27899" end="27928" title="Haldane of the Secret Service" label="Haldane of the Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5790107" start="28125" end="28141" title="Theodore Hardeen" label="Theodore Hardeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q356014" start="28224" end="28236" title="Harry Kellar" label="Harry Kellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q63107781" start="28370" end="28385" title="Ralf Marc Walker" label="Ralph M. Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="28896" end="28904" title="elevator" label="elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309654" start="29775" end="29789" title="Voisin 1907 biplane" label="Voisin biplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="29980" end="29987" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="30146" end="30155" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q24090063" start="30354" end="30371" title="Tivoli Theatre, Melbourne" label="[New] Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273370" start="30455" end="30469" title="E.N.V. Motor Syndicate" label="E.N.V. pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309654" start="30836" end="30850" title="Voisin 1907 biplane" label="Voisin biplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275644" start="30884" end="30906" title="Diggers Rest, Victoria" label="Diggers Rest, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q25929825" start="31906" end="31925" title="Basil George Watson" label="Basil Watson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q179098" start="32481" end="32489" title="parapsychology" label="psychics"/>
<link wikidata="Q583271" start="32494" end="32501" title="mediumship" label="mediums"/>
<link wikidata="Q148442" start="32617" end="32631" title="stage magician" label="stage magician"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="32817" end="32836" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="32928" end="32940" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066830" start="33046" end="33063" title="George Valiantine" label="George Valiantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q745594" start="33067" end="33093" title="Wilkes Barre, Pennsylvania" label="Wilkes Barre, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093522" start="33170" end="33176" title="séance" label="séance"/>
<link wikidata="Q535175" start="33287" end="33299" title="Mina Crandon" label="Mina Crandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23705287" start="33337" end="33356" title="Joaquín Argamasilla" label="Joaquín Argamasilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965626" start="33431" end="33435" title="Dermo-optical perception" label="read"/>
<link wikidata="Q45089" start="33462" end="33466" title="dice" label="dice"/>
<link wikidata="Q24068925" start="33721" end="33734" title="Nino Pecoraro" label="Nino Pecoraro"/>
<link wikidata="Q294918" start="33865" end="33882" title="James Randi" label="The Amazing Randi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298381" start="33884" end="33900" title="Dorothy Dietrich" label="Dorothy Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q130317" start="33902" end="33919" title="Penn &amp;amp; Teller" label="Penn &amp;amp; Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272711" start="33925" end="33936" title="Dick Brookz" label="Dick Brookz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006676" start="34053" end="34068" title="C. M. Eddy, Jr." label="C. M. Eddy, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="34156" end="34174" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q829348" start="34202" end="34214" title="Spiritualism (religious movement)" label="spiritualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093522" start="34930" end="34937" title="Seances" label="séances"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="34941" end="34950" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355575" start="35031" end="35042" title="Arthur Ford (psychic)" label="Arthur Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422056" start="35390" end="35409" title="Knickerbocker Hotel (Los Angeles)" label="Knickerbocker Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509142" start="35746" end="35766" title="Sidney Hollis Radner" label="Sidney Hollis Radner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470081" start="35878" end="35887" title="Excalibur (nightclub)" label="Excalibur"/>
<link wikidata="Q337935" start="35907" end="35918" title="necromancer" label="necromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989417" start="35925" end="35935" title="Neil Tobin" label="Neil Tobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552361" start="35977" end="36006" title="Society of American Magicians" label="Society of American Magicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298381" start="36058" end="36074" title="Dorothy Dietrich" label="Dorothy Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706862" start="36120" end="36137" title="Magic Towne House" label="Magic Towne House"/>
<link wikidata="Q466896" start="36188" end="36204" title="Walter B. Gibson" label="Walter B. Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691765" start="36209" end="36230" title="Milbourne Christopher" label="Milbourne Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="36514" end="36529" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006676" start="36545" end="36560" title="C. M. Eddy, Jr." label="C. M. Eddy, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q24964747" start="36651" end="36677" title="The Cancer of Superstition" label="The Cancer of Superstition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550742" start="37298" end="37308" title="bow-legged" label="bow-legged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738912" start="37457" end="37474" title="Kenneth Silverman" label="Kenneth Silverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q691783" start="37625" end="37637" title="Phonograph cylinder" label="wax cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q840381" start="37663" end="37681" title="Flatbush, New York" label="Flatbush, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100683" start="37765" end="37791" title="Chinese Water Torture Cell" label="Chinese Water Torture Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701168" start="37961" end="37976" title="John Mulholland (magician)" label="John Mulholland"/>
<link wikidata="Q139637" start="38023" end="38040" title="David Copperfield (illusionist)" label="David Copperfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="39070" end="39079" title="Freemason" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750391" start="40393" end="40410" title="Selective Service System" label="selective service"/>
<link wikidata="Q223102" start="40504" end="40515" title="peritonitis" label="peritonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q121041" start="40563" end="40575" title="appendicitis" label="appendicitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="40757" end="40765" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="41977" end="41985" title="insomnia" label="insomnia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42584" end="42598" title="Sinai-Grace Hospital#History" label="Grace Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300043" start="43485" end="43501" title="double indemnity" label="double indemnity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723847" start="43661" end="43679" title="Machpelah Cemetery (Queens)" label="Machpelah Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568334" start="43683" end="43699" title="Glendale, Queens" label="Glendale, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552361" start="43723" end="43752" title="Society of American Magicians" label="Society of American Magicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q594648" start="43815" end="43821" title="exedra" label="exedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912790" start="44017" end="44031" title="Houdini Museum" label="Houdini Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q271395" start="44035" end="44043" title="Scranton" label="Scranton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091316" start="44434" end="44450" title="George Schindler" label="George Schindler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298381" start="45198" end="45214" title="Dorothy Dietrich" label="Dorothy Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272711" start="45219" end="45230" title="Dick Brookz" label="Dick Brookz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912790" start="45238" end="45252" title="Houdini Museum" label="Houdini Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q271395" start="45256" end="45264" title="Scranton" label="Scranton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896361" start="45761" end="45765" title="Bess Houdini" label="Bess"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="45777" end="45789" title="heart attack" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q846591" start="45824" end="45843" title="Needles, California" label="Needles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127009" start="46016" end="46039" title="Gate of Heaven Cemetery" label="Gate of Heaven Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q54066" start="46043" end="46071" title="Westchester County, New York" label="Westchester County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="46080" end="46088" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q331055" start="46326" end="46336" title="exhumation" label="exhumation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912790" start="46533" end="46547" title="Houdini Museum" label="Houdini Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="46670" end="46689" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491121" start="46878" end="46890" title="Larry Sloman" label="Larry Sloman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5790107" start="47115" end="47131" title="Theodore Hardeen" label="Theodore Hardeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509142" start="47429" end="47449" title="Sidney Hollis Radner" label="Sidney Hollis Radner"/>
<link wikidata="Q274120" start="47604" end="47626" title="Niagara Falls, Ontario" label="Niagara Falls, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739769" start="48033" end="48049" title="History Museum at the Castle" label="Outagamie Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q94928" start="48053" end="48072" title="Appleton, Wisconsin" label="Appleton, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="48288" end="48307" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719159" start="48444" end="48462" title="The Book Collector" label="The Book Collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="48833" end="48862" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="48921" end="48940" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138020" start="49008" end="49021" title="Reginald Scot" label="Reginald Scot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520634" start="49029" end="49065" title="The Discoverie of Witchcraft" label="&amp;quot;Discoverie of Witchcraft&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q222390" start="49070" end="49083" title="David Garrick" label="David Garrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701168" start="49747" end="49762" title="John Mulholland (magician)" label="John Mulholland"/>
<link wikidata="Q139637" start="49822" end="49839" title="David Copperfield (illusionist)" label="David Copperfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="50519" end="50541" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912790" start="50571" end="50585" title="Houdini Museum" label="Houdini Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589610" start="50918" end="50938" title="The House of Houdini" label="The House of Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q47321201" start="51128" end="51154" title="Houdini Museum of New York" label="Houdini Museum of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="51396" end="51415" title="CBC Television" label="Canadian television"/>
<link wikidata="Q186424" start="51423" end="51439" title="Detective fiction" label="detective series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326701" start="51446" end="51463" title="Murdoch Mysteries" label="Murdoch Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51502" end="51518" title="List of Murdoch Mysteries episodes#Season 2 (2009)" label="Houdini Whodunit"/>
<link wikidata="Q984622" start="51564" end="51575" title="Joe Dinicol" label="Joe Dinicol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51693" end="51724" title="List of Murdoch Mysteries episodes#Season 13 (2019–2020)" label="Staring Blindly into the Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q466896" start="51958" end="51974" title="Walter B. Gibson" label="Walter B. Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q967116" start="51991" end="52001" title="The Shadow" label="The Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q379773" start="52198" end="52211" title="Jean Eugène Robert-Houdin" label="Robert-Houdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883361" start="52544" end="52572" title="Imprisoned with the Pharaohs" label="Imprisoned with the Pharaohs"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="52617" end="52632" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q773087" start="52698" end="52713" title="Popular Science" label="Popular Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q773087" start="52807" end="52822" title="Popular Science" label="Popular Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="52893" end="52916" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281183" start="53057" end="53075" title="The Master Mystery" label="The Master Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q152442" start="53131" end="53144" title="The Grim Game" label="The Grim Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739165" start="53150" end="53170" title="Famous Players–Lasky" label="Famous Players–Lasky"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="53171" end="53189" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984781" start="53228" end="53241" title="Terror Island" label="Terror Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739165" start="53247" end="53267" title="Famous Players Lasky" label="Famous Players Lasky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988197" start="53313" end="53332" title="The Man from Beyond" label="The Man from Beyond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782536" start="53403" end="53432" title="Haldane of the Secret Service" label="Haldane of the Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414304" start="53466" end="53469" title="Film Booking Offices of America" label="FBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626841" start="53529" end="53550" title="List of magic museums" label="List of magic museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817667" start="53553" end="53570" title="List of magicians" label="List of magicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q938844" start="53609" end="53633" title="William Lindsay Gresham" label="Gresham, William Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132837" start="53699" end="53719" title="Henry Holt &amp;amp; Co." label="Henry Holt &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q301559" start="53730" end="53743" title="Doug Henning" label="Henning, Doug"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654997" start="53972" end="53991" title="Harcourt (publisher)" label="Harcourt, Brace Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q5317558" start="54180" end="54202" title="E. P. Dutton" label="E. P. Dutton &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q15999151" start="54404" end="54416" title="Fred Lockley" label="Fred Lockley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381612" start="54424" end="54433" title="Photoplay" label="Photoplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893402" start="54508" end="54530" title="Marcet Haldeman-Julius" label="Marcet Haldeman-Julius"/>
<link wikidata="Q466896" start="54656" end="54672" title="Walter B. Gibson" label="Walter B. Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998297" start="55262" end="55273" title="Joseph Rinn" label="Joseph Rinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q466896" start="55487" end="55503" title="Walter B. Gibson" label="Walter B. Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691765" start="56139" end="56160" title="Milbourne Christopher" label="Milbourne Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256834" start="57401" end="57417" title="Massimo Polidoro" label="Massimo Polidoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080232" start="57720" end="57748" title="University of Illinois Press" label="University of Illinois Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211847" start="58305" end="58318" title="Joe Posnanski" label="Joe Posnanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="58320" end="58337" title="Avid Reader Press" label="Avid Reader Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="58644" end="58663" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="58671" end="58700" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q476676" start="58784" end="58795" title="Harry Price" label="Harry Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="58835" end="58855" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="58962" end="58981" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093997" start="59036" end="59057" title="The Online Books Page" label="The Online Books Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="59131" end="59150" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="59197" end="59220" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842919" start="59341" end="59360" title="American Experience" label="American Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="59379" end="59382" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53396" wikidata="Q2513186" url="?curid=53396" title="Stand-in">
<text>A stand-in, sometimes a lighting double, for film and television is a person who substitutes for the actor before filming, for technical purposes such as lighting and camera setup.
Stand-ins are helpful in the initial processes of film and television production.

Stand-ins allow the director of photography to light the set and the camera department to light and focus scenes while the actors are absent. The director will often ask stand-ins to deliver the scene dialogue (&quot;lines&quot;) and walk through (&quot;blocking&quot;) the scenes to be filmed.

Stand-ins are distinguished from doubles, who replace actors &quot;on camera&quot; from behind, in makeup, or during dangerous stunts. Stand-ins do not appear on camera. However, on some productions the jobs of stand-in and double may be done by the same person. In rare cases, a stand-in will appear on screen, sometimes as an in-joke. For instance, a scene in &quot;Heidi&quot; (1937) features the title character&#x27;s grandfather (Jean Hersholt) mistake a stranger for Heidi (Shirley Temple); the look-alike was played by Temple&#x27;s regular stand-in, Mary Lou Islieb. In another case, the actress who pretends to be Ann Darrow in the stage show during the final act of &quot;King Kong&quot; (2005) is played by Naomi Watts&#x27; stand-in, Julia Walshaw.

Stand-ins do not necessarily look like the actor, but they must have the same skin tone, hair color, height and build as the actor so that the lighting in a scene will be set up correctly. For example, if the lighting is set up with a stand-in shorter than an actor, the actor might end up having their head in relative darkness. In some cases, a star and stand-in do differ in height: Ann Sheridan&#x27;s stand-in, Marveen Zehner, was taller than the actress and reportedly worked shoeless, and actor Tommy Noonan wore three-inch risers in his shoes to stand-in for Tyrone Power.

Some actors&#x27; contracts mandate that they will always have the same stand-in. Famous cases include Pluma Noisom (stand-in for Claudette Colbert), Harry Cornbleth (Fred Astaire) and Adam Bryant (Robin Williams). Myrna Loy wrote in her autobiography &quot;Myrna Loy: Being and Becoming&quot; about her friendship and working relationship with her stand-in, Shirley Hughes. When Bette Davis walked out on her Warner Bros. contract, she negotiated for her regular stand-in, Sally Sage, to continue to work at the studio.

==Stand-in use in animation==
Stand-ins are also used for animated characters in live-action animated films, sometimes with life-size character models instead of people. This lets the animators know where to place the animated character in the scene, how to make them move realistically, and for actors to know where to look. In these cases, skin tone and hair color are not important. Height and build, however, are still important for any interaction between live-action actors and animated characters.

==See also==
*Fake Shemp
*Understudy
*Doppelgänger
*Impersonation
*Look-alike
*Political decoy
*Simulacrum
*&quot;Stand-In&quot; (1937 film)
*&quot;The Stand In&quot; (&quot;Seinfeld&quot; episode)

==References==
==External links==

* Stand-In Central: Learn How to Be a TV/Film Stand-In
*Stars and Stand-Ins: Hollywood&#x27;s Unsung Heroes Step Into the Spotlight</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2513186" start="2" end="10" title="Stand-in" label="stand-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513186" start="24" end="39" title="Stand-in" label="lighting double"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="45" end="49" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="54" end="64" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q222344" start="284" end="307" title="director of photography" label="director of photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q704948" start="593" end="599" title="Double (filmmaking)" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594303" start="928" end="933" title="Heidi (1937 film)" label="Heidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q359251" start="996" end="1009" title="Jean Hersholt" label="Jean Hersholt"/>
<link wikidata="Q182580" start="1041" end="1055" title="Shirley Temple" label="Shirley Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q160215" start="1243" end="1252" title="King Kong (2005 film)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q132616" start="1279" end="1290" title="Naomi Watts" label="Naomi Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q233848" start="1709" end="1721" title="Ann Sheridan" label="Ann Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q736541" start="1825" end="1837" title="Tommy Noonan" label="Tommy Noonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q309989" start="1890" end="1902" title="Tyrone Power" label="Tyrone Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q203819" start="2035" end="2052" title="Claudette Colbert" label="Claudette Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q100937" start="2072" end="2084" title="Fred Astaire" label="Fred Astaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83338" start="2103" end="2117" title="Robin Williams" label="Robin Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q105941" start="2120" end="2129" title="Myrna Loy" label="Myrna Loy"/>
<link wikidata="Q71206" start="2285" end="2296" title="Bette Davis" label="Bette Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25110269" start="2508" end="2534" title="live-action animated film" label="live-action animated films"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431475" start="2947" end="2957" title="Fake Shemp" label="Fake Shemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309178" start="2959" end="2969" title="Understudy" label="Understudy"/>
<link wikidata="Q461363" start="2971" end="2983" title="Doppelgänger" label="Doppelgänger"/>
<link wikidata="Q17379560" start="2985" end="2998" title="Impersonation" label="Impersonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188702" start="3000" end="3010" title="Look-alike" label="Look-alike"/>
<link wikidata="Q11070121" start="3012" end="3027" title="Political decoy" label="Political decoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412596" start="3029" end="3039" title="Simulacrum" label="Simulacrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672175" start="3047" end="3055" title="Stand-In" label="Stand-In"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766212" start="3081" end="3093" title="The Stand In (Seinfeld)" label="The Stand In"/>
<link wikidata="Q23733" start="3107" end="3115" title="Seinfeld" label="Seinfeld"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53398" wikidata="Q610140" url="?curid=53398" title="Esoteric programming language">
<text>An esoteric programming language (sometimes shortened to esolang) is a programming language designed to test the boundaries of computer programming language design, as a proof of concept, as software art, as a hacking interface to another language (particularly functional programming or procedural programming languages), or as a joke. The use of the word &quot;&quot; distinguishes them from languages that working developers use to write software. The creators of most esolangs do not intend them to be used for mainstream programming, although some esoteric features, such as visuospatial syntax, have inspired practical applications in the arts. Such languages are often popular among hackers and hobbyists.

Usability is rarely a goal for designers of esoteric programming languages; often their design leads to quite the opposite. Their usual aim is to remove or replace conventional language features while still maintaining a language that is Turing-complete, or even one for which the computational class is unknown.

==History==
The earliest, and still the canonical example of an esoteric programming language, is INTERCAL, designed in 1972 by Don Woods and James M. Lyon, who said that their intention was to create a programming language unlike any with which they were familiar. It parodied elements of established programming languages of the day such as Fortran, COBOL and assembly language.

For many years, INTERCAL was represented only by paper copies of the INTERCAL manual. Its revival in 1990 as an implementation in C under Unix stimulated a wave of interest in the intentional design of esoteric computer languages.

In 1993, Wouter van Oortmerssen created FALSE, a small stack-oriented programming language with syntax designed to make the code inherently obfuscated, confusing and unreadable. Its compiler is only 1024 bytes in size. This inspired Urban Müller to create an even smaller language, the now-infamous Brainfuck, which consists of only eight recognized characters. Along with Chris Pressey&#x27;s Befunge (like FALSE, but with a two-dimensional instruction pointer), Brainfuck is now one of the best-supported esoteric programming languages, with canonical examples of minimal Turing tarpits and needlessly obfuscated language features. Brainfuck is related to the P′′ family of Turing machines.

== Common features ==
While esoteric programming languages differ in many ways, there are some common traits that characterize many languages, such as parody, minimalism, and the goal of making programming difficult. Many esoteric programming languages, such as brainfuck, and similar, use single characters as commands, however, it is not uncommon for languages to read line by line like conventional programming languages.

=== Unique data representations ===
Conventional imperative programming languages typically allow data to be stored in variables, but esoteric languages may utilize different methods of storing and accessing data. Languages like Brainfuck and Malbolge only permit data to be read through a single pointer, which must be moved to a location of interest before data is read. Others, like Befunge and Shakespeare, utilize one or more stacks to hold data, leading to a manner of execution akin to Reverse Polish notation. Finally, there are languages which explore alternative forms of number representation: the Brainfuck variant Boolfuck only permits operations on single bits, while Malbolge and INTERCAL variant TriINTERCAL replace bits altogether with a base 3 ternary system.

=== Unique instruction representations ===
Esoteric languages also showcase unique ways of representing program instructions. Some languages, such as Befunge and Piet, represent programs in two or more dimensions, with program control moving around in multiple possible directions through the program. This differs from conventional languages in which a program is a set of instructions usually encountered in sequence. Other languages modify instructions to appear in an unusual form, often one that can be read by humans with an alternate meaning to the underlying instructions. Shakespeare achieves this by making all programs resemble Shakespearian plays. Chef achieves the same by having all programs be recipes. Chef is particularly notable in that some have created programs that successfully function both as a program and as a recipe, demonstrating the ability of the language to produce this double meaning.

=== Difficulty to read and write ===
Many esoteric programming languages are designed to produce code that is deeply obfuscated, making it difficult to read and to write. The purpose of this may be to provide an interesting puzzle or challenge for program writers: Malbolge for instance was explicitly designed to be challenging, and so it has features like self-modifying code and highly counterintuitive operations. On the other hand, some esoteric languages become difficult to write due to their other design choices. Brainfuck is committed to the idea of a minimalist instruction set, so even though its instructions are straightforward in principle, the code that arises is difficult for a human to read. INTERCAL&#x27;s difficulty arises as a result of the choice to avoid operations used in any other programming language, which stems from its origin as a parody of other languages.

=== Parody and spoof ===
One of the aims of esoteric programming languages is to parody or spoof existing languages and trends in the field of programming. For instance, the first esoteric language INTERCAL began as a spoof of languages used in the 1960s, such as APL, Fortran, and COBOL. INTERCAL&#x27;s rules appear to be the inverse of rules in these other languages. However, the subject of parody is not always another established programming language. Shakespeare can be viewed as spoofing the structure of Shakespearean plays, for instance. The language Ook! is a parody of Brainfuck, where Brainfuck&#x27;s eight commands are replaced by various orangutan sounds like &quot;Ook. Ook?&quot;

== Examples ==

=== Befunge ===
Befunge allows the instruction pointer to roam in multiple dimensions through the code. For example, the following program displays &quot;Hello World&quot; by pushing the characters in reverse order onto the stack, then printing the characters in a loop which circulates clockwise through the instructions , , , , , and .

There are many versions of Befunge, the most common being Befunge-93, named as such because of its release year.

=== Binary lambda calculus ===
Binary lambda calculus is designed from an algorithmic information theory perspective to allow for the densest possible code with the most minimal means, featuring a 29-byte self interpreter, a 21-byte prime number sieve, and a 112-byte Brainfuck interpreter.

=== Brainfuck===
Brainfuck is designed for extreme minimalism and leads to obfuscated code, with programs containing only eight distinct characters. The following program outputs &quot;Hello, world!&quot;:
 ..+++.&gt;++.«+++++++++++++++.&gt;.+++.------.--------.&gt;+.
All characters other than are ignored.

=== Chicken ===
Chicken has just three tokens, the word &quot;chicken&quot;, &quot; &quot; (the space character), and the newline character. The compiler interprets the number of &quot;chickens&quot; on a line as an opcode instruction which it uses to manipulate data on a stack. A simple chicken program can contain dozens of lines with nothing but the word &quot;chicken&quot; repeated countless times. Chicken was invented by Torbjörn Söderstedt who drew his inspiration for the language from a parody of a scientific dissertation.

=== Chef ===
Chef is a stack-oriented programming language created by David Morgan-Mar, designed to make programs look like cooking recipes. Programs consist of a title, a list of variables and their data values, and a list of stack manipulation instructions. A joking design principle states that &quot;program recipes should not only generate valid output, but be easy to prepare and delicious&quot;, and Morgan-Mar notes that an example &quot;Hello, World!&quot; program with &quot;101 eggs&quot; and &quot;111 cups oil&quot; would produce &quot;a lot of food for one person.&quot;

=== FRACTRAN ===
A FRACTRAN program is an ordered list of positive fractions together with an initial positive integer input formula_1. The program is run by multiplying the integer formula_1 by the first fraction formula_3 in the list for which formula_4 is an integer. The integer formula_1 is then replaced by formula_4 and the rule is repeated. If no fraction in the list produces an integer when multiplied by formula_1, the program halts. FRACTRAN was invented by mathematician John Conway.

=== GolfScript ===
Programs in GolfScript, a language created for code golf, consist of lists of items, each of which is pushed onto the stack as it is encountered, with the exception of variables which have code blocks as their value, in which case the code is executed.

=== INTERCAL ===
INTERCAL, short for &quot;Compiler Language With No Pronounceable Acronym&quot;, was created in 1972 as a parody to satirize aspects of the various programming languages at the time.

=== JSFuck ===
JSFuck is an esoteric programming style of JavaScript, where code is written using only six characters: codice_1, codice_2, codice_3, codice_4, codice_5, and codice_6. 
Unlike Brainfuck, which requires its own compiler or interpreter, JSFuck is valid JavaScript code, meaning JSFuck programs can be run in any web browser or engine that interprets JavaScript. It has been used in a number of cross-site scripting (XSS) attacks on websites such as eBay due to its ability to evade cross-site scripting detection filters.

=== LOLCODE ===
LOLCODE is designed to resemble the speech of lolcats. The following is the &quot;Hello World&quot; example:
While the semantics of LOLCODE is not unusual, its syntax has been described as a linguistic phenomenon, representing an unusual example of informal speech and internet slang in programming.

=== Malbolge ===
Malbolge (named after the 8th circle of Hell) was designed to be the most difficult and esoteric programming language. Among other features, code is self-modifying by design and the effect of an instruction depends on its address in memory.

=== Piet ===
Piet is a language designed by David Morgan-Mar, whose programs are bitmaps that look like abstract art. The execution is guided by a &quot;pointer&quot; that moves around the image, from one continuous coloured region to the next. Procedures are carried out when the pointer exits a region.

There are 20 colours for which behaviour is specified: 18 &quot;colourful&quot; colours, which are ordered by a 6-step hue cycle and a 3-step brightness cycle; and black and white, which are not ordered. When exiting a &quot;colourful&quot; colour and entering another one, the performed procedure is determined by the number of steps of change in hue and brightness. Black cannot be entered; when the pointer tries to enter a black region, the rules of choosing the next block are changed instead. If all possible rules are tried, the program terminates. Regions outside the borders of the image are also treated as black. White does not perform operations, but allows the pointer to &quot;pass through&quot;. The behaviour of colours other than the 20 specified is left to the compiler or interpreter.

Variables are stored in memory as signed integers in a single stack. Most specified procedures deal with operations on that stack, while others deal with input/output and with the rules by which the compilation pointer moves.

Piet was named after the Dutch painter Piet Mondrian. The original intended name, &quot;Mondrian&quot;, was already taken by an open-source statistical data-visualization system.

=== Shakespeare ===
Shakespeare Programming Language (SPL) is designed to make programs look like Shakespearean plays. For example, the following statement declares a point in the program which can be reached via a GOTO-type statement:

 Act I: Hamlet&#x27;s insults and flattery.

=== Unlambda ===
Unlambda is a minimalist functional programming language based on SKI calculus, but combined with first-class continuations and imperative I/O (with input usually requiring the use of continuations).

=== Whitespace ===
Whitespace uses only whitespace characters (space, tab, and return), ignoring all other characters, which can therefore be used for comments. This is the reverse of many traditional languages, which do not distinguish between different whitespace characters, treating tab and space the same. It also allows Whitespace programs to be hidden in the source code of programs in languages like C.

== Cultural context ==
The cultural context of esolangs has been studied by Geoff Cox, who writes that esolangs &quot;shift attention from command and control toward cultural expression and refusal&quot;, seeing esolangs as similar to code art and code poetry, such as Mez Breeze&#x27;s mezangelle, a belief shared by others in field. Daniel Temkin describes Brainfuck as &quot;refusing to ease the boundary between human expression and assembly code and thereby taking us on a ludicrous journey of logic,&quot; exposing the inherent conflict between human thinking and computer logic by deconstructing their relationship. He connects programming within an esolang to performing an event score such as those of the Fluxus movement, where playing out the irregular rules of the logic in code makes the point of view of the language clear.

==References==
== Bibliography ==
* 

==External links==

* Esolang, the esoteric programming languages wiki</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q610140" start="3" end="32" title="Esoteric programming language" label="esoteric programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q610140" start="57" end="64" title="Esoteric programming language" label="esolang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="71" end="91" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201019" start="170" end="186" title="proof of concept" label="proof of concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864686" start="191" end="203" title="software art" label="software art"/>
<link wikidata="Q193076" start="262" end="284" title="functional programming" label="functional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418502" start="288" end="310" title="procedural programming" label="procedural programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q131138" start="331" end="335" title="joke" label="joke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6584132" start="580" end="592" title="Spatial–temporal reasoning" label="visuospatial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152399" start="593" end="599" title="syntax (programming languages)" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083944" start="690" end="697" title="Hacker culture" label="hackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q197970" start="952" end="967" title="Turing completeness" label="Turing-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q818930" start="995" end="1014" title="Computability theory" label="computational class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054365" start="1126" end="1134" title="INTERCAL" label="INTERCAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614997" start="1156" end="1165" title="Don Woods (programmer)" label="Don Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="1297" end="1305" title="parody" label="parodied"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="1371" end="1378" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q131140" start="1380" end="1385" title="COBOL" label="COBOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="1390" end="1407" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="1540" end="1541" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="1548" end="1552" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q52845127" start="1697" end="1732" title="stack-oriented programming language" label="stack-oriented programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q244627" start="1941" end="1950" title="Brainfuck" label="Brainfuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q814269" start="2036" end="2043" title="Befunge" label="Befunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4467269" start="2216" end="2229" title="Turing tarpit" label="Turing tarpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072087" start="2304" end="2307" title="P′′" label="P′′"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="2318" end="2332" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q244627" start="2598" end="2607" title="brainfuck" label="brainfuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="2738" end="2758" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q275596" start="2811" end="2843" title="Imperative programming" label="imperative programming languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q244627" start="2991" end="3000" title="Brainfuck" label="Brainfuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q517956" start="3005" end="3013" title="Malbolge" label="Malbolge"/>
<link wikidata="Q118155" start="3059" end="3066" title="Pointer (computer programming)" label="pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q814269" start="3148" end="3155" title="Befunge" label="Befunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140574" start="3160" end="3171" title="Shakespeare Programming Language" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q177929" start="3193" end="3199" title="Stack (abstract data type)" label="stacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q379695" start="3255" end="3278" title="Reverse Polish notation" label="Reverse Polish notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056486" start="3524" end="3531" title="Ternary numeral system" label="ternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q814269" start="3691" end="3698" title="Befunge" label="Befunge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3703" end="3707" title="#Piet" label="Piet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140574" start="4122" end="4133" title="Shakespeare Programming Language" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q610140" start="4201" end="4205" title="Chef programming language" label="Chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150647" start="4577" end="4587" title="Obfuscation (software)" label="obfuscated"/>
<link wikidata="Q517956" start="4725" end="4733" title="Malbolge" label="Malbolge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165944" start="4818" end="4837" title="self-modifying code" label="self-modifying code"/>
<link wikidata="Q244627" start="4982" end="4991" title="Brainfuck" label="Brainfuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054365" start="5171" end="5179" title="INTERCAL" label="INTERCAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q296187" start="5616" end="5619" title="APL (programming language)" label="APL"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="5621" end="5628" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q131140" start="5634" end="5639" title="COBOL" label="COBOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140574" start="5810" end="5821" title="Shakespeare Programming Language" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q244627" start="5933" end="5942" title="Brainfuck" label="Brainfuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q814269" start="6083" end="6090" title="Befunge" label="Befunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q131303" start="6215" end="6238" title="&amp;quot;Hello, World!&amp;quot; program" label="&amp;quot;Hello World&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913882" start="6551" end="6573" title="Binary lambda calculus" label="Binary lambda calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757543" start="6594" end="6624" title="algorithmic information theory" label="algorithmic information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q244627" start="6829" end="6838" title="Brainfuck" label="Brainfuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q52845127" start="7680" end="7715" title="stack-oriented programming language" label="stack-oriented programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q19869285" start="7727" end="7743" title="David Morgan-Mar" label="David Morgan-Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q219239" start="7781" end="7796" title="Recipe" label="cooking recipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131303" start="8097" end="8130" title="&amp;quot;Hello, World!&amp;quot; program" label="&amp;quot;Hello, World!&amp;quot; program"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063395" start="8262" end="8270" title="FRACTRAN" label="FRACTRAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q268961" start="8727" end="8738" title="John Horton Conway" label="John Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q956247" start="8807" end="8816" title="code golf" label="code golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q177929" start="8878" end="8883" title="Stack (abstract data type)" label="stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054365" start="9031" end="9039" title="INTERCAL" label="INTERCAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304718" start="9230" end="9236" title="JSFuck" label="JSFuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="9273" end="9283" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="9540" end="9551" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q371199" start="9622" end="9642" title="cross-site scripting" label="cross-site scripting"/>
<link wikidata="Q58024" start="9677" end="9681" title="eBay" label="eBay"/>
<link wikidata="Q513238" start="9767" end="9774" title="LOLCODE" label="LOLCODE"/>
<link wikidata="Q56" start="9813" end="9819" title="lolcat" label="lolcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437428" start="9886" end="9895" title="Semantics (computer science)" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="9958" end="9968" title="linguistic" label="linguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q901711" start="10016" end="10031" title="informal speech" label="informal speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q43747" start="10036" end="10050" title="internet slang" label="internet slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q517956" start="10085" end="10093" title="Malbolge" label="Malbolge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410979" start="10111" end="10129" title="Malebolge" label="8th circle of Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19869285" start="10371" end="10387" title="David Morgan-Mar" label="David Morgan-Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194708" start="10408" end="10414" title="bitmap" label="bitmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q128115" start="10431" end="10443" title="abstract art" label="abstract art"/>
<link wikidata="Q177929" start="11500" end="11505" title="Stack (abstract data type)" label="stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q151803" start="11704" end="11717" title="Piet Mondrian" label="Piet Mondrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898824" start="11790" end="11842" title="Mondrian (software)" label="an open-source statistical data-visualization system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140574" start="11865" end="11897" title="Shakespeare Programming Language" label="Shakespeare Programming Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="11943" end="11956" title="Shakespearean" label="Shakespearean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12083" end="12125" title="Hamlet#Act I" label="Act I: Hamlet&amp;#x27;s insults and flattery."/>
<link wikidata="Q670180" start="12144" end="12152" title="Unlambda" label="Unlambda"/>
<link wikidata="Q857813" start="12210" end="12222" title="SKI calculus" label="SKI calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128903" start="12254" end="12266" title="continuation" label="continuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q378222" start="12364" end="12374" title="Whitespace (programming language)" label="Whitespace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826590" start="13026" end="13036" title="Mez Breeze" label="Mez Breeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826613" start="13044" end="13054" title="mezangelle" label="mezangelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q108908" start="13472" end="13478" title="Fluxus" label="Fluxus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53399" wikidata="Q362417" url="?curid=53399" title="Montage">
<text>Montage may refer to:
==Arts and entertainment==
=== Filmmaking and films ===
* Montage (filmmaking), a technique in film editing
* &quot;Montage&quot; (2013 film), a South Korean film

=== Music ===
* Montage (music), or sound collage
* &quot;Montage&quot; (EP), a 2017 EP by Block B
* &quot;Montage&quot; (Charlene Choi album), 2012
* &quot;Montage&quot; (Kenny G album), 1990
* &quot;Montage&quot; (Savoy Records album), 1955
* &quot;Montage&quot; (Yen Town Band album), 1996
* &quot;Montage&quot; (Yulia album), 2006
* &quot;Montage&quot;, an album by Kahimi Karie, 2004
* Montage Music Group, a former American independent record label

===Other arts and entertainment===
* Photomontage, the process and result of making a composite photograph
* &quot;Montage&quot; (TV series), a filmed history of the 1960s and 1970s

==Businesses==
* Montage Hotels &amp; Resorts, a luxury hotel and resort management company
* Le Bistro Montage, or simply Montage, a restaurant in Portland, Oregon, U.S.

== Software ==
* Montage (image software), used in astrophotography to assemble astronomical images 
* Montage (screenwriting software)

==Other uses==
* Manta Montage, a car
* Montage tower, CityPlace, Toronto, Canada
* The Montage Reno, Nevada, U.S., a high-rise residential building in Reno, Nevada
* Montage Mountain, Pennsylvania, U.S. - see Montage Mountain Ski Resort
* &quot;Le Montage&quot;, a novel by Vladimir Volkoff

== See also ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q362417" start="0" end="7" title="Montage" label="Montage"/>
<link wikidata="Q239298" start="80" end="100" title="Montage (filmmaking)" label="Montage (filmmaking)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218545" start="132" end="163" title="Montage (2013 film)" label="&amp;quot;Montage&amp;quot; (2013 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744304" start="202" end="217" title="Montage (music)" label="Montage (music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48966423" start="238" end="262" title="Montage (EP)" label="&amp;quot;Montage&amp;quot; (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128159" start="287" end="328" title="Montage (Charlene Choi album)" label="&amp;quot;Montage&amp;quot; (Charlene Choi album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11785314" start="337" end="372" title="Montage (Kenny G album)" label="&amp;quot;Montage&amp;quot; (Kenny G album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785465" start="381" end="422" title="Montage (Savoy Records album)" label="&amp;quot;Montage&amp;quot; (Savoy Records album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971496" start="431" end="472" title="Montage (Yen Town Band album)" label="&amp;quot;Montage&amp;quot; (Yen Town Band album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904008" start="481" end="514" title="Montage (Yulia album)" label="&amp;quot;Montage&amp;quot; (Yulia album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567233" start="556" end="568" title="Kahimi Karie" label="Kahimi Karie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904018" start="577" end="596" title="Montage Music Group" label="Montage Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q828107" start="679" end="691" title="Photomontage" label="Photomontage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903153" start="751" end="782" title="Montage (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Montage&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228158" start="842" end="870" title="Montage Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts" label="Montage Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q14709036" start="919" end="936" title="Le Bistro Montage" label="Le Bistro Montage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904016" start="1014" end="1038" title="Montage (image software)" label="Montage (image software)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904011" start="1100" end="1132" title="Montage (screenwriting software)" label="Montage (screenwriting software)"/>
<link wikidata="Q31837299" start="1151" end="1164" title="Manta Montage" label="Manta Montage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122973" start="1189" end="1207" title="CityPlace, Toronto" label="CityPlace, Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752100" start="1218" end="1234" title="The Montage Reno" label="The Montage Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548935" start="1344" end="1371" title="Montage Mountain Ski Resort" label="Montage Mountain Ski Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166142" start="1409" end="1425" title="Vladimir Volkoff" label="Vladimir Volkoff"/>
</links>
</doc>
