<doc id="52271" wikidata="Q128956" url="?curid=52271" title="Harold Wilson">
<text>James Harold Wilson, Baron Wilson of Rievaulx (11 March 1916 – 24 May 1995) was a British statesman and Labour Party politician who twice served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, from 1964 to 1970 and again from 1974 to 1976. He was Leader of the Labour Party from 1963 to 1976, Leader of the Opposition twice from 1963 to 1964 and again from 1970 to 1974, and a Member of Parliament (MP) from 1945 to 1983. Wilson is the only Labour leader to have formed administrations following four general elections.

Born in Huddersfield, Yorkshire, to a politically active lower middle-class family, Wilson studied a combined degree of philosophy, politics and economics at Jesus College, Oxford. He was later an Economic History lecturer at New College, Oxford, and a research fellow at University College, Oxford. Elected to Parliament in 1945, Wilson was appointed to the Attlee government as a Parliamentary secretary; he became Secretary for Overseas Trade in 1947, and was elevated to the Cabinet shortly thereafter as President of the Board of Trade. Following Labour&#x27;s defeat at the 1955 election, Wilson joined the Shadow Cabinet as Shadow Chancellor, and was moved to the role of Shadow Foreign Secretary in 1961. When Labour leader Hugh Gaitskell died suddenly in January 1963, Wilson won the subsequent leadership election to replace him, becoming Leader of the Opposition.

Wilson led Labour to a narrow victory at the 1964 election. His first period as prime minister saw a period of low unemployment and economic prosperity; this was however hindered by significant problems with Britain&#x27;s external balance of payments. His government oversaw significant societal changes, abolishing both capital punishment and theatre censorship, partially decriminalising male homosexuality in England and Wales, relaxing the divorce laws, limiting immigration, outlawing racial discrimination, and liberalising birth control and abortion law. In the midst of this programme, Wilson called a snap election in 1966, which Labour won with a much increased majority. His government armed Nigeria during the Biafran War. In 1969, he sent British troops to Northern Ireland. After losing the 1970 election to Edward Heath&#x27;s Conservatives, Wilson chose to remain in the Labour leadership, and resumed the role of Leader of the Opposition for four years before leading Labour through the February 1974 election, which resulted in a hung parliament. Wilson was appointed prime minister for a second time; he called a snap election in October 1974, which gave Labour a small majority. During his second term as prime minister, Wilson oversaw the referendum that confirmed the UK&#x27;s membership of the European Communities.

In March 1976, Wilson suddenly announced his resignation as prime minister. He remained in the House of Commons until retiring in 1983 when he was elevated to the House of Lords as Lord Wilson of Rievaulx. While seen by admirers as leading the Labour Party through difficult political issues with considerable skill, Wilson&#x27;s reputation was low when he left office and is still disputed in historiography. Some scholars praise his unprecedented electoral success for a Labour prime minister and holistic approach to governance, while others criticise his political style and handling of economic issues. Several key issues which he faced while prime minister included the role of public ownership, whether Britain should seek the membership of the European Communities, and British involvement in the Vietnam War. His stated ambitions of substantially improving Britain&#x27;s long-term economic performance, applying technology more democratically, and reducing inequality were to some extent unfulfilled.
==Early life==
Wilson was born at Warneford Road, Cowlersley, in the western suburbs of the mill town of Huddersfield, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, England, on 11 March 1916. He came from a political family: his father James Herbert Wilson was a works chemist who had been active in the Liberal Party, serving as Winston Churchill&#x27;s deputy election agent in a 1908 by-election, but later joined the Labour Party. His mother Ethel (&quot;née&quot; Seddon) was a schoolteacher before her marriage; in 1901 her brother Harold Seddon settled in Western Australia and became the 8th President of the Western Australian Legislative Council in 1946. When Wilson was eight, he visited London and a much-reproduced photograph was taken of him standing on the doorstep of 10 Downing Street. At the age of ten, he went with his family to Australia, where he became fascinated with the pomp and glamour of politics. On the way home, he told his mother, &quot;I am going to be prime minister.&quot;

===Education===
Wilson won a scholarship to attend Royds Hall Grammar School, his local grammar school (now a comprehensive school) in Huddersfield, Yorkshire. His father, working as an industrial chemist, was made redundant in December 1930, and it took him nearly two years to find work; he moved to Spital, on the Wirral Peninsula, to do so. Wilson continued his education in the Sixth Form at the Wirral Grammar School for Boys, where he became Head Boy.

Wilson did well at school and, although he missed getting a scholarship, he obtained an exhibition; this, when topped up by a county grant, enabled him to study at Jesus College, Oxford, from 1934. At Oxford, Wilson was moderately active in politics as a member of the Liberal Party but was strongly influenced by G. D. H. Cole. His politics tutor, R. B. McCallum, considered Wilson to be the best student he ever had. He graduated in PPE (philosophy, politics and economics) with &quot;an outstanding first class Bachelor of Arts degree, with alphas on every paper&quot; in the final examinations, and a series of major academic awards. Biographer Roy Jenkins wrote:
Academically his results put him among prime ministers in the category of Peel, Gladstone, Asquith, and no one else. But...he lacked originality. What he was superb at was the quick assimilation of knowledge, combined with an ability to keep it ordered in his mind and to present it lucidly in a form welcome to his examiners.

He continued in academia, becoming one of the youngest Oxford dons of the century at the age of 21. He was a lecturer in Economic History at New College from 1937, and a research fellow at University College.

===War service===
On the outbreak of the Second World War, Wilson volunteered for military service, but was classed as a specialist and moved into the civil service instead. For much of this time, he was a research assistant to William Beveridge, the Master of University College, working on the issues of unemployment and the trade cycle. Wilson later became a statistician and economist for the coal industry. He was Director of Economics and Statistics at the Ministry of Fuel and Power in 1943–44 and was made an OBE for his services.

He was to remain passionately interested in statistics, becoming a Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society in 1943. As President of the Board of Trade, he was the driving force behind the Statistics of Trade Act 1947, which is still the authority governing most economic statistics in Britain. He was instrumental as prime minister in appointing Claus Moser as head of the Central Statistical Office, and was president of the Royal Statistical Society between 1972 and 1973.

==Member of Parliament (1945–1947)==
As the war drew to an end, he searched for a seat to contest at the impending general election. He was selected for the constituency of Ormskirk, then held by Stephen King-Hall. Wilson agreed to be adopted as the candidate immediately rather than delay until the election was called, and was therefore compelled to resign from his position in the Civil Service. He served as Praelector in Economics at University College between his resignation and his election to the House of Commons. He also used this time to write &quot;A New Deal for Coal&quot;, which used his wartime experience to argue for the nationalisation of the coal mines on the grounds of the improved efficiency he predicted would ensue.

In the 1945 general election, Wilson won his seat in the Labour landslide. To his surprise, he was immediately appointed to the government by Prime Minister Clement Attlee as Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Works. Two years later, he became Secretary for Overseas Trade, in which capacity he made several official trips to the Soviet Union to negotiate supply contracts.

The boundaries of his Ormskirk constituency were significantly altered before the general election of 1950. He stood instead for the new seat of Huyton near Liverpool, and was narrowly elected; he served there for 33 years until 1983.

==Cabinet minister, 1947–1951==
===Bonfire of controls===
Wilson was appointed President of the Board of Trade on 29 September 1947, becoming, at the age of 31, the youngest member of a British Cabinet in the 20th century. Initially Wilson favoured a more interventionist policy, seeking requirements for government officials to be seated on private boards of directors, further price controls, and nationalisations of private industries which opposed government policy. However, he abandoned these plans after his colleagues disagreed. He made it a priority to reduce wartime rationing, which he referred to as a &quot;bonfire of controls&quot;. Wilson decided that the massive number of wartime controls was slowing the conversion to peacetime prosperity and he was committed to removing them as fast as possible. He ended rationing of potatoes, bread and jam, as well as shoes and some other clothing controls.

In November 1948 Wilson announced his Board of Trade had removed the need for over 200,000 licences and permits. By March 1949 he promised to remove the need for another 900,000, although meat remained in short supply and was still rationed, as was petrol. Henry Irvine argues that Wilson&#x27;s success with the bonfire of controls established his reputation as a modernizing specialist, with both the general public and the political elite. Irving also argues that the selection timing and especially the publicity Wilson devoted to the bonfire represented the emerging skills of a brilliant young politician. While each major bonfire was justified in terms of technical economic advantages, it was selected and publicised widely to reach the largest possible audience so that everybody could understand that their bread and jam became free again.

===Three ambitious young men===
In mid-1949, with Chancellor of the Exchequer Stafford Cripps having gone to Switzerland in an attempt to recover his health, Wilson was one of a group of three young ministers, all of them former economics dons and wartime civil servants, convened to advise Prime Minister Attlee on financial matters. The others were Douglas Jay (Economic Secretary to the Treasury) and Hugh Gaitskell (Minister of Fuel and Power), both of whom soon grew to distrust him. Jay wrote of Wilson&#x27;s role in the debates over whether or not to devalue sterling that &quot;he changed sides three times within eight days and finished up facing both ways&quot;. Wilson was given the task during his Swiss holiday of taking a letter to Cripps informing him of the decision to devalue, to which Cripps had been opposed. Wilson had tarnished his reputation in both political and official circles. Although a successful minister, he was regarded as self-important. He was not seriously considered for the job of Chancellor when Cripps stepped down in October 1950—it was given to Gaitskell—possibly in part because of his cautious role during devaluation.

Wilson was becoming known in the Labour Party as a left-winger, and joined Aneurin Bevan and John Freeman in resigning from the government in April 1951 in protest at the introduction of National Health Service (NHS) medical charges to meet the financial demands imposed by the Korean War. At this time, Wilson was not yet regarded as a heavyweight politician: Hugh Dalton referred to him scornfully as &quot;Nye [Bevan]&#x27;s dog&quot;.

After Labour lost the 1951 election, he became the Chairman of Keep Left, Bevan&#x27;s political group. At the bitter Morecambe Conference in late 1952, Wilson was one of the Bevanites elected as constituency representatives to Labour&#x27;s National Executive Committee (NEC), whilst senior right-wingers such as Dalton and Herbert Morrison were voted off.

== In Opposition (1951–1964) ==
===Shadow Cabinet, 1954–1963===
Wilson had never made much secret that his support of the left-wing Aneurin Bevan was opportunistic. In early 1954, Bevan resigned from the Shadow Cabinet (elected by Labour MPs when the party was in opposition) over Labour&#x27;s support for the setting-up of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO). Wilson, who had been runner-up in the elections, stepped up to fill the vacant place. He was supported in this by Richard Crossman, but his actions angered Bevan and the other Bevanites.

Wilson&#x27;s course in intra-party matters in the 1950s and early 1960s left him neither fully accepted nor trusted by the left or the right in the Labour Party. Despite his earlier association with Bevan, in 1955 he backed Hugh Gaitskell, the right-wing candidate in internal Labour Party terms, against Bevan for the party leadership election. Gaitskell appointed him Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1955, and he proved to be very effective. One of his procedural moves caused a substantial delay to the progress of the Government&#x27;s Finance Bill in 1955, and his speeches as Shadow Chancellor from 1956 were widely praised for their clarity and wit. He coined the term &quot;Gnomes of Zurich&quot; to ridicule Swiss bankers for selling Britain short and pushing the pound sterling down by speculation. He conducted an inquiry into the Labour Party&#x27;s organisation following its defeat in the 1955 general election; its report compared Labour&#x27;s organisation to an antiquated &quot;penny farthing&quot; bicycle, and made various recommendations for improvements. Unusually, Wilson combined the job of Chairman of the House of Commons&#x27; Public Accounts Committee with that of Shadow Chancellor from 1959, holding that position until 1963.

Gaitskell&#x27;s leadership was weakened after the Labour Party&#x27;s 1959 defeat, his controversial attempt to ditch Labour&#x27;s commitment to nationalisation by scrapping Clause Four, and his defeat at the 1960 Party Conference over a motion supporting unilateral nuclear disarmament. Bevan had died in July 1960, so Wilson established himself as a leader of the Labour left by launching an opportunistic but unsuccessful challenge to Gaitskell&#x27;s leadership in November 1960. Wilson would later be moved to the position of Shadow Foreign Secretary in 1961, before he challenged for the deputy leadership in 1962 but was defeated by George Brown.

===Opposition Leader, 1963–64===

Gaitskell died in January 1963, just as the Labour Party had begun to unite and appeared to have a very good chance of winning the next election, with the Macmillan Government running into trouble. Timothy Heppell has explored how Wilson won the Labour Party leadership election. Wilson had alienated the right wing of the party by his angry attempts to defeat Gaitskell in 1960 for the leadership, and George Brown in 1962 for the deputy leadership. These misadventures gave Wilson a reputation for disloyalty and divisiveness. Heppell identifies three factors whereby Wilson overcame these disadvantages. Firstly, he had united the party&#x27;s left wing behind him and they showed no willingness to compromise. Secondly, the right wing, although more numerous, was deeply split between Brown and James Callaghan. Wilson took the lead on the first ballot and gained momentum on the second. Finally, Brown proved a poor campaigner, emphasizing divisive factors rather than his own credentials, allowing Wilson to emerge, surprisingly, as the unity candidate, thus becoming the Leader of the Labour Party and the Leader of the Opposition.

At the party&#x27;s 1963 annual conference, Wilson made his best-remembered speech, on the implications of scientific and technological change. He argued that &quot;the Britain that is going to be forged in the white heat of this revolution will be no place for restrictive practices or for outdated measures on either side of industry&quot;. This speech did much to set Wilson&#x27;s reputation as a technocrat not tied to the prevailing class system.

Labour&#x27;s 1964 election campaign was aided by the Profumo affair, a ministerial sex scandal that had mortally wounded Harold Macmillan and hurt the Conservatives. Wilson made capital without getting involved in the less salubrious aspects. (Asked for a statement on the scandal, he reportedly said &quot;No comment ... in glorious Technicolor!&quot;). Sir Alec Douglas-Home was an aristocrat who had given up his peerage to sit in the House of Commons and become prime minister upon Macmillan&#x27;s resignation. To Wilson&#x27;s comment that he was out of touch with ordinary people since he was the 14th Earl of Home, Home retorted, &quot;I suppose Mr. Wilson is the fourteenth Mr. Wilson&quot;.

==First premiership (1964–1970)==
=== Appointment ===
Labour won the 1964 general election with a narrow majority of four seats, and Wilson became prime minister, at 48 the youngest person to hold that office since Lord Rosebery 70 years earlier. During 1965, by-election losses reduced the government&#x27;s majority to a single seat; but in March 1966 Wilson took the gamble of calling another general election. The gamble paid off, because this time Labour achieved a 96-seat majority over the Conservatives, who the previous year had made Edward Heath their leader.

===Domestic affairs===
The 1964–1970 Labour government carried out a broad range of reforms during its time in office, in such areas as social security, civil liberties, housing, health, education, and worker&#x27;s rights.

It is perhaps best remembered for the liberal social reforms introduced or supported by Home Secretary Roy Jenkins. Notable amongst these was the partial decriminalisation of male homosexuality and abortion, reform of divorce laws, the abolition of theatre censorship and capital punishment (except for a small number of offences — notably high treason) and various pieces of legislation addressing race relations and racial discrimination.

His government also undertook the easing of means testing for non-contributory welfare benefits, the linking of pensions to earnings, and the provision of industrial-injury benefits. Wilson&#x27;s government also made significant reforms to education, most notably the expansion of comprehensive education and the creation of the Open University.

====Economic policies====
Wilson&#x27;s government put faith in economic planning as a way to solve Britain&#x27;s economic problems. The government&#x27;s strategy involved setting up a Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) which would draw up a National Plan which was intended to promote growth and investment. Wilson believed that scientific progress was the key to economic and social advancement, as such he famously referred to the &quot;white heat of technology&quot;, in reference to the modernisation of British industry. This was to be achieved through a new Ministry of Technology (shortened to &quot;Mintech&quot;) which would coordinate research and development and support the swift adoption of new technology by industry, aided by government-funded infrastructure improvements.

In practice, however, events derailed much of the initial optimism. Upon coming to power, the government was informed that they had inherited an exceptionally large deficit of £800 million on Britain&#x27;s balance of trade. This partly reflected the preceding government&#x27;s expansive fiscal policy in the run-up to the 1964 election. Immediately the pound came under enormous pressure, and many economists advocated devaluation of the pound in response, but Wilson resisted, reportedly in part out of concern that Labour, which had previously devalued sterling in 1949, would become tagged as &quot;the party of devaluation&quot;. Wilson also believed that a devaluation would disproportionately harm low-income Britons with savings and poorer Commonwealth of Nations countries in the sterling area. The government instead opted to deal with the problem by imposing a temporary surcharge on imports, and a series of deflationary measures designed to reduce demand and therefore the inflow of imports. In the latter half of 1967, an attempt was made to prevent the recession in activity from going too far in the form of a stimulus to consumer durable spending through an easing of credit, which in turn prevented a rise in unemployment.

After a costly battle, market pressures forced the government to devalue the pound by 14% from $2.80 to $2.40 in November 1967. Wilson was much criticised for a broadcast soon after in which he assured listeners that the &quot;pound in your pocket&quot; had not lost its value. Economic performance did show some improvement after the devaluation, as economists had predicted. The devaluation, with accompanying austerity measures which ensured resources went into exports rather than domestic consumption, successfully restored the trade balance to surplus by 1969. In retrospect Wilson has been widely criticised for not devaluing earlier, however, he believed there were strong arguments against it, including the fear that it would set off a round of competitive devaluations, and concern about the impact price rises following a devaluation would have on people on low incomes.

The government&#x27;s decision over its first three years to defend sterling&#x27;s parity with traditional deflationary measures ran counter to hopes for an expansionist push for growth. The National Plan produced by the DEA in 1965 targeted an annual growth rate of 3.8%, however, under the restrained circumstances the actual average rate of growth between 1964 and 1970 was a far more modest 2.2%. The DEA itself was wound up in 1969. The government&#x27;s other main initiative Mintech did have some success at switching research and development spending from military to civilian purposes, and of achieving increases in industrial productivity, although persuading industry to adopt new technology proved more difficult than had been hoped. Faith in indicative planning as a pathway to growth, embodied in the DEA and Mintech, was at the time by no means confined to the Labour Party. Wilson built on foundations that had been laid by his Conservative predecessors, in the shape, for example, of the National Economic Development Council (known as &quot;Neddy&quot;) and its regional counterparts (the &quot;little Neddies&quot;). Government intervention in industry was greatly enhanced, with the National Economic Development Office greatly strengthened and the number of &quot;little Neddies&quot; was increased, from eight in 1964 to twenty-one in 1970. The government&#x27;s policy of selective economic intervention was later characterised by the establishment of a new super-ministry of technology, a connexion not always publicly grasped, under Tony Benn.

The continued relevance of industrial nationalisation (a centrepiece of the post-War Labour government&#x27;s programme) had been a key point of contention in Labour&#x27;s internal struggles of the 1950s and early 1960s. Wilson&#x27;s predecessor as leader, Hugh Gaitskell, had tried in 1960 to tackle the controversy head-on, with a proposal to expunge Clause Four (the public ownership clause) from the party&#x27;s constitution, but had been forced to climb down. Wilson took a characteristically more subtle approach: No significant expansion of public ownership took place under Wilson&#x27;s government, however, he placated the party&#x27;s left-wing by renationalising the steel industry under the Iron and Steel Act 1967 (which had been denationalised by the Conservatives in the 1950s) creating the British Steel Corporation.

One innovation of the Wilson government was the creation in 1968 of the Girobank, a publicly owned bank which operated via the General Post Office network: As most working-class people in the 1960s did not have bank accounts, this was designed to serve their needs, as such it was billed as the &quot;people&#x27;s bank&quot;. Girobank was a long-term success, surviving until 2003.

Wilson&#x27;s government presided over a rate of unemployment which was low by historic (and later) standards but did rise during his period in office. Between 1964 and 1966 the average rate of unemployment was 1.6%, while between 1966 and 1970 the average stood at 2.5%. He had entered power at a time when unemployment stood at around 400,000. It still stood at 371,000 by early 1966 after a steady fall during 1965, but by March 1967 it stood at 631,000. It fell again towards the end of the decade, standing at 582,000 by the time of the general election in June 1970.

Despite the economic difficulties faced by Wilson&#x27;s government, it was able to achieve important advances in several domestic policy areas. As reflected by Wilson in 1971:

====Social issues====

Several liberalising social reforms were passed through parliament during Wilson&#x27;s first period in government. These dealt with the death penalty, homosexual acts, abortion, censorship and the voting age. There were new restrictions on immigration. Wilson personally, coming culturally from a provincial non-conformist background, showed no particular enthusiasm for much of this agenda.

====Education====

Higher education held special significance for a Labourite of Wilson&#x27;s generation, given its role in both opening up opportunities for ambitious youth from working-class backgrounds and enabling Britain to seize the potential benefits of scientific advances. Under the first Wilson government, for the first time in British history, more money was allocated to education than to defence. Wilson continued the rapid creation of new universities, in line with the recommendations of the Robbins Report, a bipartisan policy already in train when Labour took power.

Wilson promoted the concept of an Open University, to give adults who had missed out on tertiary education a second chance through part-time study and distance learning. His political commitment included assigning implementation responsibility to Baroness Lee, the widow of Aneurin Bevan. By 1981, 45,000 students had received degrees through the Open University. Money was also channelled into local-authority run colleges of education.

Wilson&#x27;s record on secondary education was motivated by growing pressure for the abolition of the selective principle underlying the &quot;eleven-plus&quot;, and replacement with Comprehensive schools which would serve the full range of children (see the article &#x27;grammar schools debate&#x27;). Comprehensive education became Labour Party policy. From 1966 to 1970, the proportion of children in comprehensive schools increased from about 10% to over 30%.

Labour pressed local authorities to convert grammar schools into comprehensives. Conversion continued on a large scale during the subsequent Conservative Heath administration, although the Secretary of State, Margaret Thatcher, ended the compulsion of local governments to convert.

Wilson&#x27;s first government reluctantly decided it could not fulfil its long-held promise to raise the school leaving age to 16, because of the investment required in infrastructure, such as tens of thousands of new classrooms and teachers.

Overall, public expenditure on education rose as a proportion of GNP from 4.8% in 1964 to 5.9% in 1968, and the number of teachers in training increased by more than a third between 1964 and 1967. The percentage of students staying on at school after the age of sixteen increased similarly, and the student population increased by over 10% each year. Pupil-teacher ratios were also steadily reduced. As a result of the first Wilson government&#x27;s educational policies, opportunities for the working-class were improved; overall access to education in 1970 was broader than in 1964. As summarised by Brian Lapping,

In 1966, Wilson was created the first Chancellor of the newly created University of Bradford, a position he held until 1985.

====Housing====

Housing was a major policy area under the first Wilson government. During Wilson&#x27;s time in office from 1964 to 1970, more new houses were built than in the last six years of the previous Conservative government. The proportion of council housing rose from 42% to 50% of the total, while the number of council homes built increased steadily, from 119,000 in 1964 to 133,000 in 1965 and 142,000 in 1966. Allowing for demolitions, 1.3 million new homes were built between 1965 and 1970, To encourage homeownership, the government introduced the Option Mortgage Scheme (1968), which made low-income housebuyers eligible for subsidies (equivalent to tax relief on mortgage interest payments). This scheme had the effect of reducing housing costs for buyers on low incomes and enabling more people to become owner-occupiers. In addition, house owners were exempted from capital gains tax. Together with the Option Mortgage Scheme, this measure stimulated the private housing market. Wilson in a 1967 speech said: &quot;..the grime and muddle and decay of our Victorian heritage is being replaced. The new city centres with their university precincts, their light, clean and well-spaced civic buildings, will not merely brighten the physical environment of our people, they will change the very quality of urban life in Britain.&quot;

Significant emphasis was also placed on town planning, with new conservation areas introduced and a new generation of new towns built, notably Milton Keynes. The New Towns Acts of 1965 and 1968 together gave the government the authority (through its ministries) to designate any area of land as a site for a new town.

====Urban renewal====

Many subsidies were allocated to local authorities faced with acute areas of severe poverty (or other social problems). The Housing Act 1969 provided local authorities with the duty of working out what to do about &#x27;unsatisfactory areas&#x27;. Local authorities could declare &#x27;general improvement areas&#x27; in which they would be able to buy up land and houses and spend environmental improvement grants. On the same basis, taking geographical areas of need, a package was developed by the government which resembled a miniature poverty programme. In July 1967, the government decided to pour money into what the Plowden Committee defined as Educational Priority Areas, poverty-stricken areas where children were environmentally deprived. Some poor inner-city areas were subsequently granted EPA status (despite concerns that Local Education Authorities would be unable to finance Educational Priority Areas). From 1968 to 1970, 150 new schools were built under the educational priority programme.

====Social Services and welfare====

According to Tony Atkinson, social security received much more attention from the first Wilson government than it did during the previous thirteen years of Conservative government. Following its victory in the 1964 general election, Wilson&#x27;s government began to increase social benefits. Prescription charges for medicines were abolished immediately, while pensions were raised to a record 21% of average male industrial wages. In 1966, the system of National Assistance (a social assistance scheme for the poor) was overhauled and renamed Supplementary Benefit. Before the 1966 election, the widow&#x27;s pension was tripled. Due to austerity measures following an economic crisis, prescription charges were re-introduced in 1968 as an alternative to cutting the hospital building programme, although those sections of the population who were most in need (including supplementary benefit claimants, the long-term sick, children, and pensioners) were exempted from charges.

The widow&#x27;s earning rule was also abolished, while a range of new social benefits was introduced. An Act was passed which replaced National Assistance with Supplementary Benefits. The new Act laid down that people who satisfied its conditions were entitled to these noncontributory benefits. The means test was replaced with a statement of income, and benefit rates for pensioners (the great majority of claimants) were increased, granting them a real gain in income. Unlike the National Assistance scheme, which operated on a discretionary basis, the new Supplementary Benefits scheme was a right of every citizen who found himself or herself in severe difficulties. Those persons over the retirement age with no means who were considered to be unable to live on the basic pension (which provided less than what the government deemed as necessary for subsistence) became entitled to a &quot;long-term&quot; allowance of an extra few shillings a week. Some simplification of the procedure for claiming benefits was also introduced. From 1966, an exceptionally severe disablement allowance was added, &quot;for those claimants receiving constant attendance allowance which was paid to those with the higher or intermediate rates of constant attendance allowance and who were exceptionally severely disabled.&quot; Redundancy payments were introduced in 1965 to lessen the impact of unemployment, and earnings-related benefits for maternity, unemployment, sickness, industrial injuries and widowhood were introduced in 1966, followed by the replacement of flat-rate family allowances with an earnings-related scheme in 1968. From July 1966 onwards, the temporary allowance for widows of severely disabled pensioners was extended from 13 to 26 weeks.
Increases were made in pensions and other benefits during Wilson&#x27;s first year in office that were the largest ever real term increases carried out up until that point. Social security benefits were markedly increased during Wilson&#x27;s first two years in office, as characterised by a budget passed in the final quarter of 1964 which raised the standard benefit rates for old age, sickness and invalidity by 18.5%. In 1965, the government increased the national assistance rate to a higher level relative to earnings, and via annual adjustments, broadly maintained the rate at between 19% and 20% of gross industrial earnings until the start of 1970. Through a series of ad hoc annual upratings, as noted by one study, Wilson&#x27;s government &quot;generally maintained the value of benefits in relation to earnings&quot;. 

In the five years from 1964 up until the last increases made by the First Wilson Government, pensions went up by 23% in real terms, supplementary benefits by 26% in real terms, and sickness and unemployment benefits by 153% in real terms (largely as a result of the introduction of earnings-related benefits in 1967).

====Agriculture====
Under the First Wilson Government, subsidies for farmers were increased. Farmers who wished to leave the land or retire became eligible for grants or annuities if their holdings were sold for approved amalgamations, and could receive those benefits whether they wished to remain in their farmhouses or not. A Small Farmers Scheme was also extended, and from 1 December 1965, forty thousand more farmers became eligible for the maximum £1,000 grant. New grants to agriculture also encouraged the voluntary pooling of smallholdings, and in cases where their land was purchased for non-commercial purposes, tenant-farmers could now receive double the previous &quot;disturbance compensation&quot;. A Hill Land Improvement Scheme, introduced by the Agriculture Act 1967, provided 50% grants for a wide range of land improvements, along with a supplementary 10% grant on drainage works benefitting hill land. The Agriculture Act 1967 also provided grants to promote farm amalgamation and to compensate outgoers.

====Health====
The proportion of GNP spent on the National Health Service rose from 4.2% in 1964 to about 5% in 1969. This additional expenditure provided for an energetic revival of a policy of building health centres for general practitioners, extra pay for doctors who served in areas particularly short of them, significant growth in hospital staffing, and a significant increase in a hospital building programme. Far more money was spent each year on the NHS than under the 1951–64 Conservative governments, while much more effort was put into modernising and reorganising the health service. Stronger central and regional organisations were established for bulk purchase of hospital supplies, while some efforts were made to reduce inequalities in standards of care. In addition, the government increased the intake to medical schools.

The 1966 Doctor&#x27;s Charter introduced allowances for rent and ancillary staff, significantly increased the pay scales, and changed the structure of payments to reflect &quot;both qualifications of doctors and the form of their practices, i.e. group practice&quot;. These changes not only led to higher morale, but also resulted in the increased use of ancillary staff and nursing attachments, growth in the number of health centres and group practices, and a boost in the modernisation of practices in terms of equipment, appointment systems, and buildings. The charter introduced a new system of payment for GPs, with refunds for surgery, rents, and rates, to ensure that the costs of improving his surgery did not diminish the doctor&#x27;s income, together with allowances for the greater part of ancillary staff costs. In addition, a Royal Commission on medical education was set up, partly to draw up ideas for training GPs (since these doctors, the largest group of all doctors in the country, had previously not received any special training, &quot;merely being those who, at the end of their pre-doctoral courses, did not go on for further training in any speciality&quot;).

In 1967, local authorities were empowered to provide free family planning advice and means-tested contraceptive devices. In addition, medical training was expanded following the Todd Report on medical education in 1968. In addition, National Health expenditure rose from 4.2% of GNP in 1964 to 5% in 1969 and spending on hospital construction doubled. The Health Services and Public Health Act 1968 empowered local authorities to maintain workshops for the elderly either directly or via the agency of a voluntary body. A Health Advisory Service was later established to investigate and confront the problems of long-term psychiatric and mentally subnormal hospitals in the wave of numerous scandals. The Clean Air Act 1968 extended powers to combat air pollution. More money was also allocated to hospitals treating the mentally ill. In addition, a Sports Council was set up to improve facilities. Direct government expenditure on sports more than doubled from £0.9 million in 1964/65 to £2 million in 1967/68, while 11 regional Sports Councils had been set up by 1968. In Wales, five new health centres had been opened by 1968, whereas none had been opened from 1951 to 1964, while spending on health and welfare services in the region went up from £55.8 million in 1963/64 to £83.9 million in 1967/68.

=== Social policies ===
====Workers====

The Industrial Training Act 1964 set up an Industrial Training Board to encourage training for people in work, and within seven years there were &quot;27 ITBs covering employers with some 15 million workers.&quot; From 1964 to 1968, the number of training places had doubled. The Docks and Harbours Act (1966) and the Dock Labour Scheme (1967) reorganised the system of employment in the docks in order to put an end to casual employment. The changes made to the Dock Labour Scheme in 1967 ensured a complete end to casual labour on the docks, effectively giving workers the security of jobs for life. Trade unions also benefited from the passage of the Trade Disputes Act 1965. This restored the legal immunity of trade union officials, thus ensuring that they could no longer be sued for threatening to strike.

The First Wilson Government also encouraged married women to return to teaching and improved Assistance Board Concessionary conditions for those teaching part-time, &quot;by enabling them to qualify for pension rights and by formulating a uniform scale of payment throughout the country.&quot; Soon after coming into office, midwives and nurses were given an 11% pay increase, and according to one MP, nurses also benefited from the largest pay rise they had received in a generation. In May 1966, Wilson announced 30% pay rises for doctors and dentists—a move which did not prove popular with unions, as the national pay policy at the time was for rises of between 3% and 3.5%.

Much needed improvements were made in junior hospital doctors&#x27; salaries. From 1959 to 1970, while the earnings of manual workers increased by 75%, the salaries of registrars more than doubled while those of house officers more than trebled. Most of these improvements, such as for nurses, came in the pay settlements of 1970. On a limited scale, reports by the National Board for Prices and Incomes encouraged incentive payments schemes to be developed in local government and elsewhere. In February 1969, the government accepted an &quot;above the ceiling&quot; increase for farmworkers, a low-paid group. Some groups of professional workers, such as nurses, teachers, and doctors, gained substantial awards.

====Transport====
The Travel Concessions Act 1964, one of the first Acts passed by the First Wilson Government, provided concessions to all pensioners travelling on buses operated by municipal transport authorities. The Transport Act 1968 established the principle of government grants for transport authorities if uneconomic passenger services were justified on social grounds. A National Freight Corporation was also established to provide integrated rail freight and road services. Public expenditure on roads steadily increased and stricter safety precautions were introduced, such as the breathalyser test for drunken driving, under the 1967 Road Traffic Act. The Transport Act gave a much needed financial boost to British Rail, treating them like they were a company which had become bankrupt but could now, under new management, carry on debt-free. The act also established a national freight corporation and introduced government rail subsidies for passenger transport on the same basis as existing subsidies for roads to enable local authorities to improve public transport in their areas.

The road-building programme was also expanded, with capital expenditure increased to 8% of GDP, &quot;the highest level achieved by any post-war government&quot;. Central government expenditure on roads went up from £125 million in 1963/64 to £225 million in 1967/68, while a number of road safety regulations were introduced, covering seat belts, lorry drivers&#x27; hours, car and lorry standards, and an experimental 70 mile per hour speed limit. In Scotland, spending on trunk roads went up from £6.8 million in 1963/64 to £15.5 million in 1966/67, while in Wales, spending on Welsh roads went up from £21.2 million in 1963/64 to £31.4 million in 1966/67.

====Regional development====
Encouragement of regional development was given increased attention under the First Wilson Government, to narrow economic disparities between the various regions. A policy was introduced in 1965 whereby any new government organisation should be established outside London and in 1967 the government decided to give preference to development areas. A few government departments were also moved out of London, with the Royal Mint moved to South Wales, the Giro and Inland Revenue to Bootle, and the Motor Tax Office to Swansea. A new Special Development Status was also introduced in 1967 to provide even higher levels of assistance. In 1966, five development areas (covering half the population in the UK) were established, while subsidies were provided for employers recruiting new employees in the Development Areas. A Highlands and Islands Development Board was also set up to &quot;re-invigorate&quot; the north of Scotland.

The Industrial Development Act 1966 changed the name of Development Districts (parts of the country with higher levels of unemployment than the national average and which governments sought to encourage greater investment in) to Development Areas and increased the percentage of the workforce covered by development schemes from 15% to 20%, which mainly affected rural areas in Scotland and Wales. Tax allowances were replaced by grants to extend coverage to include firms which were not making a profit, and in 1967 a Regional Employment Premium was introduced. Whereas the existing schemes tended to favour capital-intensive projects, this aimed for the first time at increasing employment in depressed areas. Set at 30s per employee per week and guaranteed for seven years, the Regional Employment Premium subsidised all manufacturing industry (though not services) in Development Areas, amounting to an average subsidy of 7% of labour costs.

Regional unemployment differentials were narrowed, and spending on regional infrastructure was significantly increased. Between 1965–66 and 1969–70, yearly expenditure on new construction (including power stations, roads, schools, hospitals and housing) rose by 41% in the United Kingdom as a whole. Subsidies were also provided for various industries (such as shipbuilding in Clydeside), which helped to prevent many job losses. It is estimated that, between 1964 and 1970, 45,000 government jobs were created outside London, 21,000 of which were located in the Development Areas. The Local Employment Act, passed in March 1970, embodied the government&#x27;s proposals for assistance to 54 &quot;intermediate&quot; employment exchange areas not classified as full &quot;development&quot; areas.

Funds allocated to regional assistance more than doubled, from £40 million in 1964/65 to £82 million in 1969/70, and from 1964 to 1970, the number of factories completed was 50% higher than from 1960 to 1964, which helped to reduce unemployment in development areas. In 1970, the unemployment rate in development areas was 1.67 times the national average, compared to 2.21 times in 1964. Although national rates of unemployment were higher in 1970 than in the early 1960s, unemployment rates in the development areas were lower and had not increased for three years. Altogether, the impact of the first Wilson government&#x27;s regional development policies was such that, according to one historian, the period 1963 to 1970 represented &quot;the most prolonged, most intensive, and most successful attack ever launched on regional problems in Britain.&quot;

====International development====
A new Ministry of Overseas Development was established, with its greatest success at the time being the introduction of interest-free loans for the poorest countries. The Minister of Overseas Development, Barbara Castle, set a standard in interest relief on loans to developing nations which resulted in changes to the loan policies of many donor countries, &quot;a significant shift in the conduct of rich white nations to poor brown ones&quot;. Loans were introduced to developing countries on terms that were more favourable to them than those given by governments of all other developed countries at that time. In addition, Castle was instrumental in setting up an Institute of Development Studies at the University of Sussex to devise ways of tackling global socio-economic inequalities. Overseas aid suffered from the austerity measures introduced by the first Wilson government in its last few years in office, with British aid as a percentage of GNP falling from 0.53% in 1964 to 0.39% in 1969.

====Taxation====
Wilson&#x27;s government made a variety of changes to the tax system. Largely under the influence of the Hungarian-born economists Nicholas Kaldor and Thomas Balogh, an idiosyncratic Selective Employment Tax (SET) was introduced that was designed to tax employment in the service sectors while subsidising employment in manufacturing. (The rationale proposed by its economist authors derived largely from claims about potential economies of scale and technological progress, but Wilson in his memoirs stressed the tax&#x27;s revenue-raising potential.) The SET did not long survive the return of a Conservative government. Of longer-term significance, capital gains tax (CGT) was introduced across the UK on 6 April 1965. Across his two periods in office, Wilson presided over significant increases in the overall tax burden in the UK. In 1974, three weeks after forming a new government, Wilson&#x27;s new chancellor Denis Healey partially reversed the 1971 reduction in the top rate of tax from 90% to 75%, increasing it to 83% in his first budget, which came into law in April 1974. This applied to incomes over £20,000 (equivalent to £ in ), and combined with a 15% surcharge on &#x27;unearned&#x27; income (investments and dividends) could add up to a 98% marginal rate of personal income tax. In 1974, as many as 750,000 people were liable to pay the top rate of income tax.

Various changes were also made to the tax system which benefited workers on low and middle incomes. Married couples with low incomes benefited from the increases in the single personal allowance and marriage allowance. In 1965, the regressive allowance for national insurance contributions was abolished and the single personal allowance, marriage allowance and wife&#x27;s earned income relief were increased. These allowances were further increased in the tax years 1969–70 and 1970–71. Increases in the age exemption and dependant relative&#x27;s income limits benefited the low-income elderly. In 1967, new tax concessions were introduced for widows.

Increases were made in some of the minor allowances in the 1969 Finance Act, notably the additional personal allowance, the age exemption and age relief and the dependent relative limit. Apart from the age relief, further adjustments in these concessions were implemented in 1970.

1968 saw the introduction of aggregation of the investment income of unmarried minors with the income of their parents. According to Michael Meacher, this change put an end to a previous inequity whereby two families, in otherwise identical circumstances, paid differing amounts of tax &quot;simply because in one case the child possessed property transferred to it by a grandparent, while in the other case the grandparent&#x27;s identical property was inherited by the parent.&quot;

In the 1969 budget, income tax was abolished for about 1 million of the lowest-paid and reduced for a further 600,000 people, while in the government&#x27;s last budget (introduced in 1970), two million small taxpayers were exempted from paying any income tax altogether.

====Liberal reforms====

A wide range of liberal measures were introduced during Wilson&#x27;s time in office. The Matrimonial Proceedings and Property Act 1970 made provision for the welfare of children whose parents were about to divorce or be judicially separated, with courts (for instance) granted wide powers to order financial provision for children in the form of maintenance payments made by either parent. This legislation allowed courts to order provision for either spouse and recognised the contribution to the joint home made during marriage. That same year, spouses were given an equal share of household assets following divorce via the Matrimonial Property Act. The Race Relations Act 1968 was also extended in 1968 and in 1970 the Equal Pay Act 1970 was passed. Another important reform, the Welsh Language Act 1967, granted &#x27;equal validity&#x27; to the declining Welsh language and encouraged its revival. Government expenditure was also increased on both sport and the arts. The Mines and Quarries (Tips) Act 1969, passed in response to the Aberfan disaster, made provision for preventing disused tips from endangering members of the public. In 1967, corporal punishment in borstals and prisons was abolished. seven regional associations were established to develop the arts, and government expenditure on cultural activities rose from £7.7 million in 1964/64 to £15.3 million in 1968/69. A Criminal Injuries Compensation Board was also set up, which had paid out over £2 million to victims of criminal violence by 1968.
The Commons Registration Act 1965 provided for the registration of all common land and village greens, whilst under the Countryside Act 1968, local authorities could provide facilities &quot;for enjoyment of such lands to which the public has access&quot;. The Family Provision Act 1966 amended a series of pre-existing estate laws mainly related to persons who died intestate. The legislation increased the amount that could be paid to surviving spouses if a will had not been left, and also expanded upon the jurisdiction of county courts, which were given the jurisdiction of high courts under certain circumstances when handling matters of estate. The rights of adopted children were also improved with certain wording changed in the Inheritance (Family Provision) Act 1938 to bestow upon them the same rights as natural-born children. In 1968, the Nurseries and Child-Minders Regulation Act 1948 was updated to include more categories of childminders. A year later, the Family Law Reform Act 1969 was passed, which allowed people born outside marriage to inherit on the intestacy of either parent. In 1967, homosexuality was partially decriminalised (in England &amp; Wales only) by the passage of the Sexual Offences Act. The Public Records Act 1967 also introduced a thirty-year rule for access to public records, replacing a previous fifty-year rule.

====Industrial relations====
Wilson made periodic attempts to mitigate inflation, largely through wage-price controls—better known in Britain as &quot;prices and incomes policy&quot;. (As with indicative planning, such controls—though now generally out of favour—were widely adopted at that time by governments of different ideological complexions, including the Nixon administration in the United States.) Partly as a result of this reliance, the government tended to find itself repeatedly injected into major industrial disputes, with late-night &quot;beer and sandwiches at Number Ten&quot; an almost routine culmination to such episodes. Among the most damaging of the numerous strikes during Wilson&#x27;s periods in office was a six-week stoppage by the National Union of Seamen, beginning shortly after Wilson&#x27;s re-election in 1966, and conducted, he claimed, by &quot;politically motivated men&quot;.

With public frustration over strikes mounting, Wilson&#x27;s government in 1969 proposed a series of changes to the legal basis for industrial relations (labour law), which were outlined in a White Paper &quot;In Place of Strife&quot; put forward by the Employment Secretary Barbara Castle. Following a confrontation with the Trades Union Congress, which strongly opposed the proposals, and internal dissent from Home Secretary James Callaghan, the government substantially backed-down from its intentions. The Heath government (1970–1974) introduced the Industrial Relations Act 1971 with many of the same ideas, but this was largely repealed by the post-1974 Labour government. Some elements of these changes were subsequently to be enacted (in modified form) during the premiership of Margaret Thatcher.

====Record on income distribution====
Despite the economic difficulties faced by the first Wilson government, it succeeded in maintaining low levels of unemployment and inflation during its time in office. Unemployment was kept below 2.7%, and inflation for much of the 1960s remained below 4%. Living standards generally improved, while public spending on housing, social security, transport, research, education and health went up by an average of more than 6% between 1964 and 1970. The average household grew steadily richer, with the number of cars in the United Kingdom rising from one to every 6.4 persons to one for every five persons in 1968, representing a net increase of three million cars on the road. The rise in the standard of living was also characterised by increased ownership of various consumer durables from 1964 to 1969, as demonstrated by television sets (from 88% to 90%), refrigerators (from 39% to 59%), and washing machines (from 54% to 64%).

By 1970, income in Britain was more equally distributed than in 1964, mainly because of increases in cash benefits, including family allowances.

According to the historian, Dominic Sandbrook:

As noted by Ben Pimlott, the gap between those on lowest incomes and the rest of the population &quot;had been significantly reduced&quot; under Wilson&#x27;s first government. The first Wilson government thus saw the distribution of income became more equal, while big reductions in poverty took place. These achievements were mainly brought about by several increases in social welfare benefits, such as supplementary benefit, pensions and family allowances, the latter of which were doubled between 1964 and 1970 (although most of the increase in family allowances did not come about until 1968). A new system of rate rebates was introduced, which benefited one million households by the end of the 1960s. Increases in national insurance benefits in 1965, 1967, 1968 and 1969 ensured that those dependent on state benefits saw their disposable incomes rise faster than manual wage earners, while income differentials between lower-income and higher-income workers were marginally narrowed. Greater progressivity was introduced in the tax system, with greater emphasis on direct (income-based) as opposed to indirect (typically expenditure-based) taxation as a means of raising revenue, with the amount raised by the former increasing twice as much as that of the latter. Also, despite an increase in unemployment, the poor improved their share of the national income while that of the rich was slightly reduced. Despite various cutbacks after 1966, expenditure on services such as education and health was still much higher as a proportion of national wealth than in 1964. In addition, by raising taxes to pay their reforms, the government paid careful attention to the principle of redistribution, with disposable incomes rising for the lowest paid while falling amongst the wealthiest during its time in office.

Between 1964 and 1968, benefits in kind were significantly progressive, in that over the period those in the lower half of the income scale benefited more than those in the upper half. On average those receiving state benefits benefited more in terms of increases in real disposable income than the average manual worker or salaried employee between 1964 and 1969. From 1964 to 1969, low-wage earners did substantially better than other sections of the population. In 1969, a married couple with two children were 11.5% per cent richer in real terms, while for a couple with three children, the corresponding increase was 14.5%, and for a family with four children, 16.5%. From 1965 to 1968, the income of single pensioner households as a percentage of other one adult households rose from 48.9% to 52.5%. For two pensioner households, the equivalent increase was from 46.8% to 48.2%. In addition, mainly as a result of big increases in cash benefits, unemployed persons and large families gained more in terms of real disposable income than the rest of the population during Wilson&#x27;s time in office.

As noted by Paul Whiteley, pensions, sickness, unemployment, and supplementary benefits went up more in real terms under the First Wilson Government than under the preceding Conservative administration:

&quot;To compare the Conservative period of office with the Labour period, we can use the changes in benefits per year as a rough estimate of comparative performance. For the Conservatives and Labour respectively increases in supplementary benefits per year were 3.5 and 5.2 percentage points, for sickness and unemployment benefits 5.8 and 30.6 percentage points, for pensions 3.8 and 4.6, and for family allowances −1.2 and −2.6. Thus the poor, the retired, the sick and the unemployed did better in real terms under Labour than they did under Conservatives, and families did worse.&quot;

Between 1964 and 1968, cash benefits rose as a percentage of income for all households but more so for poorer than for wealthier households. As noted by the economist Michael Stewart,

&quot;it seems indisputable that the high priority the Labour Government gave to expenditure on education and the health service had a favourable effect on income distribution.&quot;

For a family with two children in the income range £676 to £816 per annum, cash benefits rose from 4% of income in 1964 to 22% in 1968, compared with a change from 1% to 2% for a similar family in the income range £2,122 to £2,566 over the same period. For benefits in kind the changes over the same period for similar families were from 21% to 29% for lower-income families and from 9% to 10% for higher-income families. When taking into account all benefits, taxes and Government expenditures on social services, the first Wilson government succeeded in bringing about a reduction in income inequality. As noted by the historian Kenneth O. Morgan,

&quot;In the long term, therefore, fortified by increases in supplementary and other benefits under the Crossman regime in 1968–70, the welfare state had made some impact, almost by inadvertence, on social inequality and the maldistribution of real income&quot;.

Public expenditure as a percentage of GDP rose significantly under the 1964–1970 Labour government, from 34% in 1964–65 to nearly 38% of GDP by 1969–70, whilst expenditure on social services rose from 16% of national income in 1964 to 23% by 1970. These measures had a major impact on the living standards of low-income Britons, with disposable incomes rising faster for low-income groups than for high-income groups during the 1960s. When measuring disposable income after taxation but including benefits, the total disposable income of those on the highest incomes fell by 33%, whilst the total disposable income of those on the lowest incomes rose by 104%. As noted by one historian, &quot;the net effect of Labour&#x27;s financial policies was indeed to make the rich poorer and the poor richer&quot;.

===Foreign affairs===
====United States====
Wilson believed in a strong &quot;Special Relationship&quot; with the United States and wanted to highlight his dealings with the White House to strengthen his prestige as a statesman. President Lyndon B. Johnson disliked Wilson and ignored any &quot;special&quot; relationship. The Vietnam War was a sore point. Johnson needed and asked for help to maintain American prestige. Wilson offered lukewarm verbal support and no military aid. Wilson&#x27;s policy angered the left-wing of his Labour Party, who opposed the Vietnam War. Wilson and Johnson also differed sharply on British economic weakness and its declining status as a world power. Historian Jonathan Colman concludes it made for the most unsatisfactory &quot;special&quot; relationship in the 20th century. The only point of total agreement was that both Johnson and Wilson emphatically supported Israel in the 1967 Six-Day War.

====Europe====
Among the more challenging political dilemmas Wilson faced was the issue of British membership of the European Community, the forerunner of the present European Union. An entry attempt was vetoed in 1963 by French President Charles de Gaulle. The Labour Party in Opposition had been divided on the issue, with Hugh Gaitskell having come out in 1962 in opposition to Britain joining the European Community. After initial hesitation, Wilson&#x27;s Government in May 1967 lodged the UK&#x27;s second application to join the European Community. It was vetoed by de Gaulle in November 1967. After De Gaulle lost power, Conservative prime minister Edward Heath negotiated Britain&#x27;s admission to the EC in 1973.

Wilson in opposition showed political ingenuity in devising a position that both sides of the party could agree on, opposing the terms negotiated by Heath but not membership in principle. Labour&#x27;s 1974 manifesto included a pledge to renegotiate terms for Britain&#x27;s membership and then hold a referendum on whether to stay in the EC on the new terms. This was a constitutional procedure without precedent in British history.

Following Wilson&#x27;s return to power, the renegotiations with Britain&#x27;s fellow EC members were carried out by Wilson himself in tandem with Foreign Secretary James Callaghan, and they toured the capital cities of Europe meeting their European counterparts. The discussions focused primarily on Britain&#x27;s net budgetary contribution to the EC. As a small agricultural producer heavily dependent on imports, Britain suffered doubly from the dominance of:
:(i) agricultural spending in the EC budget,
:(ii) agricultural import taxes as a source of EC revenues.

During the renegotiations, other EEC members conceded, as a partial offset, the establishment of a significant European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), from which it was agreed that Britain would be a major net beneficiary.

In the subsequent referendum campaign, rather than the normal British tradition of &quot;collective responsibility&quot;, under which the government takes a policy position which all cabinet members are required to support publicly, members of the Government were free to present their views on either side of the question. The electorate voted on 5 June 1975 to continue membership, by a substantial majority.

====Asia====
American military involvement in Vietnam escalated continuously from 1964 to 1968 and President Lyndon B. Johnson brought pressure to bear for at least a token involvement of British military units. Wilson consistently avoided any commitment of British forces, giving as reasons British military commitments to the Malayan Emergency and British co-chairmanship of the 1954 Geneva Conference.

His government offered some rhetorical support for the US position (most prominently in the defence offered by the Foreign Secretary Michael Stewart in a much-publicised &quot;teach-in&quot; or debate on Vietnam). On at least one occasion the British government made an unsuccessful effort to mediate in the conflict, with Wilson discussing peace proposals with Alexei Kosygin, the Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers. On 28 June 1966 Wilson &#x27;dissociated&#x27; his Government from American bombing of the cities of Hanoi and Haiphong. In his memoirs, Wilson writes of &quot;selling LBJ a bum steer&quot;, a reference to Johnson&#x27;s Texas roots, which conjured up images of cattle and cowboys in British minds.

Part of the price paid by Wilson after talks with President Johnson in June 1967 for US assistance with the UK economy was his agreement to maintain a military presence East of Suez. In July 1967 Defence Secretary Denis Healey announced that Britain would abandon her mainland bases East of Suez by 1977, although airmobile forces would be retained which could if necessary be deployed in the region. Shortly afterwards, in January 1968, Wilson announced that the proposed timetable for this withdrawal was to be accelerated and that British forces were to be withdrawn from Singapore, Malaysia, and the Persian Gulf by the end of 1971.

Wilson was known for his strongly pro-Israel views. He was a particular friend of Israeli Premier Golda Meir, though her tenure largely coincided with Wilson&#x27;s 1970–1974 hiatus. Another associate was West German Chancellor Willy Brandt; all three were members of the Socialist International.

====Africa====
The British &quot;retreat from Empire&quot; had made headway by 1964 and was to continue during Wilson&#x27;s administration. Southern Rhodesia was not granted independence, principally because Wilson refused to grant independence to the white minority government headed by Rhodesian prime minister Ian Smith which was not willing to extend unqualified voting rights to the native African population. Smith&#x27;s defiant response was a Unilateral Declaration of Independence, on 11 November 1965. Wilson&#x27;s immediate recourse was to the United Nations, and in 1965, the Security Council imposed sanctions, which were to last until official independence in 1979. This involved British warships blockading the port of Beira to try to cause economic collapse in Rhodesia. Wilson was applauded by most nations for taking a firm stand on the issue (and none extended diplomatic recognition to the Smith régime). A number of nations did not join in with sanctions, undermining their efficiency. Certain sections of public opinion started to question their efficacy, and to demand the toppling of the régime by force. Wilson declined to intervene in Rhodesia with military force, believing the British population would not support such action against their &quot;kith and kin&quot;. The two leaders met for discussions aboard British warships, in 1966 and in 1968. Smith subsequently attacked Wilson in his memoirs, accusing him of delaying tactics during negotiations and alleging duplicity; Wilson responded in kind, questioning Smith&#x27;s good faith and suggesting that Smith had moved the goal-posts whenever a settlement appeared in sight. The matter was still unresolved at the time of Wilson&#x27;s resignation in 1976. Wilson had a good relationship with Siaka Stevens of Sierra Leone; the two leaders attempted to work together to find a solution to the question of Biafra in Nigeria. But despite this, the British government was actively sending arms, munitions and other equipment to the Nigerian military junta, and consistently denied any wrongdoing by the government of Nigeria: Nigerian writer Chinua Achebe wrote that this may have cost him his position.

=== Electoral defeat and resignation ===
By 1969, the Labour Party was suffering serious electoral reverses, and by the turn of 1970 had lost a total of 16 seats in by-elections since the previous general election.

By 1970, the economy was showing signs of improvement, and by May that year, Labour had overtaken the Conservatives in the opinion polls. Wilson responded to this apparent recovery in his government&#x27;s popularity by calling a general election, but, to the surprise of most observers, was defeated at the polls by the Conservatives under Heath. Most opinion polls had predicted a Labour win, with a poll six days before the election showing a 12.4% Labour lead. Writing in the aftermath of the election, &quot;The Times&quot; journalist George Clark wrote that the 1970 contest would be &quot;remembered as the occasion when the people of the United Kingdom hurled the findings of the opinion polls back into the faces of the pollsters and at the voting booths proved them wrong—most of them badly wrong&quot;. Heath and the Conservatives had attacked Wilson over the economy. Towards the end of the campaign, bad trade figures for May added weight to Heath&#x27;s campaign and he claimed that a Labour victory would result in a further devaluation. Wilson considered Heath&#x27;s claims &quot;irresponsible&quot; and &quot;damaging to the nation&quot;. Ultimately, however, the election saw Labour&#x27;s vote share fall to its lowest since 1935. Several prominent Labour figures lost their seats, notably George Brown who was still Deputy Leader of the Labour Party.

==Return to opposition (1970–1974)==

Following the elections and Labour&#x27;s subsequent defeat, Wilson survived as leader of the Labour Party in opposition. In August 1973, holidaying on the Isles of Scilly, he tried to board a motorboat from a dinghy and stepped into the sea. He was unable to get into the boat and was left in the cold water for more than half an hour, hanging on to the fenders of the motorboat. He was close to death before he was saved by Paul Wolff, the father of novelist Isabel Wolff. When word of the incident became public the following month, Wilson downplayed its severity; it was taken up by the press and resulted in some embarrassment. His press secretary, Joe Haines, tried to deflect some of the comment by blaming Wilson&#x27;s dog Paddy for the problem.

Early in 1974, Wilson became the victim of a personation fraud. A Staffordshire property developer, Ronald Milhench, forged a letter purporting to be from the former Prime Minister. Milhench was involved in negotiations for a property deal; unable to provide finance, he met a journalist, claiming that Wilson was involved with the deal. Milhench further claimed he wanted to deal &quot;a body blow&quot; to Labour&#x27;s election chances and that he could sell the letter for £25000. In November 1974, Milhench was convicted of forgery, theft and firearms charges.

Economic conditions during the 1970s were becoming more difficult for Britain and many other western economies as a result of the Nixon shock and the 1973 oil crisis, and the Heath government in its turn was buffeted by economic adversity and industrial unrest (notably including confrontation with the coalminers which led to the Three-Day Week) towards the end of 1973, and on 7 February 1974 (with the crisis still ongoing) Heath called a snap election for 28 February.

==Second premiership (1974–1976)==

Labour won more seats (though fewer votes) than the Conservative Party in the general election in February 1974, which resulted in a hung parliament. As Heath was unable to persuade the Liberals to form a coalition, Wilson returned to 10 Downing Street on 4 March 1974 as prime minister of a minority Labour Government. He gained a three-seat majority in another election later that year, on 10 October 1974.

===1975 European referendum===
One of the key issues addressed during his second period in office was the referendum on British membership of the European Community (EC) which took place in June 1975: Labour had pledged in its February 1974 manifesto to renegotiate the terms of British accession to the EC, and then to consult the public in a referendum on whether Britain should stay in on the new terms. Although the government recommended a vote in favour of continued membership, the cabinet was split on the issue, and Ministers were allowed to campaign on different sides of the question. The referendum resulted in a near two-to-one majority in favour of Britain remaining in the EC.

===Domestic economic affairs===
The Second Wilson Government made a major commitment to the expansion of the British welfare state, with increased spending on education, health, and housing rents. To pay for it, it imposed controls and raised taxes on the rich. It partially reversed the 1971 reduction in the top rate of tax from 90% to 75%, increasing it to 83% in the first budget from new chancellor Denis Healey, which came into law in April 1974. Also implemented was an investment income surcharge which raised the top rate on investment income to 98%, the highest level since the Second World War.

Despite its achievements in social policy, Wilson&#x27;s government came under scrutiny in 1975 for the rise in the unemployment rate, with the total number of Britons out of work passing one million by that April.

Wilson&#x27;s second government came into office at a troubled time for the British economy, due to a global recession and stagflation, in large part this was due to the 1973 oil crisis, and also the preceding government&#x27;s inflationary attempt to boost growth. In order to deal with inflation (which peaked at 26% in 1975) the government negotiated a &#x27;social contract&#x27; with the Trades Union Congress to implement a voluntary incomes policy, in which pay rises were held down to limits set by the government. This policy operated with reasonable success for the next few years, and inflation fell to single figures by 1978. By 1976 the recession had ended and economic recovery began, by 1978/79 living standards recovered to the level they had been in 1973/74. The Labour governments of the 1970s did, however, manage to protect the living standards of many people from the worst effects of the recession and high inflation, with pensions increasing by 20% in real terms between 1974 and 1979, while measures such as rent and price controls and food and transport subsidies mitigated the adverse impact on the living standards of many more people.

The government&#x27;s industrial policy was greatly influenced by the economist Stuart Holland and the Secretary of State for Industry Tony Benn. The centrepiece of the policy was the National Enterprise Board (NEB) which was established in 1975 and was intended to channel public investment into industry, in return for taking a holding of equity in private companies. The NEB was intended to extend public ownership of the economy as well as investing in the regeneration of industry, although it had some successes in that aim, in practice one of its main activities became that of propping up failing companies such as British Leyland. The government also continued its policy of encouraging regional development by increasing Regional Employment Premiums, which had first been established in 1967.

===Northern Ireland===
Wilson&#x27;s earlier government had witnessed the outbreak of The Troubles in Northern Ireland. In response to a request from the Government of Northern Ireland, Wilson agreed to deploy the British Army in August 1969 to restore the peace.

While out of office in late 1971, Wilson had formulated a 16-point, 15-year programme that was designed to pave the way for the unification of Ireland. The proposal was not adopted by the then Heath government.

In May 1974, when back in office as leader of a minority government, Wilson condemned the Unionist-controlled Ulster Workers Council strike as a &quot;sectarian strike&quot;. He refused to pressure a reluctant British Army to face down the Ulster loyalist paramilitaries who were intimidating utility workers. In a televised speech later, he referred to the loyalist strikers and their supporters as &quot;spongers&quot; who expected Britain to pay for their lifestyles. The strike was eventually successful in breaking the power-sharing Northern Ireland executive.

On 11 September 2008, BBC Radio 4&#x27;s &quot;Document&quot; programme claimed to have unearthed a secret plan—codenamed &quot;Doomsday&quot;—which proposed to cut all of the United Kingdom&#x27;s constitutional ties with Northern Ireland and transform the province into an independent dominion. &quot;Document&quot; went on to claim that the Doomsday plan was devised mainly by Wilson and was kept a closely guarded secret. The plan then allegedly lost momentum, due in part, it was claimed, to warnings made by both the then Foreign Secretary, James Callaghan, and the then Irish Minister for Foreign Affairs Garret FitzGerald who admitted the 12,000-strong Irish Army would be unable to deal with the ensuing civil war. Later, Callaghan himself spoke and wrote despondently about the prospect for a British-derived solution to the Northern Ireland issue, supporting a similar plan to push Northern Ireland towards independent status.

In 1975, Wilson secretly offered Libya&#x27;s dictator Muammar Gaddafi £14 million to stop arming the Provisional Irish Republican Army, but Gaddafi demanded a far greater sum of money. This offer did not become publicly known until 2009.

===Resignation===
When Wilson entered office for the second time, he had privately admitted that he had lost his enthusiasm for the role, telling a close adviser in 1974 that &quot;I have been around this racetrack so often that I cannot generate any more enthusiasm for jumping any more hurdles.&quot; On 16 March 1976, Wilson announced his resignation as prime minister, taking effect on 5 April. He claimed that he had always planned on resigning at the age of 60 and that he was physically and mentally exhausted. As early as the late 1960s he had been telling intimates, like his doctor Sir Joseph Stone (later Lord Stone of Hendon), that he did not intend to serve more than eight or nine years as prime minister.

Roy Jenkins has suggested that Wilson may have been motivated partly by the distaste for politics felt by his loyal and long-suffering wife, Mary. His doctor had detected problems which would later be diagnosed as colon cancer, and Wilson had begun drinking brandy during the day to cope with stress. In addition, by 1976 he might already have been aware of the first stages of early-onset Alzheimer&#x27;s disease, which was to cause both his formerly excellent memory and his powers of concentration to fail dramatically.

Wilson&#x27;s Resignation Honours included many businessmen and celebrities, along with his political supporters. His choice of appointments caused lasting damage to his reputation, worsened by the suggestion that the first draft of the list had been written by his political secretary Marcia Williams on lavender notepaper (it became known as the &quot;Lavender List&quot;). Roy Jenkins noted that Wilson&#x27;s retirement &quot;was disfigured by his, at best, eccentric resignation honours list, which gave peerages or knighthoods to some adventurous business gentlemen, several of whom were close neither to him nor to the Labour Party.&quot; Some of those whom Wilson honoured included Lord Kagan, the inventor of Gannex (Wilson&#x27;s preferred raincoat), who was eventually imprisoned for fraud, and Sir Eric Miller, who later committed suicide while under police investigation for corruption.

The Labour Party held an election to replace Wilson as leader of the Party, and therefore prime minister. Six candidates stood in the first ballot; in order of votes they were: Michael Foot, James Callaghan, Roy Jenkins, Tony Benn, Denis Healey and Anthony Crosland. In the third ballot, on 5 April, Callaghan defeated Foot in a parliamentary vote of 176 to 137, and served as prime minister until May 1979.

As Wilson wished to remain an MP after leaving office, he was not immediately given the peerage customarily offered to retired prime ministers, but instead was created a Knight Companion of the Garter. He fought one last election in 1979 in which he was returned as a backbench MP for Huyton. Following his departure from the House of Commons before the 1983 general election, after 38 years of service, he was granted a life peerage as Baron Wilson of Rievaulx, of &quot;Kirklees in the County of West Yorkshire&quot;, after Rievaulx Abbey, in the north of his native Yorkshire; the Kirklees refers to his home address of Huddersfield, and is not part of his title.

==Post-premiership (1976–1995)==
===Retirement===
He was appointed in 1976 to chair the Committee to Review the Functioning of Financial Institutions (the Wilson Committee) which reported in June 1980.

Shortly after resigning as prime minister, Wilson was signed by David Frost to host a series of interview/chat show programmes. The pilot episode proved to be a flop as Wilson appeared uncomfortable with the informality of the format. Wilson also hosted two editions of the BBC chat show &quot;Friday Night, Saturday Morning&quot;. He famously floundered in the role, and in 2000, Channel 4 chose one of his appearances as one of the &quot;100 Moments of TV Hell&quot;.

A lifelong Gilbert and Sullivan fan, in 1975, Wilson joined the Board of Trustees of the D&#x27;Oyly Carte Trust at the invitation of Sir Hugh Wontner, who was then the Lord Mayor of London. At Christmas 1978, Wilson appeared on the &quot;Morecambe and Wise&quot; Christmas Special. Eric Morecambe&#x27;s habit of appearing not to recognise the guest stars was repaid by Wilson, who referred to him throughout as &#x27;Morry-camby&#x27; (the mispronunciation of Morecambe&#x27;s name made by Ed Sullivan when the pair appeared on his famous American television show). Wilson appeared on the show again in 1980.

Wilson was not especially active in the House of Lords, although he did initiate a debate on unemployment in May 1984. His last speech was in a debate on marine pilotage in 1986, when he commented as an elder brother of Trinity House. In the same year he played himself as prime minister in an Anglia Television drama, &quot;Inside Story&quot;.

Wilson suffered from advancing Alzheimer&#x27;s related dementia in his retirement years, making it difficult for him to earn an income capitalizing on his experience as a former prime minister by writing books and giving speeches. According to his former press secretary, Joe Haines: &quot;He never had much money of his own. Because of his mental condition he couldn&#x27;t write articles or make speeches, and his income would have been his pension as an ex-prime minister,&quot; which Haines said was a &quot;comparatively small sum&quot; as Conservative and Liberal former prime ministers were usually aristocrats who had their own wealth or would benefit from wealthy benefactors and by being appointed to corporate boards, and thus did not need to rely on their parliamentary pensions to support themselves. One of Wilson&#x27;s successors as Labour leader, Neil Kinnock, told &quot;The Guardian&quot;: &quot;I heard stories that he was trying to make speeches for money but was unsuccessful because he had lost his fluency.&quot; Eventually, Wilson attempted to sell his personal papers to McMaster University in Canada for £212,500 in order to fund costs of his health care. This arrangement was considered unsuitable by the government and instead, it was arranged in 1991 that anonymous donors would provide funds so that the Bodleian Library at Oxford could buy Wilson&#x27;s papers in order to keep them in the United Kingdom while also allowing the proceeds to set up a trust fund for Wilson and his wife.

===Death===
Wilson continued regularly attending the House of Lords until just over a year before his death; the last sitting he attended was on 27 April 1994. He had a picture taken with other Labour Lords on 15 June 1994, just under a year before his death. He died from colon cancer and Alzheimer&#x27;s disease on 24 May 1995, aged 79.

Wilson&#x27;s memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey on 13 July 1995. It was attended by Charles, Prince of Wales, former prime ministers Edward Heath, James Callaghan, and Margaret Thatcher, incumbent Prime Minister John Major and Tony Blair, then Leader of the Opposition and later prime minister. Wilson was buried at St Mary&#x27;s Old Church, St Mary&#x27;s, Isles of Scilly, on 6 June. His epitaph is &quot;&quot; (&quot;Time the Commander of Things&quot;).

== Personal life ==
On New Year&#x27;s Day 1940, in the chapel of Mansfield College, Oxford, he married Mary Baldwin, whom he remained married to until his death. Mary Wilson became a published poet, and outlived her husband by 23 years. She died on 6 June 2018 at the age of 102. They had two sons, Robin and Giles (named after Giles Alington); Robin became a professor of mathematics, and Giles became a teacher and later a train driver. In their twenties, his sons were under a kidnap threat from the IRA because of their father&#x27;s prominence.

In April 2024, Joe Haines, who had served as Wilson&#x27;s press secretary during his time as Prime Minister, revealed that Wilson had had an affair with Haines&#x27; deputy Janet Hewlett-Davies during his final two years in office. Hewlett-Davies died aged 85 in October 2023. Speaking on BBC Radio 4&#x27;s &quot;Today&quot; programme, Wilson&#x27;s former adviser Bernard Donoughue said the affair had provided &quot;a little sunshine at sunset&quot; for Wilson, who was becoming &quot;increasingly paranoid about the security services&quot;, was dealing with political difficulties, and was possibly in the early stages of dementia.

== Legacy ==

===Political style===
Wilson regarded himself as a &quot;man of the people&quot; and did much to promote this image, contrasting himself with the stereotypical aristocratic conservatives and other statesmen who had preceded him, as an example of social mobility. He largely retained his Yorkshire accent. Other features of this persona included his working man&#x27;s Gannex raincoat, his pipe (the British Pipesmokers&#x27; Council voted him Pipe Smoker of the Year in 1965 and Pipeman of the Decade in 1976, though in private he preferred cigars), his love of simple cooking and fondness for popular British relish HP Sauce, and his support for his home town&#x27;s football team, Huddersfield Town. His first general election victory relied heavily on associating these down-to-earth attributes with a sense that the UK urgently needed to modernise after &quot;thirteen years of Tory mis-rule&quot;.

Wilson exhibited his populist touch in June 1965 when he had the Beatles honoured with the award of MBE. The award was popular with young people and contributed to a sense that the prime minister was &quot;in touch&quot; with the younger generation. There were some protests by conservatives and elderly members of the military who were earlier recipients of the award, but such protesters were in the minority. Critics claimed that Wilson acted to solicit votes for the next general election (which took place less than a year later), but defenders noted that, since the minimum voting age at that time was 21, this was hardly likely to impact many of the Beatles&#x27; fans who at that time were predominantly teenagers. It cemented Wilson&#x27;s image as a modernistic leader and linked him to the burgeoning pride in the &#x27;New Britain&#x27; typified by the Beatles. The Beatles mentioned Wilson rather negatively, naming both him and his opponent Edward Heath in George Harrison&#x27;s song &quot;Taxman&quot;, the opener to 1966&#x27;s &quot;Revolver&quot;—recorded and released after the MBEs.

In 1967, Wilson had a different interaction with a musical ensemble. He sued the pop group the Move for libel after the band&#x27;s manager Tony Secunda published a promotional postcard for the single &quot;Flowers in the Rain&quot;, featuring a caricature depicting Wilson in bed with his female assistant, Marcia Williams. Gossip had hinted at an improper relationship, though these rumours were never substantiated. Wilson won the case, and all royalties from the song (composed by Move leader Roy Wood) were assigned in perpetuity to a charity of Wilson&#x27;s choosing.

Wilson coined the term &#x27;Selsdon Man&#x27; to refer to the free market policies of the Conservative leader Edward Heath, developed at a policy retreat held at the Selsdon Park Hotel in early 1970. This phrase, intended to evoke the &#x27;primitive throwback&#x27; qualities of anthropological discoveries such as Piltdown Man and Swanscombe Man, was part of a British political tradition of referring to political trends by suffixing &#x27;man&#x27;. Other memorable phrases attributed to Wilson include &quot;the white heat of the [technological] revolution&quot;, and &quot;a week is a long time in politics&quot;, meaning that political fortunes can change extremely rapidly. In his broadcast after the 1967 devaluation of the pound, Wilson said: &quot;This does not mean that the pound here in Britain—in your pocket or purse—is worth any less&quot; and the phrase &quot;the pound in your pocket&quot; subsequently took on a life of its own.

===Reputation===
Despite his successes, Wilson&#x27;s reputation took a long time to start a recovery from the low ebb reached immediately following his second premiership. The reinvention of the Labour Party would take the better part of two decades at the hands of Neil Kinnock, John Smith and, electorally and most conclusively, Tony Blair. Disillusion with Britain&#x27;s weak economic performance and troubled industrial relations, combined with active spadework by figures such as Sir Keith Joseph, had helped to make a radical market programme politically feasible for Margaret Thatcher (which was, in turn, to influence the subsequent Labour leadership, especially under Blair). An opinion poll in September 2011 found that Wilson came in third place when respondents were asked to name the best post-war Labour Party leader. He was beaten only by John Smith and Tony Blair.

According to Glen O&#x27;Hara in 2006:
Much of the disillusionment with Harold Wilson as Labour&#x27;s leader and prime minister was due to his perceived failure on the economic front. He pledged not to devalue sterling, but did exactly that in 1967; he promised to keep unemployment low, but had by 1970 accepted a higher rate of joblessness than the Conservatives had managed. Some of the elements in Labour&#x27;s programme – the emphasis on steadier growth, for instance – were probably misguided. These problems and defeats have, however, obscured some of the real achievements of the period. Science and education spending grew very quickly; industrial investment rose; government was increasingly well informed and better advised about the performance of the economy. In an increasingly unstable and rapidly changing economic environment, this government&#x27;s economic record is here shown to be, if not hugely impressive, then at least relatively creditable.

==Possible plots and conspiracy theories==
In 1963, Soviet defector Anatoliy Golitsyn is said to have secretly claimed that Wilson was a KGB agent. The majority of intelligence officers did not believe that Golitsyn was credible in this and various other claims, but a significant number did (most prominently James Jesus Angleton, Deputy Director of Operations for Counterintelligence at the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency) and factional strife broke out between the two groups. Former MI5 officer Peter Wright claimed in his memoirs, &quot;Spycatcher&quot;, that 30 MI5 agents then collaborated in an attempt to undermine Wilson. He later retracted that claim, saying that there was only one man.

In March 1987, James Miller, a former agent, claimed that the Ulster Workers Council Strike of 1974 had been promoted by MI5 to help destabilise Wilson&#x27;s government. In July 1987, Labour MP Ken Livingstone used his maiden speech to raise the 1975 allegations of a former Army Press officer in Northern Ireland, Colin Wallace, who also alleged a plot to destabilise Wilson. Chris Mullin MP, speaking on 23 November 1988, argued that sources other than Peter Wright supported claims of a long-standing attempt by MI5 to undermine Wilson&#x27;s government.

On the BBC television programme &quot;The Plot Against Harold Wilson&quot;, broadcast on 16 March 2006 on BBC Two, it was claimed there were threats of a &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot; against the Wilson government, which were corroborated by leading figures of the time on both the left and the right. Wilson told two BBC journalists, Barrie Penrose and Roger Courtiour, who recorded the meetings on a cassette tape recorder, that he feared he was being undermined by MI5. The first time was in the late 1960s after the Wilson Government devalued the pound sterling but the threat faded after Conservative leader Edward Heath won the election of 1970. However, following the 1972 British miners&#x27; strike Heath decided to hold an election to renew his mandate to govern in February 1974 but lost narrowly to Wilson. There was again talk of a military coup, with rumours of Lord Mountbatten as head of an interim administration after Wilson had been deposed. In 1974, the British Army occupied Heathrow Airport on the grounds of training for possible IRA terrorist action at the airport. Although the military stated that this was a planned military exercise, 10 Downing Street was not informed in advance, and Wilson himself interpreted it as a show of strength, or warning, being made by the army.

Historian Christopher Andrew&#x27;s official history of MI5, &quot;The Defence of the Realm: The Authorized History of MI5&quot;, included a chapter (section E part 4) specifically alluding to a conspiracy instead of a plot against Wilson in the 1970s:
The Director-General of the Security Service assured Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, and she told the House of Commons on 6 May 1987:
In 2009, &quot;The Defence of the Realm&quot; held that while MI5 kept a file on Wilson from 1945 when he became an MP—because communist civil servants claimed that he had similar political sympathies—there was no bugging of his home or office, and no conspiracy against him. In 2010 newspaper reports made detailed allegations that the Cabinet Office had required that the section on bugging of 10 Downing Street be omitted from the history for &quot;wider public interest reasons&quot;. In 1963, on Macmillan&#x27;s orders following the Profumo affair, MI5 bugged the Cabinet room, the waiting room, and the prime minister&#x27;s study until the devices were removed in 1977 on Callaghan&#x27;s orders. From the records, it is unclear if Wilson or Heath knew of the bugging, and no recorded conversations were retained by MI5 so possibly the bugs were never activated. Professor Andrew had previously recorded in the preface of the history that &quot;One significant excision as a result of these [Cabinet Office] requirements (in the chapter on The Wilson Plot) is, I believe, hard to justify&quot;, giving credence to these new allegations.

As a result of his concerns about the danger to British parliamentary democracy, Wilson issued instructions that no agency should ever bug the telephones of any members of Parliament, a policy (still in place) which came to be known as the Wilson Doctrine.

==Honours==
* Wilson was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1969 under Statute 12 of the Society&#x27;s regulations, which covers people who have rendered conspicuous service to the cause of science or are such that their election would be of signal benefit to the Society.
* In 2013, the Government of Bangladesh posthumously awarded Wilson with the Friends of Liberation War Honour for highlighting the plight of the people of Bangladesh during the Bangladesh Liberation War.

===Statues and other tributes===
A portrait of Harold Wilson, painted by the Scottish portrait artist Cowan Dobson, hangs today at University College, Oxford. Two statues of Harold Wilson stand in prominent places. The first, unveiled by the then prime minister Tony Blair in July 1999, stands outside Huddersfield railway station in St George&#x27;s Square, Huddersfield. Costing £70,000, the statue, designed by sculptor Ian Walters, is based on photographs taken in 1964 and depicts Wilson in walking pose at the start of his first term as prime minister. His widow, Mary requested that the eight-foot-tall monument not show Wilson holding his famous pipe as she feared it would make the representation a caricature.

A block of high-rise flats in Huddersfield is named after Wilson.

In September 2006, Tony Blair unveiled a second bronze statue of Wilson in the latter&#x27;s former constituency of Huyton, near Liverpool. The statue was created by Liverpool sculptor, Tom Murphy, and Blair paid tribute to Wilson&#x27;s legacy at the unveiling, including the Open University. He added: &quot;He also brought in a whole new culture, a whole new country. He made the country very, very different&quot;.

Also in 2006, a street on a new housing development in Tividale, West Midlands, was named Wilson Drive in honour of Wilson. Along with neighbouring new development Callaghan Drive (named after James Callaghan), it formed part of a large housing estate developed since the 1960s where all streets were named after former prime ministers or senior parliamentary figures.

==Arms==
==Scholastic honours==
; Chancellor, visitor, governor, and fellowships
;Honorary degrees
==Cultural depictions==
==References==

==Further reading==

===Bibliography===

* Wilson, Harold. &quot;A Personal Record: The Labour Government, 1964–1970&quot; (1971).
* Wilson, Harold. &quot;The Labour Government 1964–1970: A Personal Record&quot; (1979)

===Biographical===
* Farr, Martin. &quot;Wilson, (James) Harold, 1st Baron Wilson 1916–1995.&quot; in David Loades, ed., &quot;Reader&#x27;s Guide to British History&quot; London: Routledge, 2003. online at Credo Reference; historiography
* ; 830pp; a standard scholarly biography.
* , the authorised biography

===Domestic policy and politics===
* Blick, Andrew. &quot;Harold Wilson, Labour and the machinery of government&quot;. &quot;Contemporary British History&quot; 20#3 (2006): 343–362.
* Butler, David, and Anthony King. &quot;The British General Election of 1964&quot; (1965)
* Butler, David, and M. Pinto-Duschinsky. &quot;The British General Election of 1970&quot; (1971).
* Butler, David, and Dennis Kavanagh. &quot;The British General Election of February 1974&quot; (1974).
* Butler, David, and Dennis Kavanagh. &quot;The British General Election of October 1974&quot; (1975). 
* Childs, David. &quot;Britain since 1945: A Political History&quot; (7th ed. 2012), pp. 117–161, 179–196. excerpt
* Coopey, Richard, and Steven Fielding. &quot;The Wilson Governments, 1964–1970&quot; (1993).
* Davies, Andrew. &quot;To build a new Jerusalem: the British Labour movement from the 1880s to the 1990s&quot; (1992), pp. 209–231.
* Dell, Edmund. &quot;The Chancellors: A History of the Chancellors of the Exchequer, 1945–90&quot; (HarperCollins, 1997) (covers economic policy under the Attlee and Wilson governments)
* Donoughue, Bernard. &quot;Prime Minister: the conduct of policy under Harold Wilson and James Callaghan&quot; (1987), highly favourable report by insider.
* Dorey, Pete. &quot;&#x27;Well, Harold Insists on Having It!&#x27;—The Political Struggle to Establish The Open University, 1965–67.&quot; &quot;Contemporary British History&quot; 29#2 (2015): 241–272.
* Fielding, Steven, ed. &quot;The Labour governments, 1964–70, volume 1: Labour and cultural change&quot; (Manchester UP, 2003).
* Heppell, Timothy. &quot;The Labour Party leadership election of 1963: Explaining the unexpected election of Harold Wilson.&quot; &quot;Contemporary British History&quot; 24.2 (2010): 151–171. online
* Holmes, Martin. &quot;The labour government, 1974–79: political aims and economic reality&quot; (Macmillan, 1985).
* King, Anthony. &quot;The British General Election of 1966&quot; (1966).
* Lapping, Brian. &quot;The Labour Government, 1964–70&quot; (Penguin books, 1970).
* Morgan, Kenneth O. &quot;The People&#x27;s Peace: British History 1945–1989&quot; (1990), pp. 239–313.
* O&#x27;Hara, Glen. &quot;From dreams to disillusionment: economic and social planning in 1960s Britain&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan, 2007) online PhD version
* Ponting, Clive. &quot;Breach of promise: Labour in power, 1964–1970&quot; (Penguin, 1989).
* Pugh, Martin. &quot;Speak for Britain!: A New History of the Labour Party&quot; (2010), pp. 319–352.
* Rogers, Chris. &quot;From Social Contract to &#x27;Social Contrick&#x27;: The Depoliticisation of Economic Policy‐Making under Harold Wilson, 1974–751.&quot; &quot;British Journal of Politics &amp; International Relations&quot; 11#4 (2009): 634–651. online
* Sked, Alan and Chris Cook. &quot;Post-War Britain: A Political History&quot; (4th ed. 1993), pp. 200–253, 292–311.

===Foreign policy===
* Colman, Jonathan. &quot;A &#x27;Special Relationship&#x27;? Harold Wilson, Lyndon B. Johnson, and Anglo-American Relations &#x27;At the Summit&#x27;, 1964–68&quot; (2004) online 
* Daddow, Oliver J. &quot;Harold Wilson and European integration: Britain&#x27;s second application to join the EEC&quot; (Psychology Press, 2003).
* Dockrill, Saki. &quot;Forging the Anglo‐American global defence partnership: Harold Wilson, Lyndon Johnson and the Washington summit, December 1964.&quot; &quot;Journal of Strategic Studies&quot; 23#4 (2000): 107–129.
* Ellis, Sylvia A. &quot;Lyndon Johnson, Harold Wilson and the Vietnam War: A Not So Special Relationship?.&quot; in Jonathan Hollowell, ed., &quot;Twentieth-Century Anglo-American Relations&quot;. (Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2001), pp. 180–204.
* Haeussler, Mathias. &quot;A Pyrrhic Victory: Harold Wilson, Helmut Schmidt, and the British Renegotiation of EC Membership, 1974–5.&quot; &quot;International History Review&quot; 37#4 (2015): 768–789.
* Hughes, Geraint. &quot;Harold Wilson&#x27;s Cold War: The Labour Government and East-West Politics, 1964–1970&quot; (2009)
* Parr, Helen. &quot;A question of leadership: July 1966 and Harold Wilson&#x27;s European decision.&quot; &quot;Contemporary British History&quot; 19.4 (2005): 437–458.
* Parr, Helen. &quot;Britain&#x27;s Policy Towards the European Community: Harold Wilson and Britain&#x27;s World Role, 1964–1967&quot; (Routledge, 2005).
* Vickers, Rhiannon. &quot;Harold Wilson, the British Labour Party, and the War in Vietnam.&quot; &quot;Journal of Cold War Studies&quot; 10.2 (2008): 41–70. online
* Young, John W. ed. &quot;The Labour governments 1964–1970 volume 2: International policy&quot; (2008).

===Historiography===
* Crines, Andrew S., ed. &quot;Harold Wilson: The Unprincipled Prime Minister?: A Reappraisal of Harold Wilson&quot; (2016). evaluations by scholars and politicians; excerpt
* O&#x27;Hara, Glen; Parr, Helen. &quot;The Fall and Rise of a Reputation&quot; &quot;Contemporary British History&quot; (2006) 20#3, pp. 295–302
* Perkins, Anne. &quot;Labour needs to rethink Harold Wilson&#x27;s legacy. It still matters&quot; &quot;The Guardian&quot;, 10 March 2016 
* Pimlott, Ben. &quot;Frustrate Their Knavish Tricks: Writings on Biography, History and Politics&quot; (1994) pp. 31–36.

==External links==
*Harold Wilson &amp; Censorship – UK Parliament Living Heritage
*Lord Wilson of Rievaulx obituary in &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;
*Harold Wilson on the Downing Street website 
*



|-


|-


|-


|-










|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="0" end="45" title="Harold Wilson" label="James Harold Wilson, Baron Wilson of Rievaulx"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="104" end="116" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="148" end="184" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615378" start="240" end="266" title="Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="Leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741536" start="286" end="310" title="Leader of the Opposition (United Kingdom)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="370" end="390" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="401" end="405" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q918466" start="409" end="413" title="1983 United Kingdom general election" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q201812" start="522" end="534" title="Huddersfield" label="Huddersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777850" start="634" end="668" title="philosophy, politics and economics" label="philosophy, politics and economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81174" start="672" end="693" title="Jesus College, Oxford" label="Jesus College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q47398" start="711" end="727" title="Economic History" label="Economic History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376987" start="740" end="759" title="New College, Oxford" label="New College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q81087" start="786" end="812" title="University College, Oxford" label="University College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7724649" start="873" end="890" title="Attlee government" label="Attlee government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477319" start="896" end="919" title="Parliamentary secretary" label="Parliamentary secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444270" start="931" end="959" title="Secretary for Overseas Trade" label="Secretary for Overseas Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037814" start="1023" end="1054" title="President of the Board of Trade" label="President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q918412" start="1094" end="1107" title="1955 United Kingdom general election" label="1955 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579210" start="1127" end="1141" title="Official Opposition Shadow Cabinet (United Kingdom)" label="Shadow Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11013932" start="1145" end="1162" title="Shadow Chancellor" label="Shadow Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460514" start="1193" end="1217" title="Shadow Foreign Secretary" label="Shadow Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q337380" start="1246" end="1260" title="Hugh Gaitskell" label="Hugh Gaitskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467480" start="1318" end="1337" title="1963 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q220208" start="1435" end="1448" title="1964 United Kingdom general election" label="1964 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709714" start="1454" end="1484" title="Labour government, 1964–1970" label="first period as prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="1622" end="1641" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937607" start="1712" end="1730" title="Murder (Abolition of Death Penalty) Act 1965" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777549" start="1735" end="1753" title="Theatres Act 1968" label="theatre censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458681" start="1755" end="1799" title="Sexual Offences Act 1967" label="partially decriminalising male homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q85757197" start="1835" end="1846" title="Divorce Reform Act 1969" label="divorce law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278915" start="1881" end="1902" title="Race Relations Act 1965" label="racial discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="1921" end="1934" title="birth control" label="birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668431" start="1939" end="1951" title="Abortion Act 1967" label="abortion law"/>
<link wikidata="Q918430" start="2001" end="2022" title="1966 United Kingdom general election" label="snap election in 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q829875" start="2113" end="2124" title="Biafran War" label="Biafran War"/>
<link wikidata="Q690413" start="2138" end="2177" title="Operation Banner" label="sent British troops to Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q918442" start="2196" end="2209" title="1970 United Kingdom general election" label="1970 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="2213" end="2225" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="2233" end="2246" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q119524" start="2395" end="2417" title="February 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="February 1974 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394879" start="2439" end="2454" title="hung parliament" label="hung parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467422" start="2492" end="2509" title="Labour government, 1974–1979" label="for a second time"/>
<link wikidata="Q918508" start="2523" end="2536" title="October 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="snap election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931610" start="2651" end="2661" title="1975 United Kingdom European Communities membership referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="2709" end="2729" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="2895" end="2909" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="3538" end="3549" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179742" start="3794" end="3804" title="Cowlersley" label="Cowlersley"/>
<link wikidata="Q201812" start="3849" end="3861" title="Huddersfield" label="Huddersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934075" start="3870" end="3894" title="West Riding of Yorkshire" label="West Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="4035" end="4048" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="4061" end="4078" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="4152" end="4164" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q24284433" start="4269" end="4282" title="Harold Seddon" label="Harold Seddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="4294" end="4311" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241387" start="4331" end="4386" title="President of the Western Australian Legislative Council" label="President of the Western Australian Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="4515" end="4532" title="10 Downing Street" label="10 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375218" start="4791" end="4816" title="Royds Hall Grammar School" label="Royds Hall Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q201812" start="4875" end="4887" title="Huddersfield" label="Huddersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578269" start="5042" end="5048" title="Spital, Merseyside" label="Spital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191558" start="5057" end="5073" title="Wirral Peninsula" label="Wirral Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026986" start="5141" end="5171" title="Wirral Grammar School for Boys" label="Wirral Grammar School for Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689310" start="5189" end="5197" title="Head Boy" label="Head Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420210" start="5288" end="5298" title="Exhibition (scholarship)" label="exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q81174" start="5364" end="5385" title="Jesus College, Oxford" label="Jesus College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044933" start="5514" end="5527" title="G. D. H. Cole" label="G. D. H. Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q261820" start="5549" end="5563" title="R. B. McCallum" label="R. B. McCallum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777850" start="5640" end="5674" title="philosophy, politics and economics" label="philosophy, politics and economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q323488" start="5849" end="5860" title="Roy Jenkins" label="Roy Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q181875" start="5942" end="5946" title="Robert Peel" label="Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="5948" end="5957" title="Gladstone" label="Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="5959" end="5966" title="Asquith" label="Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q47398" start="6317" end="6333" title="Economic History" label="Economic History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376987" start="6337" end="6348" title="New College, Oxford" label="New College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="6375" end="6381" title="fellow" label="fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q81087" start="6385" end="6403" title="University College, Oxford" label="University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6447" end="6463" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q335049" start="6634" end="6651" title="William Beveridge" label="William Beveridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927441" start="6869" end="6895" title="Ministry of Fuel and Power" label="Ministry of Fuel and Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="6923" end="6926" title="OBE" label="OBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1692699" start="7027" end="7052" title="Royal Statistical Society" label="Royal Statistical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037814" start="7065" end="7096" title="President of the Board of Trade" label="President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="7231" end="7238" title="UK" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098410" start="7292" end="7303" title="Claus Moser" label="Claus Moser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061866" start="7319" end="7345" title="Central Statistical Office, UK" label="Central Statistical Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1692699" start="7372" end="7397" title="Royal Statistical Society" label="Royal Statistical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103487" start="7595" end="7603" title="Ormskirk (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ormskirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609686" start="7618" end="7635" title="Stephen King-Hall" label="Stephen King-Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237532" start="7834" end="7844" title="Praelector" label="Praelector"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="8172" end="8193" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="1945 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="8322" end="8336" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477319" start="8340" end="8363" title="Parliamentary Secretary" label="Parliamentary Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110533" start="8371" end="8388" title="Ministry of Works (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444270" start="8417" end="8445" title="Secretary for Overseas Trade" label="Secretary for Overseas Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="8503" end="8515" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q748667" start="8630" end="8654" title="1950 United Kingdom general election" label="general election of 1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797253" start="8693" end="8699" title="Huyton (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Huyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037814" start="8863" end="8894" title="President of the Board of Trade" label="President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="9134" end="9153" title="boards of directors" label="boards of directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218843" start="9163" end="9177" title="price controls" label="price controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="9183" end="9198" title="nationalisation" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="9203" end="9221" title="Private sector" label="private industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q535297" start="9353" end="9370" title="Rationing in the United Kingdom" label="wartime rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q332405" start="10628" end="10643" title="Stafford Cripps" label="Stafford Cripps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301661" start="10901" end="10912" title="Douglas Jay" label="Douglas Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333410" start="10914" end="10948" title="Economic Secretary to the Treasury" label="Economic Secretary to the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q337380" start="10954" end="10968" title="Hugh Gaitskell" label="Hugh Gaitskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927441" start="10970" end="10996" title="Minister of Fuel and Power" label="Minister of Fuel and Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q325403" start="11790" end="11803" title="Aneurin Bevan" label="Aneurin Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356465" start="11808" end="11820" title="John Freeman (British politician)" label="John Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="11902" end="11925" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="11993" end="12003" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q26207" start="12076" end="12087" title="Hugh Dalton" label="Hugh Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722280" start="12177" end="12190" title="1951 United Kingdom general election" label="1951 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900370" start="12330" end="12339" title="Bevanites" label="Bevanites"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091265" start="12397" end="12425" title="National Executive Committee of the Labour Party" label="National Executive Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q335791" start="12480" end="12496" title="Herbert Morrison" label="Herbert Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579210" start="12718" end="12732" title="Shadow Cabinet (UK)" label="Shadow Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q277252" start="12843" end="12877" title="Southeast Asia Treaty Organization" label="Southeast Asia Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q328681" start="13001" end="13017" title="Richard Crossman" label="Richard Crossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467476" start="13285" end="13289" title="1955 Labour Party leadership election" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q337380" start="13300" end="13314" title="Hugh Gaitskell" label="Hugh Gaitskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467476" start="13395" end="13420" title="1955 Labour Party leadership election" label="party leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11013932" start="13446" end="13480" title="Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449522" start="13622" end="13634" title="Finance Bill" label="Finance Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574352" start="13764" end="13780" title="Gnomes of Zurich" label="Gnomes of Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q674304" start="13799" end="13809" title="Swiss bank" label="Swiss bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="13855" end="13869" title="pound sterling" label="pound sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q918412" start="13985" end="14006" title="1955 United Kingdom general election" label="1955 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554036" start="14078" end="14092" title="penny farthing" label="penny farthing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257298" start="14236" end="14261" title="Public Accounts Committee (United Kingdom)" label="Public Accounts Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q918420" start="14410" end="14421" title="1959 United Kingdom general election" label="1959 defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092400" start="14515" end="14526" title="Clause Four" label="Clause Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200085" start="14597" end="14627" title="unilateral nuclear disarmament" label="unilateral nuclear disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467477" start="14766" end="14823" title="1960 Labour Party leadership election" label="challenge to Gaitskell&amp;#x27;s leadership in November 1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460514" start="14872" end="14896" title="Shadow Foreign Secretary" label="Shadow Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q334073" start="14981" end="14993" title="George Brown, Baron George-Brown" label="George Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="15185" end="15205" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Macmillan Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467480" start="15276" end="15308" title="1963 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="Labour Party leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467477" start="15404" end="15408" title="1960 Labour Party leadership election" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q19568941" start="15449" end="15453" title="1962 Labour Party deputy leadership election" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="15829" end="15844" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615378" start="16108" end="16134" title="Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="Leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741536" start="16143" end="16167" title="Leader of the Opposition (United Kingdom)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q220208" start="16638" end="16660" title="1964 United Kingdom general election" label="1964 election campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401251" start="16678" end="16692" title="Profumo affair" label="Profumo affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="16746" end="16762" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q674564" start="16959" end="16970" title="Technicolor" label="Technicolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q128976" start="16984" end="17001" title="Alec Douglas-Home" label="Alec Douglas-Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769470" start="17009" end="17019" title="British aristocracy" label="aristocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q21488839" start="17041" end="17048" title="Peerages in the United Kingdom" label="peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="17063" end="17079" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q860292" start="17234" end="17246" title="Earl of Home" label="Earl of Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q220208" start="17396" end="17417" title="1964 United Kingdom general election" label="1964 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="17474" end="17488" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q244620" start="17542" end="17555" title="Lord Rosebery" label="Lord Rosebery"/>
<link wikidata="Q918430" start="17670" end="17680" title="1966 United Kingdom general election" label="March 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="17870" end="17882" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="18211" end="18225" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q323488" start="18226" end="18237" title="Roy Jenkins" label="Roy Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065229" start="18298" end="18316" title="male homosexuality" label="male homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q8184137" start="18321" end="18329" title="Abortion in the United Kingdom" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865659" start="18395" end="18413" title="Capital punishment in the United Kingdom" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994022" start="18463" end="18475" title="High treason in the United Kingdom" label="high treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089402" start="18522" end="18536" title="race relations" label="race relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q12332701" start="18541" end="18562" title="racial discrimination" label="racial discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357620" start="18609" end="18622" title="means testing" label="means testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154307" start="18806" end="18815" title="education in the United Kingdom" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q682697" start="18847" end="18870" title="comprehensive education" label="comprehensive education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413375" start="18895" end="18910" title="Open University" label="Open University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391448" start="18977" end="18994" title="economic planning" label="economic planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q611513" start="19100" end="19130" title="Secretary of State for Economic Affairs" label="Department of Economic Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564336" start="19482" end="19504" title="Ministry of Technology" label="Ministry of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="19914" end="19930" title="balance of trade" label="balance of trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q220788" start="20128" end="20139" title="devaluation" label="devaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="20456" end="20479" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q647109" start="20497" end="20510" title="sterling area" label="sterling area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972373" start="22840" end="22877" title="National Economic Development Council" label="National Economic Development Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="23393" end="23402" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="23443" end="23458" title="nationalisation" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q337380" start="23664" end="23678" title="Hugh Gaitskell" label="Hugh Gaitskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092400" start="23760" end="23771" title="Clause Four" label="Clause Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q25054086" start="24112" end="24135" title="Iron and Steel Act 1967" label="Iron and Steel Act 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q920223" start="24215" end="24240" title="British Steel Corporation" label="British Steel Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564747" start="24315" end="24323" title="Girobank" label="Girobank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="24370" end="24389" title="General Post Office" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835521" start="24676" end="24688" title="Unemployment in the United Kingdom" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503884" start="25581" end="25591" title="Censorship in the United Kingdom" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q338753" start="25600" end="25610" title="voting age" label="voting age"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005196" start="25643" end="25654" title="Modern immigration to the United Kingdom" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154307" start="25815" end="25831" title="Education in the United Kingdom" label="Higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118956" start="26305" end="26319" title="Robbins Report" label="Robbins Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q333034" start="26323" end="26333" title="bipartisanship (UK)" label="bipartisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413375" start="26417" end="26432" title="Open University" label="Open University"/>
<link wikidata="Q9698764" start="26514" end="26529" title="part-time study" label="part-time study"/>
<link wikidata="Q159595" start="26534" end="26551" title="distance learning" label="distance learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686926" start="26630" end="26642" title="Jennie Lee, Baroness Lee of Asheridge" label="Baroness Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q325403" start="26657" end="26670" title="Aneurin Bevan" label="Aneurin Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154307" start="26846" end="26865" title="Secondary education in the United Kingdom" label="secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359785" start="26966" end="26977" title="eleven-plus" label="eleven-plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593672" start="27096" end="27118" title="grammar schools debate" label="grammar schools debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="27443" end="27448" title="Edward Heath" label="Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="27498" end="27515" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q61061" start="28473" end="28483" title="Chancellor (education)" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q954035" start="28505" end="28527" title="University of Bradford" label="University of Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306184" start="28813" end="28828" title="Council house" label="council housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q204234" start="30055" end="30068" title="Milton Keynes" label="Milton Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="30220" end="30228" title="new town" label="new town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714378" start="30331" end="30345" title="severe poverty" label="severe poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q96381296" start="30378" end="30394" title="Housing Act 1969" label="Housing Act 1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q564905" start="31314" end="31327" title="Tony Atkinson" label="Tony Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q220208" start="31511" end="31532" title="1964 United Kingdom general election" label="1964 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021782" start="31594" end="31614" title="Prescription charges" label="Prescription charges"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998446" start="31757" end="31776" title="National Assistance" label="National Assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644456" start="31846" end="31867" title="Supplementary Benefit" label="Supplementary Benefit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998790" start="31899" end="31919" title="widow&amp;#x27;s pension" label="widow&amp;#x27;s pension"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644456" start="32443" end="32464" title="Supplementary Benefit" label="Supplementary Benefit"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="36265" end="36288" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500773" start="36438" end="36458" title="general practitioner" label="general practitioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q12443908" start="37062" end="37088" title="1966 Doctor&amp;#x27;s Charter" label="1966 Doctor&amp;#x27;s Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280670" start="38304" end="38319" title="family planning" label="family planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357620" start="38331" end="38343" title="means-tested" label="means-tested"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="38344" end="38365" title="contraceptive devices" label="contraceptive devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806521" start="38380" end="38396" title="Medical education in the United Kingdom" label="medical training"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152648" start="38768" end="38791" title="Health Advisory Service" label="Health Advisory Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q16835103" start="38928" end="38945" title="Ely Hospital" label="numerous scandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130457" start="38951" end="38969" title="Clean Air Act 1968" label="Clean Air Act 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698359" start="38996" end="39009" title="Air pollution in the United Kingdom" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011892" start="39597" end="39625" title="Industrial Training Act 1964" label="Industrial Training Act 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612989" start="40013" end="40030" title="casual employment" label="casual employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965975" start="40247" end="40270" title="Trade Disputes Act 1965" label="Trade Disputes Act 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998458" start="41453" end="41490" title="National Board for Prices and Incomes" label="National Board for Prices and Incomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834854" start="42023" end="42041" title="Transport Act 1968" label="Transport Act 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q920023" start="42184" end="42212" title="National Freight Corporation" label="National Freight Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q754230" start="42396" end="42408" title="breathalyser" label="breathalyser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309330" start="42418" end="42433" title="drunken driving" label="drunken driving"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="42524" end="42536" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245461" start="42742" end="42756" title="rail subsidies" label="rail subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147899" start="43190" end="43201" title="road safety" label="road safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q200403" start="43240" end="43249" title="seat belt" label="seat belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145163" start="43379" end="43389" title="trunk road" label="trunk road"/>
<link wikidata="Q951830" start="44011" end="44021" title="Royal Mint" label="Royal Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="44031" end="44042" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q893159" start="44075" end="44081" title="Bootle" label="Bootle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="44111" end="44118" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835521" start="44645" end="44657" title="Unemployment in the United Kingdom" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753119" start="45347" end="45369" title="Manufacturing in the United Kingdom" label="manufacturing industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="45831" end="45843" title="shipbuilding" label="shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600557" start="45847" end="45856" title="Clydeside" label="Clydeside"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748702" start="47168" end="47200" title="Ministry of Overseas Development" label="Ministry of Overseas Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883936" start="47367" end="47381" title="Barbara Castle" label="Barbara Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="47634" end="47654" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161297" start="47871" end="47891" title="University of Sussex" label="University of Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="47926" end="47953" title="Socioeconomic inequality" label="socio-economic inequalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308200" start="48241" end="48251" title="Taxation in the United Kingdom" label="tax system"/>
<link wikidata="Q335153" start="48314" end="48329" title="Nicholas Kaldor" label="Nicholas Kaldor"/>
<link wikidata="Q303917" start="48334" end="48347" title="Thomas Balogh" label="Thomas Balogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032066" start="48366" end="48390" title="Selective Employment Tax" label="Selective Employment Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q104869845" start="48835" end="48852" title="Capital gains tax in the United Kingdom" label="capital gains tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q332360" start="49101" end="49113" title="Denis Healey" label="Denis Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787819" start="51377" end="51422" title="Matrimonial Proceedings and Property Act 1970" label="Matrimonial Proceedings and Property Act 1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278916" start="51945" end="51968" title="Race Relations Act 1968" label="Race Relations Act 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384134" start="52011" end="52029" title="Equal Pay Act 1970" label="Equal Pay Act 1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981934" start="52072" end="52095" title="Welsh Language Act 1967" label="Welsh Language Act 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="52149" end="52163" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh language"/>
<link wikidata="Q384291" start="52328" end="52344" title="Aberfan disaster" label="Aberfan disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="52438" end="52457" title="corporal punishment" label="corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q746505" start="52461" end="52468" title="borstal" label="borstal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607722" start="52474" end="52481" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Prison Service" label="prisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153663" start="52812" end="52841" title="Commons Registration Act 1965" label="Commons Registration Act 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="52879" end="52890" title="common land" label="common land"/>
<link wikidata="Q57743" start="52895" end="52908" title="village green" label="village green"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754278" start="52928" end="52948" title="Countryside Act 1968" label="Countryside Act 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149275" start="53128" end="53139" title="Property law" label="estate laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137280" start="53335" end="53347" title="county court" label="county court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070213" start="53661" end="53708" title="Nurseries and Child-Minders Regulation Act 1948" label="Nurseries and Child-Minders Regulation Act 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q100163925" start="53783" end="53809" title="Family Law Reform Act 1969" label="Family Law Reform Act 1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188571" start="53883" end="53892" title="intestacy" label="intestacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288654" start="53920" end="53933" title="Homosexuality in England" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458681" start="54015" end="54034" title="Sexual Offences Act 1967" label="Sexual Offences Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257526" start="54040" end="54063" title="Public Records Act 1967" label="Public Records Act 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785234" start="54082" end="54098" title="thirty-year rule" label="thirty-year rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q186228" start="54266" end="54270" title="Wage control" label="wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218843" start="54271" end="54285" title="price controls" label="price controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308177" start="54330" end="54344" title="incomes policy" label="incomes policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241106" start="54531" end="54551" title="Presidency of Richard Nixon" label="Nixon administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979160" start="54929" end="54953" title="National Union of Seamen" label="National Union of Seamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q918430" start="54993" end="55012" title="1966 United Kingdom general election" label="re-election in 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010436" start="55294" end="55312" title="In Place of Strife" label="In Place of Strife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883936" start="55359" end="55373" title="Barbara Castle" label="Barbara Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q521207" start="55410" end="55431" title="Trades Union Congress" label="Trades Union Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="55497" end="55511" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="55512" end="55527" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6027712" start="55639" end="55668" title="Industrial Relations Act 1971" label="Industrial Relations Act 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="55872" end="55889" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290642" start="57038" end="57055" title="Dominic Sandbrook" label="Dominic Sandbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q816577" start="57070" end="57081" title="Ben Pimlott" label="Ben Pimlott"/>
<link wikidata="Q986194" start="57894" end="57911" title="disposable income" label="disposable income"/>
<link wikidata="Q93657" start="61779" end="61796" title="Kenneth O. Morgan" label="Kenneth O. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904466" start="62948" end="62968" title="Special Relationship" label="Special Relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="63109" end="63126" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="63197" end="63208" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="63420" end="63443" title="opposed the Vietnam War" label="opposed the Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="63793" end="63804" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324871" start="63898" end="63942" title="United Kingdom membership of the European Economic Area" label="British membership of the European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="63974" end="63988" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="64046" end="64063" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="64208" end="64226" title="European Communities" label="European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="64464" end="64476" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824370" start="64488" end="64522" title="Accession of the United Kingdom to the European Communities" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s admission to the EC"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187547" start="64828" end="64845" title="Referendum Act 1975" label="hold a referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="65134" end="65149" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q274490" start="65289" end="65298" title="Public finance" label="budgetary"/>
<link wikidata="Q271855" start="65470" end="65476" title="Government budget" label="budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="65497" end="65507" title="import tax" label="import tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="65528" end="65535" title="revenue" label="revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361297" start="65650" end="65684" title="European Regional Development Fund" label="European Regional Development Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931610" start="66105" end="66125" title="1975 United Kingdom European Communities membership referendum" label="voted on 5 June 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269566" start="66191" end="66231" title="Joint warfare in South Vietnam, 1963–1969" label="American military involvement in Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="66287" end="66304" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354629" start="66506" end="66523" title="Malayan Emergency" label="Malayan Emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q482407" start="66559" end="66581" title="1954 Geneva Conference" label="1954 Geneva Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q333773" start="66717" end="66732" title="Michael Stewart, Baron Stewart of Fulham" label="Michael Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518054" start="66760" end="66768" title="teach-in" label="teach-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q202770" start="66946" end="66960" title="Alexei Kosygin" label="Alexei Kosygin"/>
<link wikidata="Q462189" start="66966" end="66974" title="Premier of the Soviet Union" label="Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148" start="66982" end="67007" title="USSR Council of Ministers" label="USSR Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q547247" start="67076" end="67092" title="Operation Rolling Thunder" label="American bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="67110" end="67115" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q72818" start="67120" end="67128" title="Haiphong" label="Haiphong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997225" start="67183" end="67192" title="bum steer" label="bum steer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058776" start="67478" end="67490" title="East of Suez" label="East of Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747647" start="67505" end="67522" title="Secretary of State for Defence" label="Defence Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q332360" start="67523" end="67535" title="Denis Healey" label="Denis Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058776" start="67592" end="67604" title="East of Suez" label="East of Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q939087" start="67623" end="67639" title="Airmobile" label="airmobile forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="67913" end="67925" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q42992" start="68045" end="68055" title="Golda Meir" label="Golda Meir"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="68164" end="68174" title="Chancellor of Germany (Federal Republic)" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514" start="68175" end="68187" title="Willy Brandt" label="Willy Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q159454" start="68219" end="68242" title="Socialist International" label="Socialist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q750583" start="68386" end="68403" title="Southern Rhodesia" label="Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q313424" start="68559" end="68568" title="Ian Smith" label="Ian Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="68613" end="68626" title="voting rights" label="voting rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321053" start="68697" end="68735" title="Unilateral Declaration of Independence (Rhodesia)" label="Unilateral Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="68835" end="68851" title="Security Council" label="Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q814830" start="68941" end="68986" title="Beira Patrol" label="British warships blockading the port of Beira"/>
<link wikidata="Q515657" start="70023" end="70036" title="Siaka Stevens" label="Siaka Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q178469" start="70135" end="70141" title="Biafra" label="Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033039" start="70259" end="70282" title="Military dictatorship in Nigeria" label="Nigerian military junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="70344" end="70351" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q155845" start="70369" end="70382" title="Chinua Achebe" label="Chinua Achebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q918442" start="70876" end="70894" title="1970 United Kingdom general election" label="a general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q918378" start="71893" end="71897" title="1935 United Kingdom general election" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q334073" start="71958" end="71970" title="George Brown, Baron George-Brown" label="George Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q180209" start="72215" end="72230" title="Isles of Scilly" label="Isles of Scilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154833" start="72520" end="72532" title="Isabel Wolff" label="Isabel Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180077" start="72713" end="72723" title="Joe Haines (journalist)" label="Joe Haines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170673" start="72860" end="72871" title="personation" label="personation"/>
<link wikidata="Q695829" start="72895" end="72913" title="property developer" label="property developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420512" start="73512" end="73523" title="Nixon shock" label="Nixon shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="73532" end="73547" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17033242" start="73713" end="73727" title="Three-Day Week" label="Three-Day Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q119524" start="73970" end="73986" title="February 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394879" start="74025" end="74040" title="hung parliament" label="hung parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="74078" end="74086" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q124964" start="74097" end="74106" title="coalition" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q918508" start="74247" end="74279" title="October 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="another election later that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931610" start="74408" end="74471" title="1975 United Kingdom European Communities membership referendum" label="referendum on British membership of the European Community (EC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155290" start="75104" end="75125" title="British welfare state" label="British welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q332360" start="75399" end="75411" title="Denis Healey" label="Denis Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560230" start="75918" end="75936" title="1973–1975 recession" label="a global recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q185245" start="75941" end="75952" title="stagflation" label="stagflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="75988" end="76003" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q115518433" start="76046" end="76082" title="1972 United Kingdom budget" label="inflationary attempt to boost growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550484" start="76180" end="76195" title="Social Contract (Britain)" label="social contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q521207" start="76211" end="76232" title="Trades Union Congress" label="Trades Union Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308177" start="76258" end="76272" title="incomes policy" label="incomes policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242656" start="76859" end="76873" title="Price Commission" label="price controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q664112" start="77004" end="77021" title="industrial policy" label="industrial policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626661" start="77062" end="77076" title="Stuart Holland" label="Stuart Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858507" start="77085" end="77116" title="Secretary of State for Industry" label="Secretary of State for Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="77117" end="77126" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967090" start="77166" end="77191" title="National Enterprise Board" label="National Enterprise Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="77383" end="77399" title="public ownership" label="public ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046187" start="77605" end="77620" title="British Leyland" label="British Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="77872" end="77884" title="The Troubles" label="The Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589274" start="77940" end="77970" title="Government of Northern Ireland (1921–1972)" label="Government of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q690413" start="77989" end="78012" title="Operation Banner" label="deploy the British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="78353" end="78361" title="Unionists (Ireland)" label="Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78373" end="78402" title="Ulster Workers Council strike" label="Ulster Workers Council strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352121" start="78414" end="78423" title="sectarian" label="sectarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="78473" end="78485" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394819" start="78503" end="78518" title="Ulster loyalist" label="Ulster loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="78852" end="78863" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="79117" end="79125" title="dominion" label="dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425313" start="79442" end="79459" title="Garret FitzGerald" label="Garret FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038047" start="79491" end="79501" title="Irish Army" label="Irish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="79824" end="79839" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="79871" end="79904" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="Provisional Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287209" start="80625" end="80645" title="Lord Stone of Hendon" label="Lord Stone of Hendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q323488" start="80730" end="80741" title="Roy Jenkins" label="Roy Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q188874" start="80944" end="80956" title="colon cancer" label="colon cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="81120" end="81144" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577281" start="81269" end="81288" title="1976 Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s Resignation Honours" label="Resignation Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893533" start="81541" end="81556" title="Marcia Williams" label="Marcia Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q323488" start="81631" end="81642" title="Roy Jenkins" label="Roy Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6284486" start="81945" end="81955" title="Lord Kagan" label="Lord Kagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521426" start="81973" end="81979" title="Gannex" label="Gannex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387103" start="82065" end="82076" title="Eric Miller (businessman)" label="Eric Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467481" start="82181" end="82189" title="1976 Labour Party leadership election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q332419" start="82333" end="82345" title="Michael Foot" label="Michael Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="82347" end="82362" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q323488" start="82364" end="82375" title="Roy Jenkins" label="Roy Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="82377" end="82386" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q332360" start="82388" end="82400" title="Denis Healey" label="Denis Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q301252" start="82405" end="82421" title="Anthony Crosland" label="Anthony Crosland"/>
<link wikidata="Q51280089" start="82653" end="82660" title="peerage" label="peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="82735" end="82765" title="Order of the Garter" label="Knight Companion of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q918450" start="82798" end="82802" title="1979 United Kingdom general election" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="82891" end="82907" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q918466" start="82919" end="82940" title="1983 United Kingdom general election" label="1983 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="82986" end="82998" title="life peerage" label="life peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q918975" start="83037" end="83045" title="Kirklees" label="Kirklees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247496" start="83091" end="83105" title="Rievaulx Abbey" label="Rievaulx Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q918975" start="83149" end="83157" title="Kirklees" label="Kirklees"/>
<link wikidata="Q380865" start="83500" end="83511" title="David Frost" label="David Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503505" start="83730" end="83760" title="Friday Night, Saturday Morning" label="Friday Night, Saturday Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="83817" end="83826" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="83918" end="83938" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700153" start="83996" end="84019" title="D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte Opera Company" label="D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933094" start="84045" end="84057" title="Hugh Wontner" label="Hugh Wontner"/>
<link wikidata="Q73341" start="84076" end="84096" title="Lord Mayor of London" label="Lord Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748714" start="84146" end="84164" title="Morecambe and Wise" label="Morecambe and Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q583128" start="84190" end="84204" title="Eric Morecambe" label="Eric Morecambe"/>
<link wikidata="Q83807" start="84399" end="84410" title="Ed Sullivan" label="Ed Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="84559" end="84573" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q475604" start="84673" end="84688" title="Maritime pilot" label="marine pilotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570725" start="84739" end="84752" title="Trinity House" label="Trinity House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975048" start="84813" end="84830" title="Anglia Television" label="Anglia Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180077" start="85138" end="85148" title="Joe Haines (journalist)" label="Joe Haines"/>
<link wikidata="Q317258" start="85730" end="85742" title="Neil Kinnock" label="Neil Kinnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="85755" end="85767" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q632891" start="85963" end="85982" title="McMaster University" label="McMaster University"/>
<link wikidata="Q82133" start="86201" end="86217" title="Bodleian Library" label="Bodleian Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="86221" end="86227" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q854022" start="86348" end="86358" title="trust fund" label="trust fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q188874" start="86658" end="86670" title="colon cancer" label="colon cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="86675" end="86699" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="86769" end="86786" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="86823" end="86847" title="Charles, Prince of Wales" label="Charles, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="86872" end="86884" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="86886" end="86901" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="86907" end="86924" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="86951" end="86961" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="86966" end="86976" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594511" start="87055" end="87080" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Old Church, St Mary&amp;#x27;s" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Old Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329355" start="87082" end="87113" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s, Isles of Scilly" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s, Isles of Scilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487309" start="87265" end="87290" title="Mansfield College, Oxford" label="Mansfield College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296260" start="87303" end="87315" title="Mary Wilson, Lady Wilson of Rievaulx" label="Mary Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q945772" start="87499" end="87504" title="Robin Wilson (mathematician)" label="Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561600" start="87528" end="87542" title="Giles Alington (academic)" label="Giles Alington"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="87703" end="87706" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180077" start="87766" end="87776" title="Joe Haines (journalist)" label="Joe Haines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353208" start="88066" end="88071" title="Today (BBC Radio 4)" label="Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q822384" start="88118" end="88135" title="Bernard Donoughue" label="Bernard Donoughue"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="88378" end="88386" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q507462" start="88690" end="88706" title="Yorkshire accent" label="Yorkshire accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521426" start="88771" end="88777" title="Gannex" label="Gannex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197231" start="88846" end="88869" title="Pipe Smoker of the Year" label="Pipe Smoker of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565841" start="89020" end="89028" title="HP Sauce" label="HP Sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q19473" start="89086" end="89103" title="Huddersfield Town" label="Huddersfield Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="89368" end="89379" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="89407" end="89410" title="Member of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire" label="MBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="90262" end="90274" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="90278" end="90293" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q182537" start="90312" end="90318" title="Taxman" label="Taxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q185121" start="90358" end="90366" title="Revolver (Beatles album)" label="Revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133828" start="90503" end="90511" title="the Move" label="the Move"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823381" start="90552" end="90564" title="Tony Secunda" label="Tony Secunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462316" start="90619" end="90638" title="Flowers in the Rain" label="Flowers in the Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893533" start="90720" end="90735" title="Marcia Williams" label="Marcia Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q918484" start="90909" end="90917" title="Roy Wood" label="Roy Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q127324865" start="91017" end="91028" title="Selsdon Man" label="Selsdon Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="91099" end="91111" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448800" start="91155" end="91173" title="Selsdon Park Hotel" label="Selsdon Park Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q244937" start="91305" end="91317" title="Piltdown Man" label="Piltdown Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="91322" end="91336" title="Homo erectus" label="Swanscombe Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q317258" start="92206" end="92218" title="Neil Kinnock" label="Neil Kinnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q332377" start="92220" end="92230" title="John Smith (Labour Party leader)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="92271" end="92281" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q333694" start="92430" end="92442" title="Keith Joseph" label="Keith Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="92515" end="92532" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q487894" start="93861" end="93878" title="Anatoliy Golitsyn" label="Anatoliy Golitsyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="93930" end="93933" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q732295" start="94103" end="94123" title="James Jesus Angleton" label="James Jesus Angleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q501700" start="94159" end="94178" title="Counterintelligence" label="Counterintelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="94191" end="94218" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="94282" end="94285" title="MI5" label="MI5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124586" start="94294" end="94306" title="Peter Wright (MI5 officer)" label="Peter Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787608" start="94337" end="94347" title="Spycatcher" label="Spycatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880063" start="94557" end="94586" title="Ulster Workers Council Strike" label="Ulster Workers Council Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q220723" start="94690" end="94705" title="Ken Livingstone" label="Ken Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735422" start="94715" end="94728" title="maiden speech" label="maiden speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145649" start="94811" end="94824" title="Colin Wallace" label="Colin Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107532" start="94873" end="94885" title="Chris Mullin (politician)" label="Chris Mullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="95062" end="95065" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="95161" end="95168" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863547" start="95389" end="95403" title="Barrie Penrose" label="Barrie Penrose"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="95408" end="95423" title="Roger Courtiour" label="Roger Courtiour"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="95456" end="95478" title="cassette tape recorder" label="cassette tape recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q220788" start="95592" end="95600" title="devalued" label="devalued"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="95647" end="95659" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="95667" end="95679" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q918442" start="95688" end="95704" title="1970 United Kingdom general election" label="election of 1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864999" start="95729" end="95761" title="1972 United Kingdom miners&amp;#x27; strike" label="1972 British miners&amp;#x27; strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q119524" start="95830" end="95843" title="February 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="February 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="95930" end="95946" title="Lord Mountbatten" label="Lord Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="96028" end="96040" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="96050" end="96066" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="96107" end="96110" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q357104" start="96197" end="96214" title="military exercise" label="military exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="96216" end="96233" title="10 Downing Street" label="10 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086484" start="96367" end="96385" title="Christopher Andrew (historian)" label="Christopher Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="" start="96424" end="96479" title="The Defence of the Realm: The Authorized History of MI5" label="The Defence of the Realm: The Authorized History of MI5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="96678" end="96695" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5995" start="97083" end="97097" title="Cabinet Office" label="Cabinet Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="97142" end="97159" title="10 Downing Street" label="10 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023046" start="98132" end="98147" title="Wilson Doctrine" label="Wilson Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000736" start="98185" end="98226" title="List of fellows of the Royal Society elected in 1969" label="Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056319" start="98451" end="98475" title="Government of Bangladesh" label="Government of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015019" start="98513" end="98545" title="Awards and decorations of the Bangladesh Liberation War" label="Friends of Liberation War Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="98613" end="98638" title="Bangladesh Liberation War" label="Bangladesh Liberation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15454072" start="98743" end="98755" title="Cowan Dobson" label="Cowan Dobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="98903" end="98913" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565331" start="98943" end="98971" title="Huddersfield railway station" label="Huddersfield railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983204" start="99064" end="99075" title="Ian Walters" label="Ian Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="99448" end="99458" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639484" start="99545" end="99551" title="Huyton" label="Huyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="99558" end="99567" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413375" start="99706" end="99721" title="Open University" label="Open University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810419" start="99904" end="99912" title="Tividale" label="Tividale"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="100042" end="100057" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q39078678" start="103321" end="103333" title="Martin Pugh (author)" label="Pugh, Martin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="103341" end="103394" title="Speak for Britain!: A New History of the Labour Party" label="Speak for Britain!: A New History of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="106265" end="106284" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q192687" start="106313" end="106327" title="Downing Street" label="Downing Street"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52272" wikidata="Q43449" url="?curid=52272" title="Creative Commons">
<text>Creative Commons (CC) is an American non-profit organization and international network devoted to educational access and expanding the range of creative works available for others to build upon legally and to share. The organization has released several copyright licenses, known as Creative Commons licenses, free of charge to the public. These licenses allow authors of creative works to communicate which rights they reserve and which rights they waive for the benefit of recipients or other creators. A simplified one-page explanation of rights, with associated visual symbols, explains the specifics of each Creative Commons license. Content owners still maintain their copyright, but Creative Commons licenses give standard releases that replace the individual negotiations for specific rights between copyright owner (licensor) and licensee, that are necessary under an &quot;all rights reserved&quot; copyright management.

The organization was founded in 2001 by Lawrence Lessig, Hal Abelson, and Eric Eldred with the support of Center for the Public Domain. The first article in a general interest publication about Creative Commons, written by Hal Plotkin, was published in February 2002. The first set of copyright licenses was released in December 2002. The founding management team that developed the licenses and built the Creative Commons infrastructure as it is known today included Molly Shaffer Van Houweling, Glenn Otis Brown, Neeru Paharia, and Ben Adida.

In 2002, Creative Commons was selected as the successor of the Open Content Project, a 1998 precursor project by David A. Wiley. Wiley subsequently joined Creative Commons as its director. The licenses published by the Open Content Project, the Open Content License and Open Publication License, were soon deprecated in favour of Creative Commons licenses. Aaron Swartz played a role in the early stages of Creative Commons, as did Matthew Haughey.

, there were &quot;nearly 2 billion&quot; works licensed under the various Creative Commons licenses. Wikipedia and its sister projects use one of these licenses. According to a 2017 report, Flickr alone hosted over 415 million cc-licensed photos, along with around 49 million works in YouTube, 40 million works in DeviantArt and 37 million works in Wikimedia Commons. The licenses are also used by Stack Exchange, MDN, Internet Archive, Khan Academy, LibreTexts, OpenStax, MIT OpenCourseWare, WikiHow, TED, OpenStreetMap, GeoGebra, Doubtnut, Fandom, Arduino, ccmixter.org, Ninjam, etc., and formerly by Unsplash, Pixabay, and Socratic.

==Purpose and goal==

Creative Commons has been an early participant in the copyleft movement, which seeks to provide alternative solutions to copyright, and has been dubbed &quot;some rights reserved&quot;. Creative Commons has been credited with contributing to a re-thinking of the role of the &quot;commons&quot; in the Information Age. Their frameworks help individuals and groups distribute content more freely while still protecting themselves and their intellectual property rights legally.

According to its founder Lawrence Lessig, Creative Commons&#x27; goal is to counter the dominant and increasingly restrictive permission culture that limits artistic creation to existing or powerful creators. Lessig maintains that modern culture is dominated by traditional content distributors in order to maintain and strengthen their monopolies on cultural products such as popular music and popular cinema, and that Creative Commons can provide alternatives to these restrictions.

In mid‑December 2020, Creative Commons released its strategy for the upcoming five years, which will focus more on three core of goals including advocacy, infrastructure innovation, and capacity building.

==Creative Commons network==
Until April 2018, Creative Commons had over 100 affiliates working in over 75 jurisdictions to support and promote CC activities around the world. In 2018 this affiliate network has been restructured into a network organisation. The network no longer relies on affiliate organisation but on individual membership organised in Chapter.

===Hungary===
Creative Commons Hungary was the affiliated network of Creative Commons in Hungary. The non-profit organization was founded in Budapest, Hungary in 2008 and was deleted from the official registry on 6 February 2017.

===Japan===

Creative Commons Japan (CC Japan/CCJP) is the affiliated network of Creative Commons in Japan.

In 2003, the International University GLOCOM held a meeting for the CC Japan preparation.

In March 2004, CC Japan was launched by GLOCOM University. CC Japan is the world&#x27;s second CC affiliated network (the first is in America).

In March 2006, CC Japan become the NPO and be in motion. In the same month, the CC founder Lawrence Lessig came to Japan to be one of the main holders of the open ceremony.
Within the same year, between May and June, different international events were held in Japan, including iSummit 06 and the first through third rounds of CCJP.

In February 2007, the ICC x ClipLife 15 second CM competition was held. In June, iSummit 07 was held. In July, the fourth CCJP was held. On July 25, Tokyo approved to become the NGO chairman of CCJP.

In 2008, Taipie ACIA joined CCJP. The main theme music which was chosen by CCJP was announced.

In 2009, INTO INFINITY shown in Tokyo and Sapporo. iPhone held the shows with Audio Visual Mixer for INTO INFINITY. (Apple joint research and development with CCJP)

In 2012, the 10th anniversary ceremony was held in Japan.

In 2015, Creative Commons 4.0 and Creative Commons 0 were released in Japanese language.

===South Korea===
Creative Commons Korea (CC Korea) is the affiliated network of Creative Commons in South Korea. In March 2005, CC Korea was initiated by Jongsoo Yoon (in Korean: 윤종수), former Presiding Judge of Incheon District Court, as a project of Korea Association for Infomedia Law (KAFIL). The major Korean portal sites, including Daum and Naver, have been participating in the use of Creative Commons licences. In January 2009, the Creative Commons Korea Association was consequently founded as a non-profit incorporated association. Since then, CC Korea has been actively promoting the liberal and open culture of creation as well as leading the diffusion of Creative Common in the country.
* Creative Commons Korea
* Creative Commons Asia Conference 2010

===Bassel Khartabil===
Bassel Khartabil was a Palestinian Syrian open source software developer who served as a project lead and public affiliate for Creative Commons Syria. On March 15, 2012, he was detained by the Syrian government in Damascus at Adra Prison for no crime. On October 17, 2015, the Creative Commons Board of Directors passed a resolution calling for Bassel Khartabil&#x27;s release. In 2017, Bassel&#x27;s wife received confirmation that Bassel had been killed shortly after she lost contact with him in 2015.

==Evolution of CC licenses==
All current CC licenses (except the CC0 Public Domain Dedication tool) require attribution (attributing the authors of the original creative works), which can be inconvenient for works based on multiple other works. Critics feared that Creative Commons could erode the copyright system over time, or allow &quot;some of our most precious resources – the creativity of individuals – to be simply tossed into the commons to be exploited by whomever has spare time and a magic marker.&quot;

Critics also worried that the lack of rewards for content producers would dissuade artists from publishing their work, and questioned whether Creative Commons would enable the commons that it aimed to create.

Creative Commons founder Lawrence Lessig countered that copyright laws have not always offered the strong and seemingly indefinite protection that today&#x27;s law provides. Rather, the duration of copyright used to be limited to much shorter terms of years, and some works never gained protection because they did not follow the now-abandoned compulsory format.

The maintainers of Debian, a Linux distribution known for its strict adherence to a particular definition of software freedom, rejected the Creative Commons Attribution License prior to version 3 as incompatible with the Debian Free Software Guidelines (DFSG) due to the license&#x27;s anti-DRM provisions (which might, due to ambiguity, be covering more than DRM) and its requirement that downstream users remove an author&#x27;s credit upon request from the author. Version 3.0 of the Creative Commons licenses addressed these concerns and, except for the non commercial and no-derivative variants, are considered to be compatible with the DFSG.

Kent Anderson, writing for The Scholarly Kitchen, a blog of the Society for Scholarly Publishing, criticized CC as being grounded on copyright principles and not really departing from it, and as being more complex and complicating than the latter – thus the public does not scrutinize CC, reflexively accepting it as one would a software license – while at the same time weakening the rights provided by copyright. Anderson ends up concluding that this is the point, and that &quot;Creative Commons receives significant funding from large information companies like Google, Nature Publishing Group, and RedHat&quot;, and that Google money is especially linked to CC&#x27;s history; for him, CC is &quot;an organization designed to promulgate the interests of technology companies and Silicon Valley generally&quot;.

===CC license proliferation===
According to Mako Hill, Creative Commons has established a range of licenses tailored to meet the different protection interests of authors of creative works, rather than forcing a single forced standard as a &quot;base level of freedom&quot; that all Creative Commons licenses must meet, and with which all licensors and users must comply. &quot;By failing to take any firm ethical position and draw any line in the sand, CC is a missed opportunity. ...CC has replaced what could have been a call for a world where &#x27;essential rights are unreservable&#x27; with the relatively hollow call for &#x27;some rights reserved. He also argued that Creative Commons enables license proliferation, by providing multiple licenses that are incompatible.

The Creative Commons website states, &quot;Since each of the six CC licenses functions differently, resources placed under different licenses may not necessarily be combined with one another without violating the license terms.&quot; Works licensed under incompatible licenses may not be recombined in a derivative work without obtaining permission from the copyright owner.

Richard Stallman of the Free Software Foundation stated in 2005 that he could not support Creative Commons as an activity because &quot;it adopted some additional licenses which do not give everyone that minimum freedom&quot;, that freedom being &quot;the freedom to share, noncommercially, any published work&quot;. Those licenses have since been retired by Creative Commons.

===License uses===
Creative Commons is only a service provider for standardized license text, not a party in any agreement. No central database of Creative Commons works is controlling all licensed works and the responsibility of the Creative Commons system rests entirely with those using the licences. This situation is, however, not specific to Creative Commons. All copyright owners must individually defend their rights and no central database of copyrighted works or existing license agreements exists. The United States Copyright Office does keep a database of all works registered with it, but absence of registration does not imply absence of copyright, and CC licensed works can be registered on the same terms as unlicensed works or works licensed under any other licences.

Although Creative Commons offers multiple licenses for different uses, some critics suggested that the licenses still do not address the differences among the media or among the various concerns that different authors have.

Lessig wrote that the point of Creative Commons is to provide a middle ground between two extreme views of copyright protection – one demanding that all rights be controlled, and the other arguing that none should be controlled. Creative Commons provides a third option that allows authors to pick and choose which rights they want to control and which they want to grant to others. The multitude of licenses reflects the multitude of rights that can be passed on to subsequent creators.

===Non-commercial use licenses===
Various commentators have reported confusion in understanding what &quot;noncommercial&quot; use means. Creative Commons issued a report in 2009, &quot;Defining noncommercial&quot;, which presented research and various perspectives. The report claimed that noncommercial to many people means &quot;no exchange of money or any commerce&quot;. Beyond that simple statement, many people disagree on whether noncommercial use permits publishing on websites supported with advertising, sharing noncommercial media through nonprofit publishing for a fee, and many other practices in contemporary media distribution. Creative Commons has not sought to resolve the confusion, in part because of high consumer demand for the noncommercial license as is with its ambiguity.

===Personality rights===
In 2007, Virgin Mobile Australia launched a bus stop advertising campaign which promoted its mobile phone text messaging service using the work of amateur photographers who uploaded their work to the photo-sharing site Flickr using a Creative Commons by Attribution license. Users licensing their images this way freed their work for use by any other entity, as long as the original creator was attributed credit, without any other compensation being required. Virgin upheld this single restriction by printing a URL, leading to the photographer&#x27;s Flickr page, on each of their ads. However, one picture depicted 15-year-old Alison Chang posing for a photo at her church&#x27;s fund-raising carwash, with the superimposed, mocking slogan &quot;Dump Your Pen Friend&quot;. Chang sued Virgin Mobile and Creative Commons. The photo was taken by Chang&#x27;s church youth counsellor, Justin Ho-Wee Wong, who uploaded the image to Flickr under the Creative Commons license.

On November 27, 2007, Chang voluntarily dismissed the lawsuit against Creative Commons, focusing the lawsuit only against Virgin Mobile. The case was thrown out of court due to lack of jurisdiction and subsequently Virgin Mobile did not incur any damages towards the plaintiff.

==See also==
* Copyleft
* Free-culture movement
* Free content
* Open-source license
* Public-domain-equivalent license
* List of major Creative Commons licensed works

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Asschenfeldt, Christiane. &quot;Copyright and Licensing Issues—The International Commons. &quot; In &quot;CERN Workshop Series on Innovations in Scholarly Communication: Implementing the Benefits of OAI (OAI3), February 12–14, 2004 at CERN, Geneva, Switzerland&quot;. Geneva: CERN, 2004. (video)
* Brown, Glenn Otis. &quot;Academic Digital Rights: A Walk on the Creative Commons.&quot; &quot;Syllabus Magazine&quot; (April 2003).
* &quot;Out of the Way: How the Next Copyright Revolution Can Help the Next Scientific Revolution. &quot; &quot;PLoS Biology&quot; 1, no. 1 (2003): 30–31.
* Chillingworth, Mark. &quot;Creative Commons Attracts BBC&#x27;s Attention.&quot; &quot;Information World Review&quot;, June 11, 2004.
* 
* Denison, D.C. &quot;For Creators, An Argument for Alienable Rights.&quot; &quot;Boston Globe&quot;, December 22, 2002, E2.
* Fitzgerald, Brian, and Ian Oi. &quot;Free Culture: Cultivating the Creative Commons. &quot; (2004).
* Hietanen, Herkko &quot;The Pursuit of Efficient Copyright Licensing — How Some Rights Reserved Attempts to Solve the Problems of All Rights Reserved&quot; (2008) PhD dissertation.
* Kreutzer, Till. &quot;Open Content - Navigating Creative Commons Licenses&quot;, Deutsche UNESCO-Kommission e. V., Wikimedia Deutschland - Gesellschaft zur Förderung Freien Wissens e. V., 2024.
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* 
* Creative Commons wiki
* Short Flash animation describing Creative Commons
* Creative Commonsː Copyright Week: What happened to the Brazilian Copyright Reform? (English)
* Creative Commonsː Copyright Reform (English)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43449" start="0" end="16" title="Creative Commons" label="Creative Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q43449" start="18" end="20" title="Creative Commons" label="CC"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="37" end="60" title="non-profit organization" label="non-profit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q17537576" start="144" end="158" title="creative works" label="creative works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="254" end="263" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q79719" start="264" end="271" title="license" label="license"/>
<link wikidata="Q284742" start="283" end="307" title="Creative Commons license" label="Creative Commons license"/>
<link wikidata="Q797551" start="450" end="455" title="waive" label="waive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543058" start="839" end="847" title="licensee" label="licensee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752207" start="883" end="902" title="all rights reserved" label="all rights reserved"/>
<link wikidata="Q217790" start="972" end="987" title="Lawrence Lessig" label="Lawrence Lessig"/>
<link wikidata="Q770584" start="989" end="1000" title="Hal Abelson" label="Hal Abelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386427" start="1006" end="1017" title="Eric Eldred" label="Eric Eldred"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059951" start="1038" end="1066" title="Center for the Public Domain" label="Center for the Public Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640892" start="1155" end="1166" title="Hal Plotkin" label="Hal Plotkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20968991" start="1400" end="1427" title="Molly Shaffer Van Houweling" label="Molly Shaffer Van Houweling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230549" start="1591" end="1605" title="David A. Wiley" label="David A. Wiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398755" start="1723" end="1743" title="Open Content License" label="Open Content License"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412537" start="1748" end="1772" title="Open Publication License" label="Open Publication License"/>
<link wikidata="Q302817" start="1835" end="1847" title="Aaron Swartz" label="Aaron Swartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790661" start="1910" end="1925" title="Matthew Haughey" label="Matthew Haughey"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="2030" end="2039" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112526" start="2048" end="2063" title="sister projects" label="sister projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q103204" start="2119" end="2125" title="Flickr" label="Flickr"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="2214" end="2221" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q46523" start="2243" end="2253" title="DeviantArt" label="DeviantArt"/>
<link wikidata="Q565" start="2278" end="2295" title="Wikimedia Commons" label="Wikimedia Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495447" start="2327" end="2341" title="Stack Exchange" label="Stack Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273508" start="2343" end="2346" title="MDN Web Docs" label="MDN"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="2348" end="2364" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q94887" start="2366" end="2378" title="Khan Academy" label="Khan Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776533" start="2380" end="2390" title="LibreTexts" label="LibreTexts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975200" start="2392" end="2400" title="OpenStax" label="OpenStax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637597" start="2402" end="2420" title="MIT OpenCourseWare" label="MIT OpenCourseWare"/>
<link wikidata="Q306527" start="2422" end="2429" title="WikiHow" label="WikiHow"/>
<link wikidata="Q189021" start="2431" end="2434" title="TED (conference)" label="TED"/>
<link wikidata="Q936" start="2436" end="2449" title="OpenStreetMap" label="OpenStreetMap"/>
<link wikidata="Q795066" start="2451" end="2459" title="GeoGebra" label="GeoGebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q63565545" start="2461" end="2469" title="Doubtnut" label="Doubtnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q17459" start="2471" end="2477" title="Fandom (website)" label="Fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q175957" start="2479" end="2486" title="Arduino" label="Arduino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052152" start="2488" end="2500" title="CcMixter" label="ccmixter.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342017" start="2502" end="2508" title="Ninjam" label="Ninjam"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233552" start="2532" end="2540" title="Unsplash" label="Unsplash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746538" start="2542" end="2549" title="Pixabay" label="Pixabay"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303242" start="2555" end="2563" title="Socratic (Google)" label="Socratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133475" start="2642" end="2650" title="copyleft" label="copyleft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="2709" end="2718" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q9828451" start="2869" end="2876" title="commons" label="commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q956129" start="2890" end="2905" title="Information Age" label="Information Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="3027" end="3048" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q217790" start="3091" end="3106" title="Lawrence Lessig" label="Lawrence Lessig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305337" start="3192" end="3210" title="permission culture" label="permission culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15179351" start="4137" end="4161" title="Creative Commons Hungary" label="Creative Commons Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q217790" start="4790" end="4805" title="Lawrence Lessig" label="Lawrence Lessig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="5362" end="5367" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37951" start="5372" end="5379" title="Sapporo" label="Sapporo"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="5447" end="5452" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="5817" end="5823" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q982696" start="6434" end="6450" title="Bassel Khartabil" label="Bassel Khartabil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="6476" end="6496" title="Open-source software" label="open source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="6648" end="6656" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684676" start="6660" end="6671" title="Adra Prison" label="Adra Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q9828451" start="7634" end="7641" title="commons" label="commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715973" start="8051" end="8057" title="Debian" label="Debian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131669" start="8061" end="8079" title="Linux distribution" label="Linux distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076638" start="8141" end="8157" title="software freedom" label="software freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367020" start="8253" end="8284" title="Debian Free Software Guidelines" label="Debian Free Software Guidelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q192532" start="8323" end="8326" title="Digital rights management" label="DRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552237" start="8708" end="8729" title="The Scholarly Kitchen" label="The Scholarly Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552237" start="8745" end="8777" title="Society for Scholarly Publishing" label="Society for Scholarly Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q725920" start="9010" end="9026" title="EULA" label="software license"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="9247" end="9253" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q180419" start="9255" end="9278" title="Nature Publishing Group" label="Nature Publishing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q485593" start="9284" end="9290" title="RedHat" label="RedHat"/>
<link wikidata="Q49656" start="9542" end="9551" title="Mako Hill" label="Mako Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q620385" start="10200" end="10221" title="license proliferation" label="license proliferation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19092" start="10263" end="10275" title="license compatibility" label="incompatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q836950" start="10582" end="10597" title="derivative work" label="derivative work"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439" start="10654" end="10670" title="Richard Stallman" label="Richard Stallman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48413" start="10678" end="10702" title="Free Software Foundation" label="Free Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784058" start="11545" end="11575" title="United States Copyright Office" label="United States Copyright Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325951" start="13365" end="13388" title="Virgin Mobile Australia" label="Virgin Mobile Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103204" start="13575" end="13581" title="Flickr" label="Flickr"/>
<link wikidata="Q284742" start="13590" end="13621" title="Creative Commons Attribution 2.5" label="Creative Commons by Attribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q133475" start="14625" end="14633" title="Copyleft" label="Copyleft"/>
<link wikidata="Q898144" start="14636" end="14657" title="Free-culture movement" label="Free-culture movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q14075" start="14660" end="14672" title="Free content" label="Free content"/>
<link wikidata="Q97044024" start="14675" end="14694" title="Open-source license" label="Open-source license"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047642" start="14697" end="14729" title="Public-domain-equivalent license" label="Public-domain-equivalent license"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645568" start="14732" end="14777" title="List of major Creative Commons licensed works" label="List of major Creative Commons licensed works"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52273" wikidata="Q331789" url="?curid=52273" title="Crow people">
<text>The Crow, whose autonym is Apsáalooke (), are Native Americans living primarily in southern Montana. Today, the Crow people have a federally recognized tribe, the Crow Tribe of Montana, with an Indian reservation, the Crow Indian Reservation, located in the south-central part of the state.

Crow Indians are a Plains tribe, who speak the Crow language, part of the Missouri River Valley branch of Siouan languages. Of the 14,000 enrolled tribal citizens, an estimated 3,000 spoke the Crow language in 2007.

In historical times, the Crow lived in the Yellowstone River valley, which extends from present-day Wyoming, through Montana, and into North Dakota, where it joins the Missouri River. During the United States&#x27; expansion into the West, the Crow allied with the Americans against their neighbors and rivals, the Dakota, Lakota, and Cheyenne. 

Since the 19th century, Crow people have been concentrated on their reservation established south of Billings, Montana. Today, many also lived in major Western cities. Their tribal headquarters are located at Crow Agency, Montana. The tribe operates the Little Big Horn College.

==Name==
The autonym of the tribe, Apsáalooké or Absaroka, means &quot;children of the large-beaked bird&quot; and was given to them by the Hidatsa, a neighboring and related Siouan-speaking tribe. French interpreters translated the name as &quot;gens du corbeau&quot; (&quot;people of the crow&quot;), and they became known in English as the Crow. Other tribes also refer to the Apsáalooke as &quot;crow&quot; or &quot;raven&quot; in their own languages. The identity of the bird this name was meant to refer to originally is lost to time, but many Apsáalooké people believe it references the mythical Thunderbird.

==History==
===Into the Northern Plains===

The Crow and related Hidatsa originated in the Ohio Country, south of Lake Erie. They migrated west through Illinois, Minnesota, and settled south of Lake Winnipeg in the 12th or 13th centuries. They grew crops and hunted bison in settled villages, until the mid-16th century when the Ojibwe and Cree drove them further west to the Upper Missouri River.

Later the Crow moved to the Devil&#x27;s Lake region of North Dakota before the Crow split from the Hidatsa and moved westward in the late 17th century. The Crow were largely pushed westward due to intrusion and influx of the Cheyenne and subsequently the Sioux, also known as the Lakota.

To acquire control of their new territory, the Crow fought against Shoshone bands, such as the Bikkaashe, or &quot;People of the Grass Lodges&quot;, and drove them westward. The Crow allied with local Kiowa and Plains Apache bands. The Kiowa and Plains Apache bands later migrated southward, and the Crow remained dominant in their established area through the 18th and 19th centuries, the era of the fur trade.

Their historical territory stretched from what is now Yellowstone National Park and the headwaters of the Yellowstone River (E-chee-dick-karsh-ah-shay in Crow, translating to &quot;Elk River&quot;) to the west, north to the Musselshell River, then northeast to the Yellowstone&#x27;s mouth at the Missouri River, then southeast to the confluence of the Yellowstone and Powder rivers (Bilap Chashee, or &quot;Powder River&quot; or &quot;Ash River&quot;), south along the South Fork of the Powder River, confined in the SE by the Rattlesnake Mountains and westwards in the SW by the Wind River Range. Their tribal area included the river valleys of the Judith River (Buluhpa&#x27;ashe, or &quot;Plum River&quot;), Powder River, Tongue River, Big Horn River and Wind River as well as the Bighorn Mountains (Iisiaxpúatachee Isawaxaawúua), Pryor Mountains (Baahpuuo Isawaxaawúua), Wolf Mountains (Cheetiish, or &quot;Wolf Teeth Mountains&quot;) and Absaroka Range (also called Absalaga Mountains).

Once established in the Valley of the Yellowstone River and its tributaries on the Northern Plains in Montana and Wyoming, the Crow divided into four groups: the Mountain Crow, River Crow, Kicked in the Bellies, and Beaver Dries its Fur. Formerly semi-nomad hunters and farmers in the northeastern woodland, they adapted to the nomadic lifestyle of the Plains Indians as hunters and gatherers, and hunted bison. Before 1700, they were using dog travois for carrying goods.

===Enemies and allies===

From about 1730, the Plains tribes rapidly adopted the horse, which allowed them to move out on to the Plains and hunt buffalo more effectively. However, the severe winters in the North kept their herds smaller than those of Plains tribes in the South. The Crow, Hidatsa, Eastern Shoshone, and Northern Shoshone soon became noted as horse breeders and dealers and developed relatively large horse herds. At the time, other eastern and northern tribes were also moving on to the Plains, in search of game for the fur trade, bison, and more horses. The Crow were subject to raids and horse thefts by horse-poor tribes, including the powerful Blackfoot, Gros Ventre, Assiniboine, Pawnee, and Ute. Later they had to face the Lakota and their allies, the Arapaho and Cheyenne, who also stole horses from their enemies. Their greatest enemies became the tribes of the Blackfoot Confederacy and the Lakota-Cheyenne-Arapaho alliance.

In the 18th century, pressured by the Saulteaux and Cree peoples (the Iron Confederacy), who had earlier and better access to guns through the fur trade, the Crow had migrated to this area from the Ohio Eastern Woodland area of present-day Ohio, settling south of Lake Winnipeg. From there, they were pushed to the west by the Cheyenne. Both the Crow and the Cheyenne were pushed farther west by the Lakota, who took over the territory west of the Missouri River, reaching past the Black Hills of South Dakota to the Big Horn Mountains of Wyoming and Montana. The Cheyenne eventually became allies of the Lakota, as they sought to expel European Americans from the area. The Crow remained bitter enemies of both the Sioux and Cheyenne. They managed to retain a large reservation of more than 9300 km2 despite territorial losses, due in part to their cooperation with the federal government against their traditional enemies, the Sioux and Blackfoot. Many other tribes were forced onto much smaller reservations far from their traditional lands.

The Crow were generally friendly with the northern Plains tribes of the Flathead (although sometimes they had conflicts); Nez Perce, Kutenai, Shoshone, Kiowa, and Plains Apache. The powerful Iron Confederacy (Nehiyaw-Pwat), an alliance of northern plains Indian nations based around the fur trade, developed as enemies of the Crow. It was named after the dominating Plains Cree and Assiniboine peoples, and later included the Stoney, Saulteaux, and Métis.

===Historical subgroups===
By the early 19th century, the Apsáalooke fell into three independent groupings, who came together only for common defense:

* Ashalaho (&#x27;Many Lodges&#x27;, today called Mountain Crow), Awaxaawaxammilaxpáake (&#x27;Mountain People&#x27;), or Ashkúale (&#x27;The Center Camp&#x27;). The Ashalaho or Mountain Crow, the largest Crow group, split from the Awatixa Hidatsa and were the first to travel west. (McCleary 1997: 2–3)., (Bowers 1992: 21) Their leader No Intestines had received a vision and led his band on a long migratory search for sacred tobacco, finally settling in southeastern Montana. They lived in the Rocky Mountains and foothills along the Upper Yellowstone River, on the present-day Wyoming-Montana border, in the Big Horn and Absaroka Range (also Absalaga Mountains); the Black Hills comprised the eastern edge of their territory.
* Binnéessiippeele (&#x27;Those Who Live Amongst the River Banks&#x27;), today called River Crow or Ashshipíte (&#x27;The Black Lodges&#x27;) The Binnéessiippeele, or River Crow, split from the Hidatsa proper, according to tradition because of a dispute over a bison stomach. As a result, the Hidatsa called the Crow Gixáa-iccá—&quot;Those Who Pout Over Tripe&quot;. They lived along the Yellowstone and Musselshell rivers south of the Missouri River and in the river valleys of the Big Horn, Powder and Wind rivers. This area was historically known as the Powder River Country. They sometimes traveled north up to the Milk River.
* Eelalapito (Kicked in the Bellies) or Ammitaalasshé (Home Away From The center, that is, away from the Ashkúale – &quot;Mountain Crow&quot;). They claimed the area known as the Bighorn Basin, from the Bighorn Mountains in the east to the Absaroka Range to the west, and south to the Wind River Range in northern Wyoming. Sometimes they settled in the Owl Creek Mountains, Bridger Mountains and along the Sweetwater River in the south.

Apsaalooke oral history describes a fourth group, the Bilapiluutche (&quot;Beaver Dries its Fur&quot;), who may have merged with the Kiowa in the second half of the 17th century.

===Gradual displacement from tribal lands===
When European Americans arrived in numbers, the Crows were resisting pressure from enemies who greatly outnumbered them. In the 1850s, a vision by Plenty Coups, then a boy, but who later became their greatest chief, was interpreted by tribal elders as meaning that the whites would become dominant over the entire country, and that the Crow, if they were to retain any of their land, would need to remain on good terms with the whites.

By 1851, the more numerous Lakota and Cheyenne were established just to the south and east of Crow territory in Montana. These enemy tribes coveted the hunting lands of the Crow and warred against them. By right of conquest, they took over the eastern hunting lands of the Crow, including the Powder and Tongue River valleys, and pushed the less numerous Crow to the west and northwest upriver on the Yellowstone. After about 1860, the Lakota Sioux claimed all the former Crow lands from the Black Hills of South Dakota to the Big Horn Mountains of Montana. They demanded that the Americans deal with them regarding any intrusion into these areas.

The Treaty of Fort Laramie of 1851 with the United States confirmed as Crow lands a large area centered on the Big Horn Mountains: the area ran from the Big Horn Basin on the west, to the Musselshell River on the north, and east to the Powder River; it included the Tongue River basin. But for two centuries the Cheyenne and many bands of Lakota Sioux had been steadily migrating westward across the plains, and were still pressing hard on the Crows.

Red Cloud&#x27;s War (18661868) was a challenge by the Lakota Sioux to the United States military presence on the Bozeman Trail, a route along the eastern edge of the Big Horn Mountains to the Montana gold fields. Red Cloud&#x27;s War ended with victory for the Lakota. The Treaty of Fort Laramie of 1868 with the United States confirmed the Lakota control over all the high plains from the Black Hills of the Dakotas westward across the Powder River Basin to the crest of the Big Horn Mountains. Thereafter bands of Lakota Sioux led by Sitting Bull, Crazy Horse, Gall, and others, along with their Northern Cheyenne allies, hunted and raided throughout the length and breadth of eastern Montana and northeastern Wyoming, which had been for a time ancestral Crow territory.

On 25 June 1876, the Lakota Sioux and Cheyenne achieved a major victory over army forces under Lieutenant Colonel George Armstrong Custer at the Battle of the Little Big Horn in the Crow Indian Reservation, but the Great Sioux War (1876–1877) ended in the defeat of the Sioux and their Cheyenne allies. Crow warriors enlisted with the U.S. Army for this war. The Sioux and allies were forced from eastern Montana and Wyoming: some bands fled to Canada, while others suffered forced removal to distant reservations, primarily in present-day Montana and Nebraska west of the Missouri River.

In 1918, the Crow organized a gathering to display their culture, and they invited members of other tribes. The Crow Fair is now celebrated yearly on the third weekend of August, with wide participation from other tribes.

===Crow Tribe history: a chronological record===

====1600–1699====

A group of Crow went west after leaving the Hidatsa villages of earth lodges in the Knife River and Heart River area (present North Dakota) around 1675–1700. They selected a site for a single earth lodge on the lower Yellowstone River. Most families lived in tipis or other perishable kinds of homes at the new place. These Indians had left the Hidatsa villages and adjacent cornfields for good, but they had yet to become &quot;real&quot; buffalo hunting Crow following the herds on the open plains. Archaeologists know this &quot;proto-Crow&quot; site in present Montana as the Hagen site.

====1700–1799====
Some time before 1765, the Crow held a Sun Dance, attended by a poor Arapaho. A Crow with power gave him a medicine doll, and he quickly earned status and owned horses as no one else. During the next Sun Dance, some Crow stole back the figure to keep it in the tribe. Eventually the Arapaho made a duplicate. Later in life, he married a Kiowa woman and brought the doll with him. The Kiowas use it during the Sun Dance and recognize it as one of the most powerful tribal medicines. They still credit the Crow tribe for the origin of their sacred Tai-may figure.

====1800–1824====
The enmity between the Crow and the Lakota was reassured right from the start of the 19th century. The Crow killed a minimum of thirty Lakota in 1800–1801 according to two Lakota winter counts. The next year, the Lakota and their Cheyenne allies killed all the men in a Crow camp with thirty tipis.

In the summer of 1805, a Crow camp traded at the Hidatsa villages on Knife River in present North Dakota. Chiefs Red Calf and Spotted Crow allowed the fur trader Francois-Antoine Larocque to join it on its way across the plains to the Yellowstone area. He traveled with it to a point west of the place where Billings, Montana, is today. The camp crossed Little Missouri River and Bighorn River on the way.

The next year, some Crow discovered a group of whites with horses on the Yellowstone River. By stealth, they captured the mounts before morning. The Lewis and Clark Expedition did not see the Crow.

The first trading post in Crow country was constructed in 1807, known as both Fort Raymond and Fort Lisa (1807–ca. 1813). Like the succeeding forts, Fort Benton (ca. 1821–1824) and Fort Cass (1832–1838), it was built near the confluence of the Yellowstone and the Bighorn.

The Blood Blackfoot Bad Head&#x27;s winter count tells about the early and persistent hostility between the Crow and the Blackfoot. In 1813, a force of Blood warriors set off for a raid on the Crow in the Bighorn area. Next year, Crows near Little Bighorn River killed Blackfoot Top Knot.

A Crow camp neutralized thirty Cheyenne bent on capturing horses in 1819. The Cheyenne and warriors from a Lakota camp destroyed a whole Crow camp at Tongue River the following year. This was likely the most severe attack on a Crow camp in historic time.

====1825–1849====

The Crows put up 300 tipis near a Mandan village on the Missouri in 1825. The representatives of the US government waited for them. Mountain Crow chief Long Hair (Red Plume at Forehead) and fifteen other Crows signed the first treaty of friendship and trade between the Crows and the United States on 4 August. With the signing of the document, the Crows also recognized the supremacy of the United States, if they actually understood the word. River Crow chief Arapooish had left the treaty area in disgust. By help of the thunderbird he had to send a farewell shower down on the whites and the Mountain Crows.

In 1829, seven Crow warriors were neutralized by Blood Blackfoot Indians led by Spotted Bear, who captured a pipe-hatchet during the fight just west of Chinook, Montana.

In the summer of 1834, the Crow (maybe led by chief Arapooish) tried to shut down Fort McKenzie at the Missouri in Blackfeet country. The apparent motive was to stop the trading post&#x27;s sale to their Indian enemies. Although later described as a month long siege of the fort, it lasted only two days. The opponents exchanged a few shots and the men in the fort fired a cannon, but no real harm came to anyone. The Crows left four days before the arrival of a Blackfeet band. The episode seems to be the worst armed conflict between the Crows and a group of whites until the Sword Bearer uprising in 1887.

The death of chief Arapooish was recorded on 17 September 1834. The news reached Fort Clark at the Mandan village Mitutanka. Manager F.A. Chardon wrote he &quot;was Killed by Black feet&quot;.

The smallpox epidemic of 1837 spread along the Missouri and &quot;had little impact&quot; on the tribe according to one source. The River Crows grew in number, when a group of Hidatsas joined them permanently to escape the scourge sweeping through the Hidatsa villages.

Fort Van Buren was a short-lived trading post in existence from 1839 to 1842. It was built on the bank of the Yellowstone near the mouth of Tongue River.

In the summer of 1840, a Crow camp in the Bighorn valley greeted the Jesuit missionary Pierre-Jean De Smet.

From 1842 to around 1852, the Crow traded in Fort Alexander opposite the mouth of the Rosebud.

The River Crows charged a moving Blackfeet camp near Judith Gap in 1845. Father Pierre-Jean De Smet mourned the destructive attack on the &quot;petite Robe&quot; band. The Blackfeet chief Small Robe had been mortally wounded and many killed. De Smet worked out the number of women and children taken captive to 160. By and by and with a fur trader as an intermediary, the Crows agreed to let 50 women return to their tribe.

====1850–1874====

Fort Sarpy (I) near Rosebud River carried out trade with the Crow after the closing of Fort Alexander. River Crow went some times to the bigger Fort Union at the confluence of the Yellowstone and the Missouri. Both the &quot;famous Absaroka amazon&quot; Woman Chief and River Crow chief Twines His Tail (Rotten Tail) visited the fort in 1851.

In 1851, the Crow, the Sioux, and six other Indian nations signed the Fort Laramie treaty along with the U.S. It should ensure peace forever between all nine partakers. Further, the treaty described the different tribal territories. The U.S. was allowed to construct roads and forts. A weak point in the treaty was the absence of rules to uphold the tribal borders.

The Crow and various bands of Sioux attacked each other again from the mid-1850s. Soon, the Sioux took no notice of the 1851 borders and expanded into Crow territory west of the Powder. The Crows engaged in &quot;… large-scale battles with invading Sioux …&quot; near present-day Wyola, Montana. Around 1860, the western Powder area was lost.

From 1857 to 1860, many Crow traded their surplus robes and skin at Fort Sarpy (II) near the mouth of the Bighorn River.

During the mid-1860s, the Sioux resented the emigrant route Bozeman Trail through the Powder River bison habitat, although it mainly &quot;crossed land guaranteed to the Crows&quot;. When the Army built forts to protect the trail, the Crow cooperated with the garrisons. On 21 December 1866, the Sioux, Cheyenne, and Arapaho defeated Captain William J. Fetterman and his men from Fort Phil Kearny. Evidently, the U.S. could not enforce respect for the treaty borders agreed upon 15 years before.

The River Crow north of the Yellowstone developed a friendship with their former Gros Ventre enemies in the 1860s. A joint large-scale attack on a large Blackfoot camp at the Cypress Hills in 1866 resulted in a chaotic withdrawal of the Gros Ventres and Crow. The Blackfoot pursued the warriors for hours and killed allegedly more than 300.

In 1868, a new Fort Laramie treaty between the Sioux and the U.S. turned 1851 Crow Powder River area into &quot;unceded Indian territory&quot; of the Sioux. &quot;The Government had in effect betrayed the Crows…&quot;. On 7 May, the same year, the Crow ceded vast ranges to the US due to pressure from white settlements north of Upper Yellowstone River and loss of eastern territories to the Sioux. They accepted a smaller reservation south of the Yellowstone.

The Sioux and their Indian allies, now formally at peace with the U.S., focused on intertribal wars at once. Raids against the Crows were &quot;frequent, both by the Northern Cheyennes and by the Arapahos, as well as the Sioux, and by parties made up from all three tribes&quot;. Crow chief Plenty Coups recalled, &quot;The three worst enemies our people had were combined against us …&quot;.

In April 1870, the Sioux overpowered a barricaded war group of 30 Crow in the Big Dry area. The Crow were killed to either last or last but one man. Later, mourning Crow with &quot;their hair cut off, their fingers and faces cut&quot; brought the dead bodies back to camp. The drawing from the Sioux winter count of Lone Dog shows the Crow in the circle (the breastwork), while the Sioux close in on them. The many lines indicates flying bullets. The Sioux lost 14 warriors. Sioux chief Sitting Bull took part in this battle.

In the summer of 1870, some Sioux attacked a Crow reservation camp in the Bighorn/Little Bighorn area. The Crows reported Sioux Indians in the same area again in 1871. During the next years, this eastern part of the Crow reservation was taken over by the Sioux in search of buffalo. In August 1873, visiting Nez Percé and a Crow reservation camp at Pryor Creek further west faced a force of Sioux warriors in a long confrontation. Crow chief Blackfoot objected to this incursion and called for resolute U.S. military actions against the Indian trespassers. Due to Sioux attacks on both civilians and soldiers north of the Yellowstone in newly established U.S. territory (Battle of Pease Bottom, Battle of Honsinger Bluff), the Commissioner of Indian Affairs advocated the use of troops to force the Sioux back to South Dakota in his 1873 report. Nothing happened.

====1875–1899====

Two years later, in early July 1875, Crow chief Long Horse was killed in a suicidal attack on some Sioux, who previously had killed three soldiers from Camp Lewis on the upper Judith River (near Lewistown). George Bird Grinnell was a member of the exploring party in the Yellowstone National Park that year, and he saw the bringing in of the dead chief. A mule carried the body, which was wrapped in a green blanket. The chief was placed in a tipi &quot;not far from the Crow camp, reclining on his bed covered with robes, his face handsomely painted&quot;. Crow woman Pretty Shield remembered the sadness in camp. &quot;We fasted, nearly starved in our sorrow for the loss of Long-Horse.&quot;

Exposed to Sioux attacks, the Crows sided with the U.S. during the Great Sioux War in 1876–1877. On 10 April 1876, 23 Crow enlisted as Army scouts. They enlisted against a traditional Indian enemy, &quot;... who were now in the old Crow country, menacing and often raiding the Crows in their reservation camps.&quot; Charles Varnum, leader of Custer&#x27;s scouts, understood how valuable the enrolment of scouts from the local Indian tribe was. &quot;These Crows were in their own country and knew it thoroughly.&quot;

Notable Crows like Medicine Crow and Plenty Coups participated in the Rosebud Battle along with more than 160 other Crows.

The Battle of the Little Bighorn stood on the Crow reservation. As most battles between the US and the Sioux in the 1860s and 1870s, &quot;It was a clash of two expanding empires, with the most dramatic battles occurring on lands only recently taken by the Sioux from other tribes.&quot; When the Crow camp with Pretty Shield learned about the defeat of George A. Custer, it cried for the assumed dead Crow scouts &quot;… and for Son-of-the-morning-star [Custer] and his blue soldiers …&quot;.

On 8 January 1877, three Crow participated in the last battle of the Great Sioux War in the Wolf Mountains.

In the spring of 1878, 700 Crow tipis were pitched at the confluence of Bighorn River and Yellowstone River. Together with Colonel Nelson A. Miles, an Army leader in the Great Sioux War, the large camp celebrated the victory over the Sioux.

==Culture==

===Subsistence===

The main food source for the Crow was the American bison which was hunted in a variety of ways. Before the use of horses the bison were hunted on foot and required hunters to stalk close to the bison, often with a wolf-pelt disguise, then pursue the animals quickly on foot before killing them with arrows or lances. The horse allowed the Crow to hunt bison more easily as well as hunt more at one time. Riders would panic the herd into a stampede and shoot the targeted animals with arrows or bullets from horseback or lance them through the heart. In addition to bison the Crow also hunted bighorn sheep, mountain goats, deer, elk, bear, and other game. Buffalo meat was often roasted or boiled in a stew with prairie turnips. The rump, tongue, liver, heart, and kidneys all were considered delicacies. Dried bison meat was ground with fat and berries to make &quot;pemmican&quot;. In addition to meat, wild edibles were gathered and eaten such as elderberries, wild turnip, and Saskatoon berries.

The Crow often hunted bison by utilizing buffalo jumps. &quot;Where Buffaloes are Driven Over Cliffs at Long Ridge&quot; was a favorite spot for meat procurement by the Crow Indians for over a century, from 1700 to around 1870 when modern weapons were introduced. The Crow used this place annually in the autumn, a place of multiple cliffs along a ridge that eventually sloped to the creek. Early in the morning the day of the jump a medicine man would stand on the edge of the upper cliff, facing up the ridge. He would take a pair of bison hindquarters and pointing the feet along the lines of stones he would sing his sacred songs and call upon the Great Spirit to make the operation a success. After this invocation the medicine man would give the two head drivers a pouch of incense. As the two head drivers and their helpers headed up the ridge and the long line of stones they would stop and burn incense on the ground repeating this process four times. The ritual was intended to make the animals come to the line where the incense was burned, then bolt back to the ridge area.

===Habitation and transportation===

The traditional Crow shelter is the tipi or skin lodge made with bison hides stretched over wooden poles. The Crow are historically known to construct some of the largest tipis. Tipi poles were harvested from the lodgepole pine which acquired its name from its use as support for tipis. Inside the tipi, mattresses and buffalo-hide seats were arranged around the edge, with a fireplace in the center. The smoke from the fire escaped through a hole or smoke-flap in the top of the tipi. At least one entrance hole with collapsible flap allowed entry into the tipi. Often hide paintings adorned the outside and inside of tipis with specific meanings attached to the images. Often specific tipi designs were unique to the individual owner, family, or society that resided in the tipi. Tipis are easily raised and collapsed and are lightweight, which is ideal for nomadic people like the Crow who move frequently and quickly. Once collapsed, the tipi poles are used to create a travois. Travois are a horse-pulled frame structure used by plains Indians to carry and pull belongings as well as small children. Many Crow families still own and use the tipi, especially when traveling. The annual Crow Fair has been described as the largest gathering of tipis in the world.

The most widely used form of transportation used by the Crow was the horse. Horses were acquired through raiding and trading with other Plains nations. People of the northern plains like the Crow mostly got their horses from people from the southern plains such as the Comanche and Kiowa who originally got their horses from the Spanish and southwestern Indians such as the various Pueblo people. The Crow had large horse herds which were among the largest owned by Plains Indians; in 1914 they had approximately thirty to forty thousand head. By 1921 the number of mounts had dwindled to just one thousand. Like other plains people the horse was central to the Crow economy and were a highly valuable trade item and were frequently stolen from other tribes to gain wealth and prestige as a warrior. The horse allowed the Crow to become powerful and skilled mounted warriors, being able to perform daring maneuvers during battle including hanging underneath a galloping horse and shooting arrows by holding onto its mane. They also had many dogs; one source counted five to six hundred. Dogs were used as guards and pack animals to carry belongings and pull travois. The introduction of horses into Crow society allowed them to pull heavier loads faster, greatly reducing the number of dogs used as pack animals.

=== Attire ===
The Crow wore clothing distinguished by gender. Women wore dresses made of deer and buffalo hide, decorated with elk teeth or shells. They covered their legs with leggings during winter and their feet with moccasins. Crow women wore their hair in two braids. Male clothing usually consisted of a shirt, trimmed leggings with a belt, a long breechcloth, and moccasins. Robes made from the furred hide of a bison were often worn in winter. Leggings were either made of animal hide which the Crow made for themselves or made of wool which were highly valued trade items made specifically for Indians in Europe. Their hair was worn long, in some cases reaching the ground. The Crow are famous for often wearing their hair in a pompadour which was often colored with white paint. Crow men were notable for wearing two hair pipes made from beads on both sides of their hair. Men often wore their hair in two braids wrapped in the fur of beavers or otters. Bear grease was used to give shine to hair. Stuffed birds were often worn in the hair of warriors and medicine men. Like other plains Indians the Crow wore feathers from eagles, crows, owls, and other birds in their hair for symbolic reasons. The Crow wore a variety of headdresses including the famous eagle feather headdress, bison scalp headdress with horns and beaded rim, and split horn headdress. The split horn headdress is made from a single bison horn split in half and polished into two nearly identical horns which were attached to a leather cap and decorated with feathers and beadwork. Traditional clothing worn by the Crow is still worn today with varying degrees of regularity.

The Crow are well known for their intercut beadwork. They adorned basically every aspect of their lives with these beads, giving special attention to ceremonial and ornamental items. Their clothing, horses, cradles, ornamental and ceremonial gear, in addition to leather cases of all shapes, sizes and uses were decorated in beadwork. They gave reverence to the animals they ate by using as much of it as they could. The leather for their clothing, robes and pouches were created from the skin of buffalo, deer and elk. The work was done by the tribeswomen, with some being considered experts and were often sought by the younger, less experienced women for design and symbolic advice. The Crow are an innovative people and are credited with developing their own style of stitch-work for adhering beads. This stitch, which is now called the overlay, is still also known as the &quot;Crow Stitch&quot;. In their beadwork, geometric shapes were primarily used with triangles, diamonds and hour-glass structures being the most prevalent. A wide range of colors were utilized by the Crow, but blues and various shades of pink were the most dominantly used. To intensify or to draw out a certain color or shape, they would surround that figure or color in a white outline.

The colors chosen were not just merely used to be aesthetically pleasing, but rather had a deeper symbolic meaning. Pinks represented the various shades of the rising sun with yellow being the East the origin of the sun&#x27;s arrival. Blues are symbolic of the sky; red represented the setting sun or the West; green symbolizing mother earth, black the slaying of an enemy and white representing clouds, rain or sleet. Although most colors had a common symbolism, each piece&#x27;s symbolic significance was fairly subjective to its creator, especially when in reference to the individual shapes. One person&#x27;s triangle might symbolize a teepee, a spear head to a different individual or a range of mountains to yet another. Regardless of the individual significance of each piece, the Crow People give reverence to the land and sky with the symbolic references found in the various colors and shapes found on their ornamental gear and even clothing.

Some of the clothing that the Crow decorated with beads included robes, vests, pants, shirts, moccasins and various forms of celebratory and ceremonial gear. In addition to creating a connection with the land, from which they are a part, the various shapes and colors reflected one&#x27;s standing and achievements. For example, if a warrior were to slay, wound or disarm an enemy, he would return with a blackened face. The black color would then be incorporated in the clothing of that man, most likely in his war attire. A beaded robe, which was often given to a bride to be, could take over a year to produce and was usually created by the bride&#x27;s mother-in-law or another female relative-in-law. These robes were often characterized by a series of parallel horizontal lines, usually consisting of light blue. The lines represented the young women&#x27;s new role as a wife and mother; also the new bride was encouraged to wear the robe at the next ceremonial gathering to symbolize her addition and welcoming to a new family. In modern times, the Crow still often decorate their clothing with intricate bead designs for powwow and everyday clothing.

===Gender and kinship system===
The Crow had a matrilineal system. After marriage, the couple was matrilocal (the husband moved to the wife&#x27;s mother&#x27;s house upon marriage). Women hold a significant role within the tribe.

Crow kinship is a system used to describe and define family members. Identified by Lewis Henry Morgan in his 1871 work &quot;Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human Family&quot;, the Crow system is one of the six major types which he described: Eskimo, Hawaiian, Iroquois, Crow, Omaha, and Sudanese.

The Crow historically had a status for male-bodied two-spirits, termed &quot;baté&quot;/&quot;badé&quot;, such as Osh-Tisch.

==21st Century==

===Geography===

The Crow Indian Reservation in south-central Montana is a large reservation covering approximately of land area, the fifth-largest Indian reservation in the United States. The reservation is primarily in Big Horn and Yellowstone counties with ceded lands in Rosebud, Carbon, and Treasure counties. The Crow Indian Reservation&#x27;s eastern border is the 107th meridian line, except along the border line of the Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation.

The southern border is from the 107th meridian line west to the east bank of the Big Horn River. The line travels downstream to Bighorn Canyon National Recreation Area and west to the Pryor Mountains and north-easterly to Billings. The northern border travels east and through Hardin, Montana, to the 107th meridian line. The 2000 census reported a total population of 6,894 on reservation lands. Its largest community is Crow Agency.

===Government===
Prior to the 2001 Constitution, the Crow Tribe of Montana was governed by its 1948 constitution. The former constitution organized the tribe as a general council (tribal council). The general council held the executive, legislative, and judicial powers of the government and included all enrolled, adult members of the Crow Tribe, provided that women were 18 years or older and men were 21 or older. The general council was a direct democracy, comparable to that the Haudenosaunee Confederacy.

The Crow Tribe of Montana established a three-branch government at a 2001 council meeting with its 2001 constitution. The general council remains the governing body of the tribe; however, the powers were distributed to three separate branches within the government. In theory, the general council is still the governing body of the Crow Tribe, yet in reality the general council has not convened since the establishment of the 2001 constitution.

The executive branch has four officials. These officials are known as the chairperson, Vice-chairperson, Secretary, and Vice-Secretary. The Executive Branch officials are also the officials within the Crow Tribal General Council, which has not met since 15 July 2001.

The current administration of the Crow Tribe Executive Branch is as follows:

* Chairman: Frank White Clay
* Vice-chairman: Lawrence DeCrane
* Secretary: Levi Black Eagle
* Vice-Secretary: Channis Whiteman

The Legislative Branch consists of three members from each district on the Crow Indian Reservation. The Crow Indian Reservation is divided into six districts known as The Valley of the Chiefs, Reno, Black Lodge, Mighty Few, Big Horn, and Pryor Districts. The Valley of the Chiefs District is the largest district by population.

The Judicial Branch consists of all courts established by the Crow Law and Order Code and in accordance with the 2001 Constitution. The Judicial Branch has jurisdiction over all matters defined in the Crow Law and Order Code. The Judicial Branch attempts to be a separate and distinct branch of government from the Legislative and Executive Branches of Crow Tribal Government. The Judicial Branch consists of an elected Chief Judge and two Associate Judges. The Crow Court of Appeals, similar to State Court of Appeals, receives all appeals from the lower courts. The Chief Judge of the Crow Tribe is Julie Yarlott.

====Constitution controversy====
According to the 1948 Constitution, Resolution 63-01 (Please note: in a letter of communication from Phileo Nash, then Commissioner of Indian Affairs, to the B.I.A. Area Director, as stated in the letter and confirmed that 63-01 is an Ordinance in said letter) all constitutional amendments must be voted on by secret ballot or referendum vote. In 2001, major actions were taken by the former Chairperson Birdinground without complying with those requirements. The quarterly council meeting on 15 July 2001 passed all resolutions by voice vote, including the measure to repeal the current constitution and approve a new constitution.

Critics contend the new constitution is contrary to the spirit of the Crow Tribe, as it provides authority for the US Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) to approve Crow legislation and decisions. The Crow people have guarded their sovereignty and Treaty Rights. The alleged New Constitution was not voted on to add it to the agenda of the Tribal Council. The former constitution mandated that constitutional changes be conducted by referendum vote, using the secret ballot election method and criteria. In addition, a constitutional change can only be conducted in a specially called election, which was never approved by council action for the 2001 Constitution. The agenda was not voted on or accepted at the council.

The only vote taken at the council was whether to conduct the voting by voice vote or walking through the line. Critics say the chairman ignored and suppressed attempts to discuss the Constitution. This council and constitutional change was never ratified by any subsequent council action. The Tribal Secretary, who was removed from office by the Birdinground Administration, was the leader of the opposition. All activity occurred without his signature.

When the opposition challenged, citing the violation of the Constitutional Process and the Right to Vote, the Birdinground Administration sought the approval of the United States Department of the Interior (USDOI), Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA). The latter stated it could not interfere in an internal tribal affair The federal court also ruled that the constitutional change was an internal tribal matter.

===Leadership===

The seat of government and capital of the Crow Indian Reservation is Crow Agency, Montana.

The Crow Tribe historically elected a chairperson of tribal council biennially; however, in 2001, the term of office was extended to four years. The previous chairperson was Carl Venne. The chairperson serves as chief executive officer, speaker of the council, and majority leader of the Crow Tribal Council. The constitutional changes of 2001 created a three-branch government. The chairperson serves as the head of the executive branch, which includes the offices of vice-chairperson, secretary, vice-secretary, and the tribal offices and departments of the Crow Tribal Administration. Notable chairs include Clara Nomee, Edison Real Bird, and Robert &quot;Robie&quot; Yellowtail.

On 19 May 2008, Hartford and Mary Black Eagle of the Crow Tribe adopted U.S. Senator (later President) Barack Obama into the tribe on the date of the first visit of a U.S. presidential candidate to the nation. Crow representatives also took part in President Obama&#x27;s inaugural parade. In 2009, Dr. Joseph Medicine Crow was one of 16 people awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom.

During the United States federal government shutdown of 2013, the Crow Tribe furloughed 316 employees and suspended programs providing health care, bus services and improvements to irrigation.

In 2020, the Tribal Chairman AJ Not Afraid Jr. endorsed President Donald Trump&#x27;s reelection, along with endorsing Republicans Steve Daines for the Senate, Greg Gianforte for Governor and Matt Rosendale for the U.S. House.
== Notable Crow people ==
* Eldena Bear Don&#x27;t Walk (Crow/Salish/Kutenai, b. c. 1973), lawyer, judge, politician, first woman to serve as the Chief Justice of the Crow Tribe
* Max Big Man, educator, artist, and honorary chief who created educational programming with CBS Radio
* Earl Biss (1947–1998), painter
* Bull Chief (c. 1825 – unknown), war chief (pipe carrier), who fought against Lakota, Nez Percé, Shoshone, and Piegan Blackfoot warriors, he also resisted white settlement of Crow territory
* Curly (or Curley) (also known as Ashishishe/Shishi&#x27;esh, c. 1856 – 1923), Indian Scout and warrior
* Goes Ahead or Ba&#x27;suck&#x27;osh (also Walks Among the Stars, 1851–1919), Indian Scout and warrior, husband of Pretty Shield
* Hairy Moccasin or Esh-sup-pee-me-shish (c. 1854 – 1922), Crow Indian Scout and warrior
* Half Yellow Face or Ischu Shi Dish (c. 1830 – c. 1879), Crow Indian Scout and warrior, war leader (pipe carrier) and leader of the six Crow Scouts who assisted General George A. Custer
* Issaatxalúash, also Two Leggings (mid-1840s – 1923); &quot;bacheeítche&quot; (local group leader) of River Crow, war leader (pipe carrier), during the first years of the reservation era
* Donald Laverdure, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs at the U.S. Department of the Interior
* Joe Medicine Crow, also PédhitšhÎ-wahpášh (1913–2016), the last war chief (pipe carrier) of the Crow Tribe, educator, historian, author, and official anthropologist
* Elias Not Afraid; (born 1990) Apsáalooke (Crow/Absaroke)[2] artist known for his traditional and non-traditional beadwork
* Janine Pease, an American Indian educator and advocate and the first woman of Crow lineage to earn a doctorate degree
* Wendy Red Star, visual artist
* Plenty Coups, Crow chief who cooperated with the government against other more hostile tribes, ensuring the Crow kept much of their traditional lands.
* Pretty Eagle, fellow war chief of Plenty Coups, who worked with him to ensure the tribe&#x27;s cooperation with the federal government.
* Pretty Shield (c. 1856 – 1944), medicine woman, wife of Goes Ahead, a scout at the Battle of the Little Bighorn
* Shows as He Goes, war chief
* Pauline Small or Strikes Twice In One Summer (1924–2005), first woman to serve in Crow Tribal Council
* Frank Shively (c. 1877 – unknown), football coach
* Supaman, also Christian Parrish Takes the Gun, rapper and fancy dancer
* Noah Watts, also Bulaagawish (Old Bull), actor and musician, best known for his role as Ratonhnhaké:ton, the main character of Assassin&#x27;s Creed III
* Bethany Yellowtail (Crow/Northern Cheyenne), fashion designer based in Los Angeles
* Robert Yellowtail (1889–1988), leader of Crow Tribe, first Native American to hold position of Agency Superintendent
* Thomas Yellowtail (1903–1993), a medicine man and Sun Dance Chief of the Crow Tribe
* White Man Runs Him (c. 1858 – 1929); Crow Indian Scout and warrior, step-grandfather of Joe Medicine Crow
* White Swan, also Mee-nah-tsee-us (White Goose, c. 1850 – 1904), Indian Scout and warrior, cousin of Curly.

==See also==
* Absaroka, a proposed state located in parts of Montana, South Dakota, and Wyoming.
* Crow religion
* James Beckwourth, a Black chief of the Crow tribe
* Pine Leaf, a female chief of the Crow tribe

==Citations==
== General references ==
* Thomas H. Leforge, &quot;Memoirs of a White Crow Indian&quot;, The Century Co., 1928, hardcover, ASIN B00086PAP6
* Alma Hogan Snell, &quot;Grandmother&#x27;s Grandchild: My Crow Indian Life&quot;, University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska, 2000, hardcover, 
* Charles Bradley, &quot;The Handsome People: A History of the Crow Indians and the Whites&quot;, Council for Indian Education, 1991, paperback, 
* Frank B. Linderman, &quot;Plenty-Coups: Chief of the Crows&quot;, University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska, 1962, paperback, 
* Frank B. Linderman, &quot;Pretty-shield: Medicine Woman of the Crows&quot;, University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska, 1974, paperback, 
* Fred W. Voget and Mary K. Mee, &quot;They Call Me Agnes: A Crow Narrative Based on the Life of Agnes Yellowtail Deernose&quot;, University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, Oklahoma, 1995, hardcover, 
* Frederick E. Hoxie, &quot;Parading through History: The Making of the Crow Nation in America 1805–1935&quot;, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 1995, hardcover, 
* Helene Smith and Lloyd G. Mickey Old Coyote, &quot;Apsaalooka: The Crow Nation Then and Now&quot;, MacDonald/Swãrd Publishing Company, Greensburg, Pennsylvania, 1992, paperback, 
* Henry Old Coyote and Barney Old Coyote, &quot;The Way of the Warrior: Stories of the Crow People&quot;, University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska, 2003, 
* Jonathan Lear, &quot;Radical Hope: Ethics in the Face of Cultural Devastation&quot;, Harvard University Press, 2006, 
* Joseph Medicine Crow, &quot;From the Heart of the Crow Country: The Crow Indians&#x27; Own Stories&quot;, University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska, 2000, paperback, 
* Keith Algier, &quot;The Crow and the Eagle: A Tribal History from Lewis &amp; Clark to Custer&quot;, Caxton Printers, Caldwell, Idaho, 1993, paperback, 
* Michael Oren Fitzgerald, &quot;Yellowtail, Crow Medicine Man and Sun Dance Chief: An Autobiography&quot;, University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, Oklahoma, 1991, hardcover, 
* Peter Nabokov, &quot;Two Leggings: The Making of a Crow Warrior&quot;, Crowell Publishing Co., 1967, hardcover, ASIN B0007EN16O
* Robert H. Lowie, &quot;The Crow Indians&quot;, University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska, 1983, paperback, 
* Robert H. Lowie, &quot;Crow Indian Art&quot;, The Trustees, 1922, ASIN B00086D6RK
* Robert H. Lowie, &quot;Material Culture of the Crow Indians&quot;, The Trustees, 1922, hardcover, ASIN B00085WH80
* Robert H. Lowie, &quot;Minor Ceremonies of the Crow Indians&quot;, American Museum Press, 1924, hardcover, ASIN B00086D3NC
* Robert H. Lowie, &quot;Myths and Traditions of the Crow Indians&quot;, AMS Press, 1980, hardcover, 
* Robert H. Lowie, &quot;Religion of the Crow Indians&quot;, The Trustees, 1922, hardcover, ASIN B00086IFQM
* Robert H. Lowie, &quot;Social Life of the Crow Indians&quot;, AMS Press, 1912, hardcover, 
* Robert H. Lowie, &quot;The Crow Language&quot;, University of California Press, 1941, hardcover, ASIN B0007EKBDU
* Robert H.Lowie, &quot;The Tobacco Society of the Crow Indians&quot;, The Trustees, 1919, hardcover, ASIN B00086IFRG
* Robert H. Lowie, 1914, &quot;The Crow Sun Dance&quot;, hardcover, ASIN B0008CBIOW
* Rodney Frey (ed.), &quot;Stories That Make the World: Oral Literature of the Indian Peoples of the Inland Northwest. As Told by Lawrence Aripa, Tom Yellowtail and Other Elders&quot;. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1995. 
* Rodney Frey, &quot;The World of the Crow Indians: As Driftwood Lodges&quot;, Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1987. 

==External links==
* Crow Tribe of Montana, Apsaalooké
* Crow Indians – Their Lands, Allies and Enemies
* Little Big Horn College Library
* Smithsonian
* 2001 Constitution
* 1948 Constitution
* Photo exhibition on Crow Indians, with short account of 21st century lifestyle, Untold London
* Collection of historical Crow photographs
* List of Crow Chiefs, Little Big Horn College Library.
* &quot;Crow Indian Recipes and Herbal Medicine&quot;, by Pretty Shield&#x27;s granddaughter, Alma Hogan Snell</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q331789" start="4" end="8" title="Crow people" label="Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="16" end="23" title="Endonym and exonym" label="autonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q331789" start="27" end="37" title="Crow people" label="Apsáalooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="46" end="62" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358663" start="131" end="157" title="List of federally recognized tribes in the United States" label="federally recognized tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q331789" start="163" end="184" title="Crow people" label="Crow Tribe of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="194" end="212" title="Indian reservation" label="Indian reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241804" start="218" end="241" title="Crow Indian Reservation" label="Crow Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q907924" start="311" end="323" title="Plains Indians" label="Plains tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207611" start="339" end="352" title="Crow language" label="Crow language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34181" start="398" end="414" title="Siouan languages" label="Siouan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q374772" start="552" end="569" title="Yellowstone River" label="Yellowstone River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="609" end="616" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="626" end="633" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="644" end="656" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="677" end="691" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148367" start="824" end="830" title="Dakota people" label="Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="832" end="838" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="844" end="852" title="Cheyenne" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q166304" start="957" end="974" title="Billings, Montana" label="Billings, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q964578" start="1065" end="1085" title="Crow Agency, Montana" label="Crow Agency, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649089" start="1110" end="1133" title="Little Big Horn College" label="Little Big Horn College"/>
<link wikidata="Q503333" start="1276" end="1283" title="Hidatsa" label="Hidatsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q264471" start="1739" end="1750" title="Thunderbird (mythology)" label="Thunderbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016453" start="1844" end="1856" title="Ohio Country" label="Ohio Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492" start="1867" end="1876" title="Lake Erie" label="Lake Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272" start="1947" end="1960" title="Lake Winnipeg" label="Lake Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267424" start="2180" end="2197" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Lake (North Dakota)" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="2208" end="2220" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q503333" start="2252" end="2259" title="Hidatsa" label="Hidatsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="2408" end="2413" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q26774" start="2509" end="2517" title="Shoshone" label="Shoshone"/>
<link wikidata="Q117100" start="2643" end="2648" title="Kiowa" label="Kiowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523166" start="2653" end="2666" title="Plains Apache" label="Plains Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q502534" start="2843" end="2852" title="North American fur trade" label="fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="2909" end="2934" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955484" start="3079" end="3096" title="Musselshell River" label="Musselshell River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="3152" end="3166" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096785" start="3224" end="3230" title="Powder River (Montana)" label="Powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722116" start="3436" end="3452" title="Wind River Range" label="Wind River Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187977" start="3506" end="3518" title="Judith River" label="Judith River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787489" start="3581" end="3593" title="Tongue River (Montana)" label="Tongue River"/>
<link wikidata="Q859686" start="3595" end="3609" title="Big Horn River" label="Big Horn River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745932" start="3614" end="3624" title="Wind River (Wyoming)" label="Wind River"/>
<link wikidata="Q643243" start="3640" end="3657" title="Bighorn Mountains" label="Bighorn Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323101" start="3690" end="3705" title="Pryor Mountains" label="Pryor Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029870" start="3731" end="3745" title="Wolf Mountains" label="Wolf Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q331762" start="3799" end="3813" title="Absaroka Range" label="Absaroka Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q374772" start="3873" end="3904" title="Yellowstone River" label="Valley of the Yellowstone River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="3951" end="3958" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="3963" end="3970" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="4177" end="4184" title="nomadic" label="nomadic"/>
<link wikidata="Q907924" start="4202" end="4216" title="Plains Indians" label="Plains Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q18099" start="4254" end="4259" title="bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q949220" start="4290" end="4301" title="Travois" label="dog travois"/>
<link wikidata="Q307014" start="4621" end="4637" title="Eastern Shoshone" label="Eastern Shoshone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006743" start="4643" end="4660" title="Northern Shoshone" label="Northern Shoshone"/>
<link wikidata="Q388264" start="4989" end="4998" title="Blackfoot Confederacy" label="Blackfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q510032" start="5000" end="5011" title="Gros Ventre" label="Gros Ventre"/>
<link wikidata="Q682808" start="5013" end="5024" title="Assiniboine" label="Assiniboine"/>
<link wikidata="Q750947" start="5026" end="5032" title="Pawnee people" label="Pawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253290" start="5038" end="5041" title="Ute people" label="Ute"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="5070" end="5076" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q626136" start="5099" end="5106" title="Arapaho" label="Arapaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="5111" end="5119" title="Cheyenne" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q541421" start="5314" end="5323" title="Saulteaux" label="Saulteaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q117191" start="5328" end="5332" title="Cree" label="Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072409" start="5346" end="5362" title="Iron Confederacy" label="Iron Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="5419" end="5428" title="fur trade" label="fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272" start="5540" end="5553" title="Lake Winnipeg" label="Lake Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q250937" start="5758" end="5769" title="Black Hills" label="Black Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q643243" start="5793" end="5811" title="Big Horn Mountains" label="Big Horn Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241804" start="6043" end="6054" title="Crow Indian Reservation" label="reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q497587" start="6394" end="6402" title="Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Nation" label="Flathead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123923" start="6444" end="6453" title="Nez Perce" label="Nez Perce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550384" start="6455" end="6462" title="Kutenai" label="Kutenai"/>
<link wikidata="Q117100" start="6474" end="6479" title="Kiowa" label="Kiowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523166" start="6485" end="6498" title="Plains Apache" label="Plains Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q492150" start="6748" end="6754" title="Nakoda people" label="Stoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q262457" start="6771" end="6776" title="Métis" label="Métis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682108" start="7297" end="7303" title="Vision (spirituality)" label="vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q177626" start="7331" end="7340" title="Human migration" label="migratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030548" start="7352" end="7366" title="sacred tobacco" label="sacred tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="7401" end="7408" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q250937" start="7602" end="7613" title="Black Hills" label="Black Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q266864" start="8218" end="8238" title="Powder River Country" label="Powder River Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q217739" start="8280" end="8290" title="Milk River (Alberta–Montana)" label="Milk River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906955" start="8471" end="8484" title="Bighorn Basin" label="Bighorn Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114850" start="8645" end="8664" title="Owl Creek Mountains" label="Owl Creek Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966629" start="8666" end="8683" title="Bridger Mountains (Montana)" label="Bridger Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444096" start="8698" end="8714" title="Sweetwater River (Wyoming)" label="Sweetwater River"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="8741" end="8753" title="oral tradition" label="oral history"/>
<link wikidata="Q117100" start="8863" end="8868" title="Kiowa" label="Kiowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204572" start="9102" end="9114" title="Plenty Coups" label="Plenty Coups"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895359" start="9598" end="9615" title="right of conquest" label="right of conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q374772" start="9793" end="9804" title="Yellowstone River" label="Yellowstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q250937" start="9884" end="9895" title="Black Hills" label="Black Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q643243" start="9919" end="9937" title="Big Horn Mountains" label="Big Horn Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241487" start="10045" end="10075" title="Treaty of Fort Laramie (1851)" label="Treaty of Fort Laramie of 1851"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906955" start="10194" end="10208" title="Big Horn Basin" label="Big Horn Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955484" start="10229" end="10246" title="Musselshell River" label="Musselshell River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096785" start="10277" end="10289" title="Powder River (Montana)" label="Powder River"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="10320" end="10325" title="Drainage basin" label="basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="10353" end="10361" title="Cheyenne" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="10380" end="10392" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060306" start="10493" end="10513" title="Red Cloud&amp;#x27;s War" label="Red Cloud&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q896134" start="10607" end="10620" title="Bozeman Trail" label="Bozeman Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481957" start="10767" end="10797" title="Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868)" label="Treaty of Fort Laramie of 1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106899" start="10931" end="10949" title="Powder River Basin" label="Powder River Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43527" start="11030" end="11042" title="Sitting Bull" label="Sitting Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q44555" start="11044" end="11055" title="Crazy Horse" label="Crazy Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q224107" start="11057" end="11061" title="Gall" label="Gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457186" start="11092" end="11109" title="Northern Cheyenne" label="Northern Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330319" start="11173" end="11188" title="eastern Montana" label="eastern Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="11206" end="11213" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q188205" start="11382" end="11405" title="George Armstrong Custer" label="George Armstrong Custer"/>
<link wikidata="Q205422" start="11413" end="11442" title="Battle of the Little Big Horn" label="Battle of the Little Big Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241804" start="11450" end="11473" title="Crow Indian Reservation" label="Crow Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q430053" start="11483" end="11498" title="Great Sioux War" label="Great Sioux War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189083" start="11970" end="11979" title="Crow Fair" label="Crow Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026382" start="13521" end="13533" title="winter count" label="winter count"/>
<link wikidata="Q166304" start="13950" end="13967" title="Billings, Montana" label="Billings, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="14198" end="14224" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q10498202" start="14326" end="14338" title="Fort Raymond" label="Fort Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q44812134" start="14949" end="14974" title="Tongue River Indian Massacre" label="Crow camp at Tongue River"/>
<link wikidata="Q966181" start="15852" end="15868" title="Chinook, Montana" label="Chinook, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189126" start="16449" end="16470" title="Crow War" label="Sword Bearer uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470939" start="16562" end="16572" title="Fort Clark Trading Post State Historic Site" label="Fort Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q956625" start="17359" end="17369" title="Judith Gap, Montana" label="Judith Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q981962" start="17386" end="17405" title="Pierre-Jean De Smet" label="Pierre-Jean De Smet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362959" start="17894" end="17904" title="Fort Union Trading Post National Historic Site" label="Fort Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q134154" start="17991" end="17997" title="Amazons" label="amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q959278" start="18741" end="18755" title="Wyola, Montana" label="Wyola, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q896134" start="18987" end="19000" title="Bozeman Trail" label="Bozeman Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346001" start="19269" end="19289" title="William J. Fetterman" label="William J. Fetterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471828" start="19307" end="19323" title="Fort Phil Kearny" label="Fort Phil Kearny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148229" start="19599" end="19612" title="Cypress Hills (Canada)" label="Cypress Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241804" start="20189" end="20200" title="Crow Indian Reservation" label="reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710038" start="21820" end="21842" title="Battle of Pease Bottom" label="Battle of Pease Bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871244" start="21844" end="21869" title="Battle of Honsinger Bluff" label="Battle of Honsinger Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010563" start="21876" end="21906" title="Bureau of Indian Affairs" label="Commissioner of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398792" start="22240" end="22260" title="George Bird Grinnell" label="George Bird Grinnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="22304" end="22329" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q430053" start="22796" end="22811" title="Great Sioux War of 1876" label="Great Sioux War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189120" start="22864" end="22875" title="Crow scouts" label="Army scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083119" start="23046" end="23060" title="Charles Varnum" label="Charles Varnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q549005" start="24109" end="24124" title="Nelson A. Miles" label="Nelson A. Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="24294" end="24308" title="American bison" label="American bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q189466" start="24844" end="24857" title="bighorn sheep" label="bighorn sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q242602" start="24859" end="24873" title="mountain goats" label="mountain goats"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="24881" end="24884" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q21314347" start="24964" end="24978" title="prairie turnip" label="prairie turnip"/>
<link wikidata="Q130097" start="25120" end="25128" title="pemmican" label="pemmican"/>
<link wikidata="Q131448" start="25202" end="25214" title="Sambucus" label="elderberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q164158" start="25233" end="25250" title="Amelanchier alnifolia" label="Saskatoon berries"/>
<link wikidata="Q605981" start="25294" end="25306" title="buffalo jump" label="buffalo jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q134932" start="26413" end="26431" title="tipi" label="tipi or skin lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="26442" end="26447" title="American Bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q165091" start="26590" end="26604" title="lodgepole pine" label="lodgepole pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q949220" start="27351" end="27358" title="travois" label="travois"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="27714" end="27719" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q907924" start="28111" end="28124" title="Plains Indian" label="Plains Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="29049" end="29053" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18099" start="29058" end="29065" title="Bison" label="buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="29087" end="29090" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q252484" start="29180" end="29188" title="moccasin" label="moccasin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130359" start="29314" end="29325" title="breechcloth" label="breechcloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q14776796" start="29697" end="29706" title="pompadour (hairstyle)" label="pompadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q258933" start="30227" end="30250" title="war bonnet" label="eagle feather headdress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136773" start="34052" end="34063" title="matrilineal" label="matrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328927" start="34103" end="34113" title="matrilocal" label="matrilocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536046" start="34237" end="34249" title="Crow kinship" label="Crow kinship"/>
<link wikidata="Q313458" start="34320" end="34338" title="Lewis Henry Morgan" label="Lewis Henry Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523730" start="34493" end="34499" title="Eskimo kinship" label="Eskimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523788" start="34501" end="34509" title="Hawaiian kinship" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536028" start="34511" end="34519" title="Iroquois kinship" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536040" start="34527" end="34532" title="Omaha kinship" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523747" start="34538" end="34546" title="Sudanese kinship" label="Sudanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q301702" start="34600" end="34610" title="two-spirit" label="two-spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106558" start="34663" end="34672" title="Osh-Tisch" label="Osh-Tisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241804" start="34714" end="34737" title="Crow Indian Reservation" label="Crow Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="34841" end="34859" title="Indian reservation" label="Indian reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q109503" start="34914" end="34922" title="Big Horn County, Montana" label="Big Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q490283" start="34927" end="34938" title="Yellowstone County, Montana" label="Yellowstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q496664" start="34968" end="34975" title="Rosebud County, Montana" label="Rosebud"/>
<link wikidata="Q192992" start="34977" end="34983" title="Carbon County, Montana" label="Carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q496744" start="34989" end="34997" title="Treasure County, Montana" label="Treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701112" start="35065" end="35079" title="107th meridian west" label="107th meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457186" start="35122" end="35158" title="Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation" label="Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q859686" start="35242" end="35256" title="Big Horn River" label="Big Horn River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906951" start="35289" end="35328" title="Bighorn Canyon National Recreation Area" label="Bighorn Canyon National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323101" start="35345" end="35360" title="Pryor Mountains" label="Pryor Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q964591" start="35438" end="35453" title="Hardin, Montana" label="Hardin, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="35487" end="35498" title="United States Census, 2000" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840289" start="35777" end="35791" title="tribal council" label="tribal council"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="36040" end="36056" title="direct democracy" label="direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="36081" end="36106" title="Haudenosaunee Confederacy" label="Haudenosaunee Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80687" start="36661" end="36670" title="Secretary" label="Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="38033" end="38045" title="Constitution" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010563" start="38764" end="38788" title="Bureau of Indian Affairs" label="Bureau of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="39984" end="40024" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="United States Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010563" start="40034" end="40058" title="Bureau of Indian Affairs" label="Bureau of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241804" start="40288" end="40311" title="Crow Indian Reservation" label="Crow Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="40328" end="40335" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040904" start="40512" end="40522" title="Carl Venne" label="Carl Venne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126030" start="40949" end="40960" title="Clara Nomee" label="Clara Nomee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338417" start="40962" end="40978" title="Edison Real Bird Administration" label="Edison Real Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351311" start="40984" end="41019" title="Robert Yellowtail" label="Robert &amp;quot;Robie&amp;quot; Yellowtail"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="41125" end="41137" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707608" start="41325" end="41345" title="Joe Medicine Crow" label="Joseph Medicine Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="41379" end="41408" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15015307" start="41422" end="41471" title="United States federal government shutdown of 2013" label="United States federal government shutdown of 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858953" start="41661" end="41701" title="List of Donald Trump 2020 presidential campaign political endorsements" label="President Donald Trump&amp;#x27;s reelection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200900" start="41736" end="41748" title="Steve Daines" label="Steve Daines"/>
<link wikidata="Q42916322" start="41749" end="41763" title="2020 United States Senate election in Montana" label="for the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605607" start="41765" end="41779" title="Greg Gianforte" label="Greg Gianforte"/>
<link wikidata="Q48835101" start="41780" end="41792" title="2020 Montana gubernatorial election" label="for Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791163" start="41797" end="41811" title="Matt Rosendale" label="Matt Rosendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121936" start="41812" end="41830" title="2020 United States House of Representatives election in Montana" label="for the U.S. House"/>
<link wikidata="Q57292677" start="41860" end="41887" title="Eldena Bear Don&amp;#x27;t Walk" label="Eldena Bear Don&amp;#x27;t Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q104414561" start="42012" end="42023" title="Max Big Man" label="Max Big Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q52151156" start="42115" end="42124" title="Earl Biss" label="Earl Biss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996545" start="42148" end="42158" title="Bull Chief" label="Bull Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007693" start="42339" end="42356" title="Curly (scout)" label="Curly (or Curley)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577162" start="42444" end="42454" title="Goes Ahead" label="Goes Ahead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577162" start="42458" end="42479" title="Ba&amp;#x27;suck&amp;#x27;osh" label="Ba&amp;#x27;suck&amp;#x27;osh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577162" start="42486" end="42507" title="Walks Among the Stars" label="Walks Among the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031753" start="42574" end="42588" title="Hairy Moccasin" label="Hairy Moccasin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063465" start="42663" end="42679" title="Half Yellow Face" label="Half Yellow Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189120" start="42798" end="42809" title="Crow Scouts" label="Crow Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q29828975" start="42850" end="42863" title="Issaatxalúash" label="Issaatxalúash"/>
<link wikidata="Q29828975" start="42870" end="42882" title="Two Leggings" label="Two Leggings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294694" start="43038" end="43054" title="Donald Laverdure" label="Donald Laverdure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707608" start="43152" end="43169" title="Joe Medicine Crow" label="Joe Medicine Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707608" start="43176" end="43193" title="PédhitšhÎ-wahpášh" label="PédhitšhÎ-wahpášh"/>
<link wikidata="Q130744769" start="43319" end="43335" title="Elias Not Afraid" label="Elias Not Afraid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154574" start="43443" end="43455" title="Janine Pease" label="Janine Pease"/>
<link wikidata="Q23416926" start="43563" end="43577" title="Wendy Red Star" label="Wendy Red Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204572" start="43595" end="43607" title="Plenty Coups" label="Plenty Coups"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242221" start="43748" end="43760" title="Pretty Eagle" label="Pretty Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242284" start="43886" end="43899" title="Pretty Shield" label="Pretty Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q266750" start="43918" end="43932" title="medicine woman" label="medicine woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q433128" start="44000" end="44016" title="Shows as He Goes" label="Shows as He Goes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155087" start="44030" end="44043" title="Pauline Small" label="Pauline Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155087" start="44047" end="44074" title="Strikes Twice In One Summer" label="Strikes Twice In One Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489552" start="44134" end="44147" title="Frank Shively" label="Frank Shively"/>
<link wikidata="Q27044247" start="44186" end="44193" title="Supaman" label="Supaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q27044247" start="44200" end="44231" title="Christian Parrish Takes the Gun" label="Christian Parrish Takes the Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709727" start="44259" end="44269" title="Noah Watts" label="Noah Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709727" start="44276" end="44287" title="Bulaagawish" label="Bulaagawish"/>
<link wikidata="Q29003259" start="44414" end="44432" title="Bethany Yellowtail" label="Bethany Yellowtail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351311" start="44499" end="44516" title="Robert Yellowtail" label="Robert Yellowtail"/>
<link wikidata="Q10382206" start="44618" end="44635" title="Thomas Yellowtail" label="Thomas Yellowtail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995036" start="44704" end="44722" title="White Man Runs Him" label="White Man Runs Him"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031091" start="44812" end="44822" title="White Swan" label="White Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031091" start="44829" end="44844" title="Mee-nah-tsee-us" label="Mee-nah-tsee-us"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669674" start="44935" end="44943" title="Absaroka (proposed state)" label="Absaroka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189135" start="45020" end="45033" title="Crow religion" label="Crow religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374280" start="45036" end="45052" title="James Beckwourth" label="James Beckwourth"/>
<link wikidata="Q259025" start="45088" end="45097" title="Pine Leaf" label="Pine Leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791791" start="45174" end="45191" title="Thomas Leforge" label="Thomas H. Leforge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649089" start="49113" end="49136" title="Little Big Horn College" label="Little Big Horn College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242284" start="49204" end="49217" title="Pretty Shield" label="Pretty Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733555" start="49240" end="49256" title="Alma Hogan Snell" label="Alma Hogan Snell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52274" wikidata="Q269094" url="?curid=52274" title="Richard Rodgers">
<text>Richard Charles Rodgers (June 28, 1902 – December 30, 1979) was an American composer who worked primarily in musical theater. With 43 Broadway musicals and over 900 songs to his credit, Rodgers was one of the best-known American composers of the 20th century, and his compositions had a significant influence on popular music.

Rodgers is known for his songwriting partnerships, first with lyricist Lorenz Hart and then with Oscar Hammerstein II. With Hart he wrote musicals throughout the 1920s and 1930s, including &quot;Pal Joey&quot;, &quot;A Connecticut Yankee&quot;, &quot;On Your Toes&quot; and &quot;Babes in Arms.&quot; With Hammerstein he wrote musicals through the 1940s and 1950s, such as &quot;Oklahoma!&quot;, &quot;Flower Drum Song&quot;, &quot;Carousel&quot;, &quot;South Pacific&quot;, &quot;The King and I&quot;, and &quot;The Sound of Music&quot;. His collaborations with Hammerstein, in particular, are celebrated for bringing the Broadway musical to a new maturity by telling stories that were focused on characters and drama rather than the earlier light-hearted entertainment of the genre.

Rodgers was the first person to win all four of the top American entertainment awards in theater, film, recording, and televisionan Emmy, a Grammy, an Oscar, and a Tonynow known collectively as an EGOT. In addition, he was awarded a Pulitzer Prize, making him the first ever to receive all five awards (later joined by Marvin Hamlisch). In 1978, Rodgers was in the inaugural group of Kennedy Center Honorees for lifetime achievement in the arts.

==Early life==
Rodgers was born into a Jewish family in Queens, New York, the son of Mamie (Levy) and Dr. William Abrahams Rodgers, a prominent physician who had changed the family name from Rogazinsky. Rodgers began playing the piano at the age of six. He attended P.S. 166, Townsend Harris Hall and DeWitt Clinton High School. Rodgers spent his early teenage summers in Camp Wigwam (Waterford, Maine) where he composed some of his first songs.

Rodgers, Lorenz Hart, and later collaborator Oscar Hammerstein II all attended Columbia University. At Columbia, Rodgers joined the Pi Lambda Phi fraternity. In 1921, Rodgers shifted his studies to the Institute of Musical Art (now the Juilliard School). Rodgers was influenced by composers such as Victor Herbert and Jerome Kern, as well as by the operettas his parents took him to see on Broadway when he was a child.

==Career==
===Rodgers and Hart===
In 1919, Richard met Lorenz Hart, thanks to Phillip Levitt, a friend of Richard&#x27;s older brother. Rodgers and Hart struggled for years in the field of musical comedy, writing several amateur shows. They made their professional debut with the song &quot;Any Old Place With You&quot;, featured in the 1919 Broadway musical comedy &quot;A Lonely Romeo&quot;. Their first professional production was the 1920 &quot;Poor Little Ritz Girl&quot;, which also had music by Sigmund Romberg. Their next professional show, &quot;The Melody Man&quot;, did not premiere until 1924.

When he was just out of college Rodgers worked as musical director for Lew Fields. Among the stars he accompanied were Nora Bayes and Fred Allen. Rodgers was considering quitting show business altogether to sell children&#x27;s underwear, when he and Hart finally broke through in 1925. They wrote the songs for a benefit show presented by the prestigious Theatre Guild, called &quot;The Garrick Gaieties&quot;, and the critics found the show fresh and delightful. Although it was meant to run only one day, the Guild knew they had a success and allowed it to re-open later. The show&#x27;s biggest hit—the song that Rodgers believed &quot;made&quot; Rodgers and Hart—was &quot;Manhattan&quot;. The two were now a Broadway songwriting force.

Throughout the rest of the decade, the duo wrote several hit shows for both Broadway and London, including &quot;Dearest Enemy&quot; (1925), &quot;The Girl Friend&quot; (1926), &quot;Peggy-Ann&quot; (1926), &quot;A Connecticut Yankee&quot; (1927), and &quot;Present Arms&quot; (1928). Their 1920s shows produced standards such as &quot;Here in My Arms&quot;, &quot;Mountain Greenery&quot;, &quot;Blue Room&quot;, &quot;My Heart Stood Still&quot; and &quot;You Took Advantage of Me&quot;.

With the Depression in full swing during the first half of the 1930s, the team sought greener pastures in Hollywood. The hardworking Rodgers later regretted these relatively fallow years, but he and Hart did write some classic songs and film scores while out west, including &quot;Love Me Tonight&quot; (1932) (directed by Rouben Mamoulian, who would later direct Rodgers&#x27;s &quot;Oklahoma!&quot; on Broadway), which introduced three standards: &quot;Lover&quot;, &quot;Mimi&quot;, and &quot;Isn&#x27;t It Romantic?&quot;. Rodgers also wrote a melody for which Hart wrote three consecutive lyrics which were either cut, not recorded or not a hit. The fourth lyric resulted in one of their most famous songs, &quot;Blue Moon&quot;. Other film work includes the scores to &quot;The Phantom President&quot; (1932), starring George M. Cohan, &quot;Hallelujah, I&#x27;m a Bum&quot; (1933), starring Al Jolson, and, in a quick return after having left Hollywood, &quot;Mississippi&quot; (1935), starring Bing Crosby and W. C. Fields.

In 1935, they returned to Broadway and wrote an almost unbroken string of hit shows that ended shortly before Hart&#x27;s death in 1943. Among the most notable are &quot;Jumbo&quot; (1935), &quot;On Your Toes&quot; (1936, which included the ballet &quot;Slaughter on Tenth Avenue&quot;, choreographed by George Balanchine), &quot;Babes in Arms&quot; (1937), &quot;I Married an Angel&quot; (1938), &quot;The Boys from Syracuse&quot; (1938), &quot;Pal Joey&quot; (1940), and their last original work, &quot;By Jupiter&quot; (1942). Rodgers also contributed to the book on several of these shows.

Many of the songs from these shows are still sung and remembered, including &quot;The Most Beautiful Girl in the World&quot;, &quot;My Romance&quot;, &quot;Little Girl Blue&quot;, &quot;I&#x27;ll Tell the Man in the Street&quot;, &quot;There&#x27;s a Small Hotel&quot;, &quot;Where or When&quot;, &quot;My Funny Valentine&quot;, &quot;The Lady Is a Tramp&quot;, &quot;Falling in Love with Love&quot;, &quot;Bewitched, Bothered and Bewildered&quot;, and &quot;Wait till You See Her&quot;.

In 1939, Rodgers wrote the ballet &quot;Ghost Town&quot; for the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo, with choreography by Marc Platoff.

===Rodgers and Hammerstein===

Rodgers&#x27; partnership with Hart began having problems because of the lyricist&#x27;s unreliability and declining health from alcoholism. Rodgers began working with Oscar Hammerstein II, with whom he had previously written songs (before ever working with Lorenz Hart). Their first musical, the groundbreaking hit &quot;Oklahoma!&quot; (1943), is a notable example of a &quot;book musical&quot;, a musical play in which the songs and dances are fully integrated into the plot. What was once a collection of songs, dances and comic turns held together by a tenuous plot became a fully integrated narrative. Even though &quot;Show Boat&quot; is considered to be the earliest example of a book musical, &quot;Oklahoma!&quot; epitomized the innovations for which &quot;Show Boat&quot; had laid the groundwork and is considered the first production in American history to be intentionally marketed as a fully integrated musical.

In 1943, Richard Rodgers became the ninth president of the Dramatists Guild of America. In November that year he and Hart mounted a revival of &quot;A Connecticut Yankee&quot;; Hart died from alcoholism and pneumonia just days after its opening.

Rodgers and Hammerstein went on to create four more hits that are among the most popular in musical history. Each was made into a successful film: &quot;Carousel&quot; (1945), &quot;South Pacific&quot; (1949, winner of the 1950 Pulitzer Prize for Drama), &quot;The King and I&quot; (1951), and &quot;The Sound of Music&quot; (1959). Other shows include the minor hit &quot;Flower Drum Song&quot; (1958), as well as relative failures &quot;Allegro&quot; (1947), &quot;Me and Juliet&quot; (1953), and &quot;Pipe Dream&quot; (1955). They also wrote the score to the film &quot;State Fair&quot; (1945) (which was remade in 1962 with Pat Boone) and a special TV musical of &quot;Cinderella&quot; (1957).

Their collaboration produced many well-known songs, including &quot;Oh, What a Beautiful Mornin&#x27;&quot;, &quot;People Will Say We&#x27;re in Love&quot;, &quot;Oklahoma&quot; (which also became the state song of Oklahoma), &quot;It&#x27;s A Grand Night For Singing&quot;, &quot;If I Loved You&quot;, &quot;You&#x27;ll Never Walk Alone&quot;, &quot;It Might as Well Be Spring&quot;, &quot;Some Enchanted Evening&quot;, &quot;Younger Than Springtime&quot;, &quot;Bali Hai&quot;, &quot;Getting to Know You&quot;, &quot;My Favorite Things&quot;, &quot;The Sound of Music&quot;, &quot;Sixteen Going on Seventeen&quot;, &quot;Climb Ev&#x27;ry Mountain&quot;, &quot;Do-Re-Mi&quot;, and &quot;Edelweiss&quot;, Hammerstein&#x27;s last song.

Much of Rodgers&#x27; work with both Hart and Hammerstein was orchestrated by Robert Russell Bennett. Rodgers composed twelve themes, which Bennett used in preparing the orchestra score for the 26-episode World War II television documentary &quot;Victory at Sea&quot; (1952–53). This NBC production pioneered the &quot;compilation documentary&quot;—programming based on pre-existing footage—and was eventually broadcast in dozens of countries. The melody of the popular song &quot;No Other Love&quot; was later taken from the &quot;Victory at Sea&quot; theme entitled &quot;Beneath the Southern Cross&quot;. Rodgers won an Emmy for the music for the ABC documentary &quot;Winston Churchill: The Valiant Years&quot;, scored by Eddie Sauter, Hershy Kay, and Robert Emmett Dolan. Rodgers composed the theme music, &quot;March of the Clowns&quot;, for the 1963–64 television series &quot;The Greatest Show on Earth&quot;, which ran for 30 episodes. He also contributed the main title theme for the 1963–64 historical anthology television series &quot;The Great Adventure&quot;.

In 1950, Rodgers and Hammerstein received The Hundred Year Association of New York&#x27;s Gold Medal Award &quot;in recognition of outstanding contributions to the City of New York.&quot; Rodgers, Hammerstein, and Joshua Logan won the Pulitzer Prize for Drama for &quot;South Pacific&quot;. Rodgers and Hammerstein had won a special Pulitzer Prize in 1944 for &quot;Oklahoma!&quot;.

In 1954, Rodgers conducted the New York Philharmonic Orchestra in excerpts from &quot;Victory at Sea&quot;, &quot;Slaughter on Tenth Avenue&quot; and the &quot;Carousel Waltz&quot; for a special LP released by Columbia Records.

Rodgers and Hammerstein musicals earned a total of 37 Tony Awards, 15 Academy Awards, two Pulitzer Prizes, two Grammy Awards, and two Emmy Awards.

===After Hammerstein===
Rodgers composed five new musicals between Hammerstein&#x27;s death in 1960 and his own in 1979. In chronological order, they are: &quot;No Strings&quot; (1962), &quot;Do I Hear a Waltz?&quot; (1965), &quot;Two by Two&quot; (1970), &quot;Rex&quot; (1976), and &quot;I Remember Mama&quot; (1979).

Rodgers wrote both words and music for his first new Broadway project &quot;No Strings&quot;, which earned two Tony Awards and played 580 shows. The show was a minor hit and featured the song, &quot;The Sweetest Sounds&quot;.

Rodgers also wrote both the words and music for two new songs used in the film version of &quot;The Sound of Music&quot;. (Other songs in that film were from Rodgers and Hammerstein.)

Each of his final Broadway musicals faced a declining level of success as Rodgers was overshadowed by up-and-coming composers and lyricists. This was evident by the steady drop in run times and critic reviews. &quot;Do I Hear a Waltz?&quot; ran 220 performances; &quot;Two by Two,&quot; 343 performances; &quot;Rex&quot; only 49 performances; and &quot;I Remember Mama,&quot; 108 performances.

While Rodgers went on to work with lyricists: Stephen Sondheim (&quot;Do I Hear a Waltz?&quot;), who was a protégé of Hammerstein, Martin Charnin (&quot;Two by Two,&quot; &quot;I Remember Mama&quot;) and Sheldon Harnick (&quot;Rex&quot;), he never found another permanent partner. These partnerships proved to be unsuccessful as a result of issues of collaboration. Sondheim&#x27;s reluctance to participate in &quot;Do I Hear a Waltz?&quot; led to tension between the two. In addition, Charnin and Rodgers were met with opposing ideas when creating &quot;Two by Two&quot;.

Nevertheless, his overall successful lifetime career did not go unrecognized. At its 1978 commencement ceremonies, Barnard College awarded Rodgers its highest honor, the Barnard Medal of Distinction.

Rodgers was an honoree at the first Kennedy Center Honors in 1978. At the 1979 Tony Awards ceremony—six months before his death—Rodgers was presented the Lawrence Langner Memorial Award for Distinguished Lifetime Achievement in the American Theatre.

One of Rodger&#x27;s final works was a revival of &quot;Fly With Me&quot; for the 1980 Varsity Show, to which he added several new songs. He died less than four months before its premiere in April 1980.

==Personal life==
In 1930, Rodgers married Dorothy Belle Feiner (1909–92). Their daughter, Mary (1931–2014), was the composer of &quot;Once Upon a Mattress&quot; and an author of children&#x27;s books. The Rodgers later lost a daughter at birth. Another daughter, Linda (1935–2015), also had a brief career as a songwriter. Mary&#x27;s son and Richard Rodgers&#x27;s grandson, Adam Guettel (b. 1964), also a musical theater composer, won Tony Awards for Best Score and Best Orchestrations for &quot;The Light in the Piazza&quot; in 2005. Peter Melnick (b. 1958), Linda Rodgers&#x27;s son, is the composer of &quot;Adrift In Macao,&quot; which debuted at the Philadelphia Theatre Company in 2005 and was produced Off-Broadway in 2007. Mary Rodgers&#x27; book &quot;Shy: The Alarmingly Outspoken Memoirs of Mary Rodgers&quot; was published posthumously in 2022, and included her frank revelations and assessments of her father, family and herself.

Rodgers was an atheist. He was prone to depression and alcohol abuse and was at one time hospitalized.

Rodgers was portrayed by Tom Drake in the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer film &quot;Words and Music&quot;, a semi-fictionalized depiction of the partnership of Rodgers and Hart. In Richard Linklater&#x27;s 2025 film &quot;Blue Moon&quot;, he is played by Andrew Scott, who won the Silver Bear for Best Supporting Performance at the 75th Berlin International Film Festival.

==Death==
Rodgers died in 1979, aged 77, after surviving cancer of the jaw, a heart attack, and a laryngectomy. He was cremated, and his ashes were scattered at sea.

==Legacy==
In 1990, the 46th Street Theatre was renamed the Richard Rodgers Theatre in his memory. In 1999, Rodgers and Hart were each commemorated on United States postage stamps. In 2002, the centennial year of Rodgers&#x27; birth was celebrated worldwide with books, retrospectives, performances, new recordings of his music, and a Broadway revival of &quot;Oklahoma!&quot;. The BBC Proms that year devoted an entire evening to Rodgers&#x27; music, including a concert performance of &quot;Oklahoma!&quot; The Boston Pops Orchestra released a new CD that year in tribute to Rodgers, entitled &quot;My Favorite Things: A Richard Rodgers Celebration&quot;.

Alec Wilder wrote the following about Rodgers:

Rodgers is a member of the American Theater Hall of Fame.

Along with the Academy of Arts and Letters, Rodgers also started and endowed an award for non-established musical theater composers to produce new productions either by way of full productions or staged readings. It is the only award for which the Academy of Arts and Letters accepts applications and is presented every year. Below are the previous winners of the award:

===Relationship with performers===

Rosemary Clooney recorded a version of &quot;Falling in Love with Love&quot; by Rodgers, using a swing style. After the recording session Richard Rodgers told her pointedly that it should be sung as a waltz. After Doris Day recorded &quot;I Have Dreamed&quot; in 1961, he wrote to her and her arranger, Jim Harbert, that theirs was the most beautiful rendition of his song he had ever heard.

After Peggy Lee recorded her version of &quot;Lover&quot;, a Rodgers song, with a dramatically different arrangement from that originally conceived by him, Rodgers said, &quot;I don&#x27;t know why Peggy picked on me, she could have fucked up Silent Night&quot;. Mary Martin said that Richard Rodgers composed songs for her for &quot;South Pacific&quot;, knowing she had a small vocal range, and the songs generally made her look her best. She also said that Rodgers and Hammerstein listened to all her suggestions and she worked extremely well with them. Both Rodgers and Hammerstein wanted Doris Day for the lead in the film version of &quot;South Pacific&quot; and she reportedly wanted the part. They discussed it with her, but after her manager/husband Martin Melcher would not budge on his demand for a high salary for her, the role went to Mitzi Gaynor.

==Awards and nominations==
Rodgers is the first entertainer to have won the EGOT (Emmy, Grammy, Oscar, and Tony).

==Shows with music by Rodgers==
===Lyrics by Lorenz Hart===
===Lyrics by Oscar Hammerstein II===
===Other lyricists and solo works===
==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
*
* 
*City Journal article on Rodgers
*Centennial features on Rodgers
*The Richard Rodgers Collection at the Library of Congress
*Richard Rodgers papers, 1914–1989, held by the Billy Rose Theatre Division, New York Public Library for the Performing Arts
*Musicals by Rodgers and Hammerstein
*TimeLine of Rodgers&#x27; Life
*Review and analysis of Rodgers&#x27; later plays
*A feature on Rodgers and Hammerstein.
* Richard Rodgers recordings at the Discography of American Historical Recordings.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q269094" start="0" end="23" title="Richard Rodgers" label="Richard Charles Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q207628" start="76" end="83" title="Musical composition" label="compose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="109" end="124" title="musical theater" label="musical theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="134" end="142" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q725828" start="399" end="410" title="Lorenz Hart" label="Lorenz Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q319693" start="425" end="445" title="Oscar Hammerstein II" label="Oscar Hammerstein II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046738" start="523" end="531" title="Pal Joey (musical)" label="Pal Joey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656075" start="545" end="565" title="A Connecticut Yankee (musical)" label="A Connecticut Yankee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16395228" start="579" end="591" title="On Your Toes" label="On Your Toes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284234" start="608" end="621" title="Babes in Arms" label="Babes in Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364648" start="707" end="716" title="Oklahoma!" label="Oklahoma!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169548" start="730" end="746" title="Flower Drum Song" label="Flower Drum Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044703" start="760" end="768" title="Carousel (musical)" label="Carousel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535240" start="782" end="795" title="South Pacific (musical)" label="South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431690" start="809" end="823" title="The King and I" label="The King and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022513" start="841" end="859" title="The Sound of Music" label="The Sound of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="1246" end="1250" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="1254" end="1260" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="1265" end="1270" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="1278" end="1282" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony"/>
<link wikidata="Q79227539" start="1311" end="1315" title="List of EGOT winners" label="EGOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="1347" end="1361" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q337206" start="1433" end="1448" title="Marvin Hamlisch" label="Marvin Hamlisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738793" start="1498" end="1521" title="The Kennedy Center Honors" label="Kennedy Center Honorees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1600" end="1606" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244175" start="1862" end="1888" title="DeWitt Clinton High School" label="DeWitt Clinton High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448821" start="1946" end="1962" title="Waterford, Maine" label="Waterford, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q725828" start="2017" end="2028" title="Lorenz Hart" label="Lorenz Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q319693" start="2053" end="2073" title="Oscar Hammerstein II" label="Oscar Hammerstein II"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="2087" end="2106" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189964" start="2140" end="2153" title="Pi Lambda Phi" label="Pi Lambda Phi"/>
<link wikidata="Q503246" start="2244" end="2260" title="Juilliard School" label="Juilliard School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275145" start="2307" end="2321" title="Victor Herbert" label="Victor Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q313270" start="2326" end="2337" title="Jerome Kern" label="Jerome Kern"/>
<link wikidata="Q170384" start="2357" end="2365" title="operetta" label="operetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="2398" end="2406" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q725828" start="2484" end="2495" title="Lorenz Hart" label="Lorenz Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474095" start="2565" end="2581" title="Rodgers and Hart" label="Rodgers and Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q23035202" start="2878" end="2899" title="Poor Little Ritz Girl" label="Poor Little Ritz Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q742945" start="2931" end="2946" title="Sigmund Romberg" label="Sigmund Romberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535975" start="3107" end="3117" title="Lew Fields" label="Lew Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q441730" start="3155" end="3165" title="Nora Bayes" label="Nora Bayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q967454" start="3170" end="3180" title="Fred Allen" label="Fred Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777378" start="3392" end="3405" title="Theatre Guild" label="Theatre Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987184" start="3420" end="3440" title="The Garrick Gaieties" label="The Garrick Gaieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749225" start="3714" end="3723" title="Manhattan (song)" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246982" start="3892" end="3905" title="Dearest Enemy" label="Dearest Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987236" start="3926" end="3941" title="The Girl Friend" label="The Girl Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160615" start="3962" end="3971" title="Peggy-Ann" label="Peggy-Ann"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656075" start="3992" end="4012" title="A Connecticut Yankee (musical)" label="A Connecticut Yankee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240931" start="4037" end="4049" title="Present Arms (musical)" label="Present Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737674" start="4115" end="4130" title="Here in My Arms" label="Here in My Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q16387125" start="4144" end="4161" title="Mountain Greenery" label="Mountain Greenery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929807" start="4175" end="4184" title="Blue Room (1926 song)" label="Blue Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q16387196" start="4198" end="4218" title="My Heart Stood Still" label="My Heart Stood Still"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057555" start="4235" end="4259" title="You Took Advantage of Me" label="You Took Advantage of Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="4277" end="4287" title="Great Depression" label="Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331849" start="4549" end="4564" title="Love Me Tonight" label="Love Me Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q51472" start="4591" end="4607" title="Rouben Mamoulian" label="Rouben Mamoulian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364648" start="4653" end="4662" title="Oklahoma!" label="Oklahoma!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692342" start="4723" end="4728" title="Lover (Rodgers and Hart song)" label="Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q16387019" start="4742" end="4746" title="Mimi (song)" label="Mimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9383949" start="4764" end="4787" title="Isn&amp;#x27;t It Romantic?" label="Isn&amp;#x27;t It Romantic?"/>
<link wikidata="Q804574" start="4986" end="4995" title="Blue Moon (1934 song)" label="Blue Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756843" start="5048" end="5069" title="The Phantom President" label="The Phantom President"/>
<link wikidata="Q563017" start="5093" end="5108" title="George M. Cohan" label="George M. Cohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642860" start="5116" end="5142" title="Hallelujah, I&amp;#x27;m a Bum (film)" label="Hallelujah, I&amp;#x27;m a Bum"/>
<link wikidata="Q128532" start="5166" end="5175" title="Al Jolson" label="Al Jolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="5270" end="5281" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q352971" start="5286" end="5298" title="W. C. Fields" label="W. C. Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q186344" start="5471" end="5476" title="Jumbo (musical)" label="Jumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16395228" start="5497" end="5509" title="On Your Toes" label="On Your Toes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539051" start="5555" end="5580" title="Slaughter on Tenth Avenue" label="Slaughter on Tenth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284234" start="5631" end="5644" title="Babes in Arms" label="Babes in Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978419" start="5665" end="5683" title="I Married an Angel" label="I Married an Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q163844" start="5704" end="5726" title="The Boys from Syracuse" label="The Boys from Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046738" start="5747" end="5755" title="Pal Joey (musical)" label="Pal Joey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003799" start="5806" end="5816" title="By Jupiter" label="By Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752354" start="5978" end="6014" title="The Most Beautiful Girl in the World (1935 song)" label="The Most Beautiful Girl in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946324" start="6028" end="6038" title="My Romance (song)" label="My Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6650163" start="6052" end="6068" title="Little Girl Blue (song)" label="Little Girl Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966040" start="6082" end="6118" title="I&amp;#x27;ll Tell the Man in the Street" label="I&amp;#x27;ll Tell the Man in the Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782657" start="6132" end="6158" title="There&amp;#x27;s a Small Hotel" label="There&amp;#x27;s a Small Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980709" start="6172" end="6185" title="Where or When" label="Where or When"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956401" start="6199" end="6217" title="My Funny Valentine" label="My Funny Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q861675" start="6231" end="6250" title="The Lady Is a Tramp" label="The Lady Is a Tramp"/>
<link wikidata="Q110208490" start="6264" end="6289" title="Falling in Love with Love" label="Falling in Love with Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563385" start="6303" end="6337" title="Bewitched, Bothered and Bewildered" label="Bewitched, Bothered and Bewildered"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960427" start="6355" end="6376" title="Wait till You See Her" label="Wait till You See Her"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150726" start="6450" end="6477" title="Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo" label="Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648666" start="6500" end="6512" title="Marc Platt (dancer)" label="Marc Platoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="6675" end="6685" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q319693" start="6714" end="6734" title="Oscar Hammerstein II" label="Oscar Hammerstein II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364648" start="6868" end="6877" title="Oklahoma!" label="Oklahoma!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="6924" end="6936" title="book musical" label="book musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166879" start="7172" end="7181" title="Show Boat" label="Show Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255671" start="7532" end="7559" title="Dramatists Guild of America" label="Dramatists Guild of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656075" start="7622" end="7642" title="A Connecticut Yankee (musical)" label="A Connecticut Yankee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044703" start="7873" end="7881" title="Carousel (musical)" label="Carousel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535240" start="7902" end="7915" title="South Pacific (musical)" label="South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="7948" end="7962" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431690" start="7981" end="7995" title="The King and I" label="The King and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022513" start="8020" end="8038" title="The Sound of Music" label="The Sound of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169548" start="8093" end="8109" title="Flower Drum Song" label="Flower Drum Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731413" start="8159" end="8166" title="Allegro (musical)" label="Allegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386936" start="8187" end="8200" title="Me and Juliet" label="Me and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197217" start="8225" end="8235" title="Pipe Dream (musical)" label="Pipe Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209050" start="8294" end="8304" title="State Fair (1945 film)" label="State Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q342778" start="8349" end="8358" title="Pat Boone" label="Pat Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224353" start="8394" end="8404" title="Cinderella (Rodgers and Hammerstein musical)" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045690" start="8488" end="8521" title="Oh, What a Beautiful Mornin&amp;#x27;" label="Oh, What a Beautiful Mornin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165935" start="8535" end="8569" title="People Will Say We&amp;#x27;re in Love" label="People Will Say We&amp;#x27;re in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305977" start="8583" end="8591" title="Oklahoma (Rodgers and Hammerstein song)" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5990486" start="8701" end="8715" title="If I Loved You" label="If I Loved You"/>
<link wikidata="Q728692" start="8729" end="8757" title="You&amp;#x27;ll Never Walk Alone" label="You&amp;#x27;ll Never Walk Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6091926" start="8771" end="8797" title="It Might as Well Be Spring" label="It Might as Well Be Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151241" start="8811" end="8833" title="Some Enchanted Evening" label="Some Enchanted Evening"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058590" start="8847" end="8870" title="Younger Than Springtime" label="Younger Than Springtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850834" start="8884" end="8892" title="Bali Hai" label="Bali Hai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554688" start="8906" end="8925" title="Getting to Know You (song)" label="Getting to Know You"/>
<link wikidata="Q546331" start="8939" end="8957" title="My Favorite Things (song)" label="My Favorite Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414348" start="8971" end="8989" title="The Sound of Music (song)" label="The Sound of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893658" start="9003" end="9029" title="Sixteen Going on Seventeen" label="Sixteen Going on Seventeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639041" start="9043" end="9068" title="Climb Ev&amp;#x27;ry Mountain" label="Climb Ev&amp;#x27;ry Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189887" start="9082" end="9090" title="Do-Re-Mi" label="Do-Re-Mi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735688" start="9108" end="9117" title="Edelweiss (song)" label="Edelweiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054753" start="9234" end="9256" title="Robert Russell Bennett" label="Robert Russell Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9361" end="9373" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557617" start="9403" end="9417" title="Victory at Sea" label="Victory at Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="9440" end="9443" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044731" start="9637" end="9650" title="No Other Love (1953 song)" label="No Other Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="9779" end="9783" title="Emmy" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771926" start="9828" end="9864" title="The Valiant Years" label="Winston Churchill: The Valiant Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282967" start="9882" end="9894" title="Eddie Sauter" label="Eddie Sauter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744566" start="9896" end="9906" title="Hershy Kay" label="Hershy Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157024" start="9912" end="9931" title="Robert Emmett Dolan" label="Robert Emmett Dolan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9973" end="9992" title="March of the Clowns" label="March of the Clowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225700" start="10040" end="10066" title="The Greatest Show on Earth (TV series)" label="The Greatest Show on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822598" start="10197" end="10228" title="The Great Adventure (U.S. TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Great Adventure&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275079" start="10240" end="10263" title="Rodgers and Hammerstein" label="Rodgers and Hammerstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521330" start="10273" end="10313" title="The Hundred Year Association of New York" label="The Hundred Year Association of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q505141" start="10445" end="10457" title="Joshua Logan" label="Joshua Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q289214" start="10466" end="10490" title="Pulitzer Prize for Drama" label="Pulitzer Prize for Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259350" start="10556" end="10578" title="Pulitzer Prize Special Citations and Awards" label="special Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q471154" start="10646" end="10677" title="New York Philharmonic Orchestra" label="New York Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539051" start="10729" end="10754" title="Slaughter on Tenth Avenue" label="Slaughter on Tenth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10775" end="10789" title="Carousel Waltz" label="Carousel Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="10825" end="10841" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275079" start="10844" end="10867" title="Rodgers and Hammerstein" label="Rodgers and Hammerstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="10898" end="10908" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="10914" end="10928" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="10934" end="10948" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="10955" end="10967" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="10978" end="10988" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045015" start="11153" end="11163" title="No Strings" label="No Strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286034" start="11184" end="11202" title="Do I Hear a Waltz?" label="Do I Hear a Waltz?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859366" start="11223" end="11233" title="Two by Two (musical)" label="Two by Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319121" start="11254" end="11257" title="Rex (musical)" label="Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978796" start="11282" end="11297" title="I Remember Mama (musical)" label="I Remember Mama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767647" start="11512" end="11531" title="The Sweetest Sounds (song)" label="The Sweetest Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q60072" start="11630" end="11660" title="The Sound of Music (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Sound of Music&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q153579" start="12166" end="12182" title="Stephen Sondheim" label="Stephen Sondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295377" start="12251" end="12265" title="Martin Charnin" label="Martin Charnin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354471" start="12324" end="12339" title="Sheldon Harnick" label="Sheldon Harnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q167733" start="12810" end="12825" title="Barnard College" label="Barnard College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12865" end="12893" title="List of Barnard College people#Recipients of the Medal of Distinction" label="Barnard Medal of Distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738793" start="12932" end="12953" title="Kennedy Center Honors" label="Kennedy Center Honors"/>
<link wikidata="Q87021201" start="13394" end="13414" title="Dorothy Rodgers" label="Dorothy Belle Feiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q435135" start="13442" end="13446" title="Mary Rodgers" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091825" start="13486" end="13506" title="Once Upon a Mattress" label="Once Upon a Mattress"/>
<link wikidata="Q753110" start="13663" end="13673" title="songwriter" label="songwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679169" start="13728" end="13740" title="Adam Guettel" label="Adam Guettel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747285" start="13850" end="13873" title="The Light in the Piazza (musical)" label="The Light in the Piazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077877" start="13889" end="13902" title="Peter Melnick" label="Peter Melnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="14063" end="14075" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="14313" end="14320" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q552848" start="14427" end="14436" title="Tom Drake" label="Tom Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="14444" end="14463" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507560" start="14469" end="14496" title="Words and Music (1948 film)" label="&amp;quot;Words and Music&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q40035" start="14572" end="14589" title="Richard Linklater" label="Richard Linklater"/>
<link wikidata="Q127118129" start="14607" end="14628" title="Blue Moon (2025 film)" label="&amp;quot;Blue Moon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q507322" start="14646" end="14658" title="Andrew Scott (actor)" label="Andrew Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q110961983" start="14672" end="14715" title="Silver Bear for Best Supporting Performance" label="Silver Bear for Best Supporting Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q124750517" start="14723" end="14762" title="75th Berlin International Film Festival" label="75th Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472065" start="14863" end="14875" title="laryngectomy" label="laryngectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328714" start="14992" end="15015" title="Richard Rodgers Theatre" label="Richard Rodgers Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046677" start="15314" end="15323" title="BBC Proms" label="BBC Proms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263983" start="15445" end="15466" title="Boston Pops Orchestra" label="Boston Pops Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q705892" start="15591" end="15602" title="Alec Wilder" label="Alec Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q467050" start="15666" end="15695" title="American Theater Hall of Fame" label="American Theater Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q466508" start="16106" end="16122" title="Rosemary Clooney" label="Rosemary Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q110208490" start="16151" end="16176" title="Falling in Love with Love" label="Falling in Love with Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q104372" start="16320" end="16329" title="Doris Day" label="Doris Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977521" start="16345" end="16359" title="I Have Dreamed (song)" label="I Have Dreamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q229139" start="16505" end="16514" title="Peggy Lee" label="Peggy Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692342" start="16545" end="16550" title="Lover (Rodgers and Hart song)" label="Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q172152" start="16742" end="16754" title="Silent Night" label="Silent Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q285483" start="16762" end="16773" title="Mary Martin" label="Mary Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644646" start="17257" end="17271" title="Martin Melcher" label="Martin Melcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q255794" start="17346" end="17358" title="Mitzi Gaynor" label="Mitzi Gaynor"/>
<link wikidata="Q79227539" start="17437" end="17441" title="List of EGOT winners" label="EGOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="17443" end="17447" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="17449" end="17455" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="17457" end="17462" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="17468" end="17472" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013890" start="17881" end="17928" title="New York Public Library for the Performing Arts" label="New York Public Library for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800691" start="18123" end="18168" title="Discography of American Historical Recordings" label="Discography of American Historical Recordings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52275" wikidata="Q2673132" url="?curid=52275" title="Piegan Blackfeet">
<text>The Piegan (Blackfeet: &quot;Piikáni&quot;) are an Algonquian-speaking people from the North American Great Plains. They are the largest of three Blackfeet-speaking groups that make up the Blackfeet Confederacy; the Siksika and Kainai are the others. The Piegan dominated much of the northern Great Plains during the nineteenth century.

After their homelands were divided by the nations of Canada and the United States of America making boundaries between them, the Piegan people were forced to sign treaties with one of those two countries, settle in reservations on one side or the other of the border, and be enrolled in one of two government-like bodies sanctioned by North American nation-states. These two successor groups are the Blackfeet Nation, a federally recognized tribe in northwestern Montana, U.S., and the Piikani Nation, a recognized &quot;band&quot; in Alberta, Canada.

Today many Piegan live with the Blackfeet Nation with tribal headquarters in Browning, Montana. There were 32,234 Blackfeet recorded in the 1990 United States Census. In 2010 the US Census reported 105,304 persons who identified as Blackfeet (&quot;alone&quot; or &quot;in combination&quot; with one or more races and/or tribes.)

== Terminology ==
The &quot;Piegan&quot; (also known as the Pikuni, Piikuni, Pikani, and Piikáni) are one of the three original tribes of the Blackfeet Confederacy (a &quot;tribe&quot; here refers to an ethnic or cultural group with a shared name and identity). The Piegan are closely related to the Kainai Nation (also known as the &quot;Blood Tribe&quot;), and the Siksika Nation (also called the &quot;Blackfeet Nation&quot;); together they are sometimes collectively referred to as &quot;the Blackfoot&quot; or &quot;the Blackfoot Confederacy&quot;. Ethnographic literature most commonly uses &quot;Blackfeet people&quot;, and Canadian Blackfeet people use the singular Blackfeet.

The tribal governments and the US government use the term &quot;Blackfeet&quot;, as in Blackfeet Nation, as used on their official tribe website. The term &quot;Siksika&quot;, derived from &quot;Siksikáíkoan&quot; (a Blackfeet person), may also be used as self-identification. In English, an individual may say, &quot;I am Blackfeet&quot; or &quot;I am a member of the Blackfeet tribe.&quot;

Traditionally, Plains peoples were divided into &quot;bands&quot;: groups of families who migrated together for hunting and defence. The bands of the Piegan, as given by Grinnell, are: Ahahpitape, Ahkaiyikokakiniks, Kiyis, Sikutsipmaiks, Sikopoksimaiks, Tsiniksistsoyiks, Kutaiimiks, Ipoksimaiks, Silkokitsimiks, Nitawyiks, Apikaiviks, Miahwahpitsiks, Nitakoskitsipupiks, Nitikskiks, Inuksiks, Miawkinaiyiks, Esksinaitupiks, Inuksikahkopwaiks, Kahmitaiks, Kutaisotsiman, Nitotsiksisstaniks, Motwainaiks, Mokumiks, and Motahtosiks. Hayden gives also Susksoyiks.

==Relations and history==
===Before 1870s===

In 2014, researchers reported on their sequencing of the DNA of a 12,500+-year-old infant skeleton in west-central Montana, found in close association with several Clovis culture artifacts. It showed strong affinities with all existing Native American populations.

There is preliminary evidence of human habitation in north central Montana that may date as far back as 5000 years. There was evidence that the people had made substantial use of buffalo jumps from as early as AD 300.

The Piegan people may be more recent arrivals in the area, as there is strong evidence that, beginning about 1730, their Algonquian-speaking ancestors migrated southwest from what today is Saskatchewan. Before that, they may have lived further east, as many Algonquian-speaking peoples have historically lived along the Atlantic Coast, and others around the Great Lakes.

Linguistic studies of the Blackfoot language in comparison to others in the Algonquian-language family indicate that the Blackfoot had long lived in an area west of the Great Lakes. Like others in this language family, the Blackfoot language is agglutinative.

The people practiced some agriculture and were partly nomadic. They moved westward after they adopted use of horses and guns, which gave them a larger range for bison hunting. They became part of the Plains Indians cultures in the early 19th century. According to tribal oral histories, humans lived near the Rocky Mountain Front for thousands of years before European contact. The Blackfoot creation story is set near Glacier National Park in an area now known as the Badger-Two Medicine.

The introduction of the horse is placed at about 1730, when raids by the Shoshoni prompted the Piegan to obtain horses from the Kutenai, Salish and Nez Perce. Early accounts of contact with European-descended people date to the late eighteenth century. The fur trader James Gaddy and the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company explorer David Thompson, the first Whites recorded as seeing Bow River, camped with a group of Piegan during the 1787–1788 winter.

In 1858 the Piegan in the United States were estimated to number 3,700. Three years later, Hayden estimated the population at 2,520. The population was at times dramatically lower when the Blackfeet people suffered declines due to infectious disease epidemics. They had no natural immunity to Eurasian diseases, and the 1837 smallpox epidemic on the Plains killed 6,000 Blackfeet, as well as thousands more in other tribes. The Blackfeet also suffered from starvation because of disruption of food supplies and war. When the last buffalo hunt failed in 1882, that year became known as the starvation year. In 1900, there were an estimated 20,000 Blackfoot. In 1906 there were 2,072 under the Blackfeet Agency in Montana, and 493 under the Piegan band in Alberta, Canada. In the early 21st century, there are more than 35,000. In the US 2010 census, 105,304 people identified as Piegan Blackfeet, 27,279 of them full-blooded, the remainder self-identified as being of more than one race or, in some cases, with ancestry from more than one tribe, but they primarily identified as Blackfeet.

The Blackfeet had controlled large portions of Alberta and Montana. Today the Blackfeet Reservation in Montana is the size of Delaware, and the three Blackfoot reserves in Alberta have a much smaller area.

The Blackfeet hold belief &quot;in a sacred force that permeates all things, represented symbolically by the sun whose light sustains all things&quot;.

The Blackfeet have &quot;manly-hearted women&quot;. These were recorded as acting in many of the social roles of men. This includes a willingness to sing alone, usually considered &quot;immodest&quot;, and using a men&#x27;s singing style.

==After 1870s==
==Piegan==
*Earl Old Person (1929–2021 ), former Chief of the Blackfeet Tribe; added to the Montana Indian Hall of Fame in 2007
*Helen Piotopowaka Clarke (1846–1923), actress, educator, and bureaucrat ; was one of the first women elected to public office in Montana
*James Welch (1940–2003), author and poet. While most of his published works were novels, he also wrote the non-fiction historical account, &quot;Killing Custer: The Battle of Little Bighorn and the Fate of the Plains Indians&quot;. He was one of the participants in the PBS &quot;American Experience&quot; documentary, &quot;Last Stand at Little Bighorn&quot;. His award-winning novel &quot;Fools Crow&quot; is based on the Blackfeet tribe and its culture.
*John Two Guns White Calf (1872–1934) was a chief who became famous while promoting the Glacier National Park for the Great Northern Railway.
*Stephen Graham Jones (1972- ), author, won a National Endowment for the Arts Fellowship and the Independent Publisher Book Award for Multicultural Fiction, and other awards. At public readings he has said that his short story &quot;Bestiary&quot; is not fiction.

===Books about the Blackfeet===
* George Bird Grinnell (1849–1938), European-American author and ethnologist; wrote accounts of the Blackfeet Nation during his travels and research as a conservationist; editor of &quot;Forest and Stream&quot;
* James Willard Schultz, or &quot;Apikuni&quot; (1859–1947), author, explorer, Glacier National Park guide, fur trader and historian of the Blackfeet Indians. He wrote and published 37 fiction and non-fiction books dealing with the Blackfeet, Kootenai, and Flathead Indians. His works received critical literary acclaim.

== See also ==
* Marias massacre

==References==
==Bibliography==
*Dempsey, Hugh A. and Lindsay Moir. &quot;Bibliography of the Blackfoot&quot;, (&quot;Native American Bibliography Series&quot;, No. 13) Metuchen, NJ: The Scarecrow Press, 1989, 
*Ewers, John C. &quot;The Blackfeet: Raiders on the Northwestern Plains&quot;, Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1958 (and later reprints). 
*Johnson, Bryan R. &quot;The Blackfeet: An Annotated Bibliography&quot;, New York: Garland Publishing, 1988. 

==External links==
*Official Site of the Blackfoot Nation
*Blackfoot – English Dictionary
*Blackfoot Culture and History Links
*Blackfeet Indian History
*Blackfeet Indian Reservation
*Blackfeet Indian Stories by George Bird Grinnell
*Constitution and By-Laws For the Blackfeet Tribe Of The Blackfeet Indian Reservation of Montana
*Magee Photograph Collection – nearly 1,000 digitized photographic negatives depicting life on the Blackfeet Nation.
*Blackfoot Digital Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2673132" start="4" end="10" title="Piegan Blackfeet" label="Piegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33060" start="12" end="21" title="Blackfeet language" label="Blackfeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="51" end="70" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q907924" start="87" end="114" title="Plains Indians" label="North American Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q388264" start="189" end="210" title="Blackfeet Confederacy" label="Blackfeet Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q485070" start="216" end="223" title="Siksika Nation" label="Siksika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520098" start="228" end="234" title="Kainai Nation" label="Kainai"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="293" end="305" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q33123248" start="738" end="754" title="Blackfeet Nation" label="Blackfeet Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358663" start="758" end="784" title="List of federally recognized tribes" label="federally recognized tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="801" end="808" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898794" start="824" end="838" title="Piikani Nation" label="Piikani Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882257" start="859" end="863" title="Band government" label="band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="873" end="880" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q964747" start="968" end="985" title="Browning, Montana" label="Browning, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q862577" start="1031" end="1056" title="1990 United States Census" label="1990 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q388264" start="1364" end="1385" title="Blackfeet Confederacy" label="Blackfeet Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520098" start="1522" end="1535" title="Kainai Nation" label="Kainai Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q485070" start="1589" end="1603" title="Siksika Nation" label="Siksika Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q388264" start="1747" end="1768" title="Blackfoot Confederacy" label="Blackfoot Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33123248" start="1995" end="2011" title="Blackfeet Nation" label="Blackfeet Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485378" start="3073" end="3087" title="Clovis culture" label="Clovis culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419524" start="3228" end="3249" title="First Peoples Buffalo Jump State Park" label="north central Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q605981" start="3354" end="3366" title="buffalo jump" label="buffalo jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="3583" end="3595" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="3752" end="3763" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="3842" end="3852" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="3935" end="3946" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q393272" start="4011" end="4024" title="agglutinative" label="agglutinative"/>
<link wikidata="Q907924" start="4227" end="4241" title="Plains Indians" label="Plains Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438029" start="4336" end="4356" title="Rocky Mountain Front" label="Rocky Mountain Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q373567" start="4446" end="4467" title="Glacier National Park (U.S.)" label="Glacier National Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4496" end="4515" title="Badger-Two Medicine" label="Badger-Two Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26774" start="4591" end="4599" title="Shoshoni" label="Shoshoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550384" start="4646" end="4653" title="Ktunaxa" label="Kutenai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825812" start="4655" end="4661" title="Salish peoples" label="Salish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123923" start="4666" end="4675" title="Nez Perce people" label="Nez Perce"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="4806" end="4831" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q763043" start="4841" end="4855" title="David Thompson (explorer)" label="David Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q895385" start="4893" end="4902" title="Bow River" label="Bow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="5195" end="5213" title="infectious disease" label="infectious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="5289" end="5297" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q853930" start="5421" end="5431" title="starvation" label="starvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="6180" end="6188" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q155239" start="6214" end="6222" title="Indian reserve" label="reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326034" start="6683" end="6698" title="Earl Old Person" label="Earl Old Person"/>
<link wikidata="Q21028601" start="6800" end="6824" title="Helen P. Clarke" label="Helen Piotopowaka Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q504698" start="6938" end="6949" title="James Welch (writer)" label="James Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="7208" end="7211" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465688" start="7329" end="7339" title="Fools Crow" label="Fools Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11953798" start="7396" end="7420" title="John Two Guns White Calf" label="John Two Guns White Calf"/>
<link wikidata="Q373567" start="7483" end="7504" title="Glacier National Park (U.S.)" label="Glacier National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272318" start="7513" end="7535" title="Great Northern Railway (U.S.)" label="Great Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609341" start="7538" end="7558" title="Stephen Graham Jones" label="Stephen Graham Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967116" start="7583" end="7614" title="National Endowment for the Arts" label="National Endowment for the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398792" start="7836" end="7856" title="George Bird Grinnell" label="George Bird Grinnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="7899" end="7910" title="ethnologist" label="ethnologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q388264" start="7934" end="7950" title="Blackfoot Confederacy" label="Blackfeet Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="7988" end="8003" title="conservation movement" label="conservationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469139" start="8021" end="8038" title="Forest and Stream" label="Forest and Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551423" start="8047" end="8068" title="James Willard Schultz" label="James Willard Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q373567" start="8124" end="8145" title="Glacier National Park (U.S.)" label="Glacier National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q388264" start="8185" end="8202" title="Blackfoot Confederacy" label="Blackfeet Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550384" start="8288" end="8296" title="Kutenai Indians" label="Kootenai"/>
<link wikidata="Q568625" start="8302" end="8318" title="Flathead Indians" label="Flathead Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120018" start="8384" end="8399" title="Marias massacre" label="Marias massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930528" start="8434" end="8450" title="Hugh Dempsey" label="Dempsey, Hugh A."/>
<link wikidata="Q15052224" start="8613" end="8627" title="John C. Ewers" label="Ewers, John C."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52277" wikidata="Q1287" url="?curid=52277" title="Jansenism">
<text>Jansenism was a 17th- and 18th-century theological movement within Roman Catholicism, primarily active in France, which arose as an attempt to reconcile the theological concepts of free will and divine grace in response to certain developments in the Catholic Church, but later developing political and philosophical aspects in opposition to royal absolutism.

Jansenism is difficult to define, as its proponents usually identified as Roman Catholics. They did, however, possess some characteristic traits, such as using Augustine of Hippo&#x27;s conception of divine grace. In their interpretation, divine grace not only was necessary for salvation, but also negated human free will. As they interpreted it, humans post-Fall were only capable of evil. The Jansenists were also distinguished by their moral rigorism and hostility towards the Jesuits and ultramontanism. From the end of the 17th century, this theological movement gained a political aspect, with the opponents of royal absolutism being largely identified with Jansenism.

Jansenism began in the midst of the Counter-Reformation, and owes its name to the Dutch bishop of Ypres, Cornelius Jansen, the author of its foundational text, &quot;Augustinus&quot;, which was published posthumously in Leuven in 1640. The work was first popularised by Jansen&#x27;s friend Abbot Jean du Vergier de Hauranne of Saint-Cyran-en-Brenne Abbey, and after Vergier&#x27;s death in 1643, the movement was led by Antoine Arnauld. &quot;Augustinus&quot; was the culmination of controversies regarding grace dating back several decades, and coincided with growing hostility of part of the Roman Catholic clergy towards the Jesuits. Jansen claimed to establish Augustine&#x27;s true position on the subject, as opposed to the Jesuit view, which was said to give too great a role to free will in salvation.

&quot;Augustinus&quot; provoked lively debates, particularly in France, where five propositions, including the doctrines of limited atonement and irresistible grace, were extracted from the work and declared heretical by theologians hostile to Jansen. These were condemned in 1653 by Pope Innocent X in the apostolic constitution &quot;Cum occasione&quot;. Certain defenders of Jansen responded by distinguishing between matters &quot;de jure&quot; and &quot;de facto&quot;, arguing that the propositions were indeed heretical (&quot;de jure&quot;), but could not be found in &quot;Augustinus&quot; (&quot;de facto&quot;), and thus that the pope could not bind the conscience of a Roman Catholic regarding matters &quot;de facto&quot;.

The Jansenists attacked Jesuit casuistry as moral laxity, in such works as the &quot;Lettres provinciales&quot; (&#x27;Provincial letters&#x27;, fictional letters defending the Jansenist cause) by Blaise Pascal, which greatly affected French opinion on the matter. At the same time, the Port-Royal-des-Champs Abbey became a theological centre for the movement and a haven for writers including Vergier, Arnauld, Pascal, Pierre Nicole and Jean Racine. Jansenism developed and gained popularity. In the late 17th century, Jansenists enjoyed a measure of peace under Pope Clement IX (a period known as the &#x27;Clementine Peace&#x27;).

Nevertheless, Jansenism was opposed by many within the Roman Catholic hierarchy, especially the Jesuits. Although the Jansenists identified themselves merely as rigorous followers of Augustine&#x27;s teachings, Jesuits coined the term &quot;Jansenism&quot; to identify their ideas as the heresy of Crypto-Calvinism. Jansenists were also considered enemies of the monarchy, as they were very quickly targeted by royal power, with Louis XIV and his successors intensely persecuting them. The popes likewise demonstrated increasing severity towards them, notably with Clement XI abolishing the abbey of Port-Royal in 1708 and promulgating the bull &quot;Unigenitus&quot; in 1713, which further condemned Jansenist teachings. This controversy did not end until Louis Antoine de Noailles, cardinal and archbishop of Paris, who had opposed the bull, signed it in 1728. In this context, Jansenism merged with the Enlightenment in the struggle against the Jesuits, royal absolutism, and ultramontanism during the 18th century. Jansenist courtiers were instrumental in persuading Louis XV to launch the Suppression of the Jesuits. The clerics supporting the First French Republic and the Civil Constitution of the Clergy, which declared the Catholic Church in France completely subservient to the State, were also largely Jansenists. However, Jansenism receded and disappeared in the 19th century, with the First Vatican Council declaring a definitive end to most of the debates which caused its initial appearance, mainly by declaring the dogma of papal infallibility, which resolved ambiguities regarding the infallibility of papal bulls, and therefore whether they could be accepted or rejected by Roman Catholic clergy and laypeople.

== Definition ==

&quot;A historical enigma&quot; according to certain historians, &quot;an adaptation to changing circumstances&quot; according to others, Jansenism had an evolution parallel to that of the Roman Catholic Church until the 19th century, without any incontestable unity to be found in it.

The term &#x27;Jansenism&#x27; was rejected by those called &#x27;Jansenists&#x27;, who throughout history consistently proclaimed their unity with the Roman Catholic Church. Abbot Victor Carrière, precursor of contemporary studies of Jansenism, says the following.There is perhaps no question more complicated than that of Jansenism. From the beginning, many of those who were rightly considered to be its legitimate representatives asserted that it does not exist [...]. Moreover, in order to escape the condemnations of the Church, to disarm certain attackers and win new adherents, it has, depending on the circumstances, attenuated or even modified its fundamental theses. Thus, despite the countless works devoted to it, the history of Jansenism in its entirety still remains to be written today, since the spirit of polemic has prevailed for two centuries.Jansenism was first of all a defence of Augustinian theology in a debate initiated by the Protestant Reformation and the Council of Trent, then a concrete implementation of this Augustinianism. The struggle against ultramontanism and papal authority gave it a Gallican character, which became an essential component of the movement. In the absolutist France of the 17th and 18th centuries, the fear of a transition from religious opposition to a general opposition justified monarchical repression of Jansenism, and consequently, transformed the movement by giving it a political aspect marked by resistance to power and a defence of the &quot;parlements&quot;. In the 18th century, a diversity of &#x27;Jansenisms&#x27; became more evident. In France, the participation of secular society in the movement revealed a popular and miraculous component involving figurism and the phenomenon of the &quot;convulsionnaires&quot;. In northern Italy, the influence of the Austrian Enlightenment brought Jansenism closer to modernity. However in the 19th century, Jansenism was primarily a defence of the past and a struggle against modern developments in the Roman Catholic Church.

Augustin Gazier, historian of Jansenism and convinced Port-Royalist, attempts a minimal definition of the movement, removing the particularities to attribute a few common traits to all Jansenists: the subjection of one&#x27;s whole life to a demanding form of Christianity, which gave a particular view of dogmatic theology, religious history and the Christian world. They harshly criticised developments in the church, but at the same time maintained an unshakeable loyalty to it.

Taking a broader view, the estimation of Marie-José Michel is that the Jansenists occupied an empty space between the ultramontane project of Rome and the construction of Bourbon absolutism.French Jansenism is a creation of &quot;Ancien Régime&quot; society [...]. Developed from an Augustinian background very firmly anchored in France, it unfolds in parallel with the two great projects of French absolutism and the Catholic reformation [the Counter-Reformation]. Its development by part of the French religious and secular elites gives it an immediate audience never reached by the other two systems. It is thus rooted in French mentalities, and it truly survived as long as its two enemies, that is to say until the French Revolution for one, and until the First Vatican Council for the other.Therefore Jansenism cannot be wholly encapsulated as a fixed theological doctrine defended by easily identifiable supporters claiming a system of thought, but rather, it represented the variable and diverse developments of part of French and European Roman Catholicism in the early modern period.

The heresy of &#x27;Jansenism&#x27;, as stated by subsequent Roman Catholic doctrine, lies in the denial of the role of free will in the acceptance and use of grace. Jansenism asserts that God&#x27;s role in the infusion of grace cannot be resisted and does not require human assent. The &quot;Catechism of the Catholic Church&quot; states the Roman Catholic position that &quot;God&#x27;s free initiative demands man&#x27;s free response&quot;, that is, humans are said to freely assent or refuse God&#x27;s gift of grace.

==Origins==
=== The question of grace in the post-Tridentine period ===
Jansenism originated from a theological school of thought within the framework of the Counter-Reformation, and appeared in the years following the Council of Trent, but drew from debates older than the council. Although Jansenism takes its name from Cornelius Jansen, it is attached to a long tradition of Augustinian thought.

Most of the debates contributing to Jansenism concern the relationship between divine grace (which God grants to man) and human freedom in the process of salvation. In the 5th century, the North African bishop Augustine of Hippo opposed the British monk Pelagius who maintained that man has, within himself, the strength to will the good and to practice virtue, and thus to carry out salvation; a position that reduces the importance of divine grace. Augustine rejected this and declared that God alone decides to whom he grants or withholds grace, which causes man to be saved. The good or evil actions of man (and thus, his will and his virtue) do not affect this process, since man&#x27;s free will was lost as a result of the original sin of Adam. God acts upon man through efficacious grace, in such a way that he infallibly regenerates him, without destroying his will. Man thus receives an irresistible and dominant desire for the good, which is infused into him by the action of efficacious grace.

Medieval theology, dominated by Augustinian thought, left little room for human freedom on the subject of grace. Thomas Aquinas, however, attempted to organise a system of thought around Augustinianism in order to reconcile grace and human freedom. He both affirmed the action of the divine in each action of man, but also the freedom of man. The Scholastics of the 14th and 15th centuries moved away from Augustinianism towards a more optimistic view of human nature.

The Reformation broke with Scholasticism, with Martin Luther and John Calvin both taking Augustine as a reference, but also representing radical views. For some Augustinians, it was only necessary to affirm the omnipotence of God against human freedom, as was over-exalted in Pelagianism, whereas Luther and Calvin saw grace (freely granted or withheld by God) as causing man to be saved. Man&#x27;s free will was therefore totally denied. 

To counter the Reformation, the Roman Catholic Church in 1547 reaffirmed in the sixth session of the Council of Trent the place of free will, without pronouncing on its relationship with grace. Afterwards, the Roman Catholic position was not entirely unified, with the Jesuit priest Diego Laynez defending a position that his detractors described as Pelagian. Indeed, the Jesuits restarted the debate, fearing that excessive Augustinianism would weaken the role of the Church in salvation and compromise the rejection of Protestantism. In the wake of Renaissance humanism, certain Roman Catholics had a less pessimistic vision of man and sought to establish his place in the process of salvation by relying on Thomistic theology, which appeared to be a reasonable compromise between grace and free will. It is in this context that Aquinas was proclaimed a Doctor of the Church in 1567.Nevertheless, theological conflict increased from 1567, and in Leuven, the theologian Michel de Bay (Baius) was condemned by Pope Pius V for his denial of the reality of free will. In response to Baius, the Spanish Jesuit Luis de Molina, then teaching at the University of Évora, defended the existence of &#x27;sufficient&#x27; grace, which provides man with the means of salvation, but only enters into him by the assent of his free will. This thesis was violently opposed by the Augustinians, which resulted in the Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith banning any publications on the problem of grace in 1611.
The controversy was then concentrated in Leuven, where the Augustinian (Old) University of Leuven opposed the Jesuits. In 1628, Cornelius Jansen, then a professor at the university, undertook the creation of a theological work aimed at resolving the problem of grace by synthesising Augustine&#x27;s thought on the matter. This work, a manuscript of nearly 1,300 pages entitled &quot;Augustinus&quot;, was almost completed when Jansen died suddenly in an epidemic in 1638. On his deathbed, he committed a manuscript to his chaplain, ordering him to consult with Libert Froidmont, a theology professor at Leuven, and Henricus Calenus, canon at the metropolitan church, and to publish the manuscript if they agreed it should be published, adding, &quot;If, however, the Holy See wishes any change, I am an obedient son, and I submit to that Church in which I have lived to my dying hour. This is my last wish.&quot; Jansen affirmed in &quot;Augustinus&quot; that since the Fall of man, the human will is capable only of evil without divine help. Only efficacious grace can make him live according to the Spirit rather than the flesh, that is to say, according to the will of God rather than the will of man. This grace is irresistible and not granted to all men. Here Jansen agreed with Calvin&#x27;s theory of predestination. The manuscript was published in 1640, expounding Augustine&#x27;s system and forming the basis for the subsequent Jansenist controversy. The book consisted of three volumes:

# The first described the history of Pelagianism and Augustine&#x27;s battle against it and against Semipelagianism;
# The second discussed the fall of man and original sin;
# The third denounced a &#x27;modern tendency&#x27; (unnamed by Jansen but clearly identifiable as Molinism) as Semipelagian.

In the first decade of the 17th century, Jansen established a fruitful collaboration with one of his classmates at the University of Leuven, the Baianist Jean du Vergier de Hauranne, later the abbot of Saint-Cyran-en-Brenne. Vergier was Jansen&#x27;s patron for several years, and got Jansen a position as a tutor in Paris in 1606, after they completed their theological studies. Two years later, he got Jansen a position teaching at the bishop&#x27;s college in Vergier&#x27;s hometown of Bayonne. The two studied the Church Fathers together in Bayonne, with a special focus on the thought of Augustine, until they both left Bayonne in 1617. The question of grace was not central to their works at that time. Jansen returned to the University of Leuven, where he completed his doctorate in 1619 and was named professor of exegesis. Jansen and Vergier continued to correspond about Augustine, especially concerning his teachings on grace. Upon the recommendation of King Philip IV of Spain, Jansen was consecrated as Bishop of Ypres in 1636. It was only after the publication of &quot;Augustinus&quot; in 1638 that Vergier became the chief proponent of Jansen&#x27;s theses, initially more out of loyalty to his late friend than out of personal conviction.

=== A form of French Augustinianism—Vergier and the Arnauds ===

Until then, grace was not frequently debated among French Roman Catholics; the topic was overshadowed by the devastating French Wars of Religion. The Jesuits were also banished from the kingdom between 1595 and 1603, so the Augustinian doctrine had no real opponents.

At the beginning of the 17th century, the principal religious movement was the French school of spirituality, mainly represented by the Oratory of Jesus founded in 1611 by Cardinal Pierre de Bérulle, a close friend of Vergier. The movement sought to put into practice a certain form of Augustinianism without focusing on the question of grace as the Jansenists would later do. Its emphasis was to bring souls to a state of humility before God through the adoration of Christ as Saviour. Although Bérulle interfered little in the debates on grace, the Oratory and the Jesuits still came into conflict, with Vergier taking part by publishing writings against the &#x27;Molinists&#x27;. Moreover, Bérulle, after having been the ally of Cardinal Richelieu, became his enemy when he realised Richelieu was not so much seeking the victory of Roman Catholicism in Europe, but rather seeking &quot;to construct a political synthesis which would ensure the universal supremacy of the French monarchy&quot;; placing himself in alignment with the royal jurists. When Bérulle died in 1629, Richelieu transferred his hostility towards Vergier, mainly due to a theological debate regarding contrition (which had not been settled by the Council of Trent) that disinclined him to Vergier, making him, at least on this point, an ally of the Jesuits.

Vergier in his writings insisted on the necessity of a true &#x27;inner conversion&#x27; (perfect contrition) for the salvation of a Christian; the only way, according to him, to be able to receive the sacraments of penance and the Eucharist. This process of inner conversion, called the practice of &#x27;renewals&#x27;, is necessarily long and, once the state of conversion has been reached, the penitent must make the graces he has received bear fruit, preferably by leading a life of retreat. This notion of an -inner conversion is related to the doctrine of contrition in the remission of sins, that is, it was considered necessary to express love for God in order receive the sacraments. In opposition to Vergier, Richelieu in his book &quot;Instruction du chrétien&quot; (&#x27;Instruction of the Christian&#x27;, 1619), along with the Jesuits, supported the thesis of attrition (imperfect contrition) that is, for them, the &quot;regret for sins based solely on the fear of hell&quot; is sufficient for one to receive the sacraments. The idea that the Eucharist should be received very infrequently, and that reception required much more than freedom from mortal sin, remained influential until it was finally condemned in the early 20th century by Pope Pius X, who endorsed frequent communion, as long as the communicant was free of mortal sin.

In 1602, Marie Angélique Arnauld, member of the Arnaulds, a large family of the Parisian nobility, became abbess of Port-Royal-des-Champs, a Cistercian convent in Magny-les-Hameaux. There, she reformed discipline after a conversion experience in 1608. In 1625, most of the nuns moved to Paris, forming the convent of Port-Royal de Paris. In 1634, after coming into contact with the Arnaulds, Vergier became the spiritual advisor of Port-Royal-des-Champs, putting into practice his Augustinian vision of salvation, and also became a good friend of Angélique Arnauld; convincing her of the rightness of Jansen&#x27;s opinions. In 1637, Antoine Le Maistre, nephew of Angélique Arnaud, retreated to Port-Royal in order to fully immerse himself in the demanding spiritual practices he learned from Vergier. He was thus the first of the &quot;Solitaires&quot; of Port-Royal, and his example would be followed by other pious men wishing to live in isolation.

The two convents became major strongholds of Jansenism. Under Angélique Arnauld, later with Vergier&#x27;s support, Port-Royal-des-Champs developed a series of elementary schools, known as the &quot;Petites écoles de Port-Royal&quot; (&#x27;Little Schools of Port-Royal&#x27;); the most famous product of these schools was the playwright Jean Racine. Through Angélique Arnauld, Vergier had met her brother, Antoine Arnauld, became his protector and brought him to accept Jansen&#x27;s position in . Following Vergier&#x27;s death in 1643, Antoine Arnauld, then a brilliant lawyer, priest and theologian at the Sorbonne (theological college of the University of Paris), became the chief proponent of Jansenism.

By allying with the Protestant princes against the Roman Catholic princes in the Thirty Years&#x27; War, Richelieu aroused the suspicion of the devout Jansenists, leading Vergier to openly condemn his foreign policy. For this reason he was imprisoned in the Bastille in May 1638. The debate on the role of contrition and attrition in salvation was also one of the motives of the imprisonment. Vergier was not released until after Richelieu&#x27;s death in 1642, and he died shortly thereafter, in 1643. 

From 1640, the Jesuits condemned Vergier&#x27;s practice of renewals, which, according to them, risked discouraging the faithful and therefore distancing them from the sacraments. The Jesuits encouraged the faithful, whether or not they were struggling with sin, to receive the Eucharist frequently, arguing that Christ instituted it as a means to holiness for sinners, and stating that the only requirement for receiving Communion (apart from baptism) was that the communicant be free of mortal sin at the time of reception. Antoine Arnauld responded to them in 1643 with &quot;De la fréquente communion&quot; (&#x27;Of frequent communion&#x27;), representing the deeply pessimistic theology of Jansenism, and discouraged frequent Communion, arguing that a high degree of perfection, including purification from attachment to venial sin, was necessary before approaching the sacrament. Arnaud presented Jansen&#x27;s ideas in a more accessible way to the public (e.g., the work was written in the vernacular, whereas &quot;Augustinus&quot; was written in Latin). The work was approved by fifteen bishops and archbishops, as well as twenty-one theologians of the Sorbonne and was widely distributed except in Jesuit circles.

In 1644, Antoine Arnauld published an &quot;Apologie pour Jansenius&quot; (&#x27;Apology for Jansenius&#x27;), then a &quot;Seconde apologie&quot; (&#x27;Second apology&#x27;) in the following year, and finally an &quot;Apologie pour M. de Saint-Cyran&quot; (&#x27;Apology for Saint-Cyran [Vergier]&#x27;). Arnauld also replied to Jesuit criticism with (&#x27;Moral Theology of the Jesuits&#x27;). The Jesuits then designated Nicolas Caussin (former confessor of Louis XIII) to write (&#x27;Response to the libel titled Moral Theology of the Jesuits&#x27;) in 1644. Another Jesuit response was (&#x27;The impostures and ignorance of the libel titled Moral Theology of the Jesuits&#x27;) by François Pinthereau, under the pseudonym of &quot;abbé de Boisic&quot;, also in 1644. Pinthereau also wrote a critical history of Jansenism, (&#x27;The Birth of Jansenism Revealed to the Chancellor&#x27;) in 1654. During the 1640s, Vergier&#x27;s nephew, Martin de Barcos, who was once a theology student under Jansen, wrote several works defending his uncle.

== The reception of &quot;Augustinus&quot; in France ==
&quot;Augustinus&quot; was first printed in France in 1641, then a second time in 1643, and was read widely in theological circles, including in Spanish Flanders and the Dutch Republic. The debate regarding Augustinianism in France was mainly introduced by the publication of &quot;Augustinus&quot;, in which emphasis is placed on the Augustinian theory of grace and predestination.The Oratorians and Dominicans welcomed the work, along with a large number of theologians at the Sorbonne, ten of which approved the French editions. But the Jesuits immediately opposed it, who were supported by Cardinal Richelieu, and after his death in 1642, by who attacked Jansen in his sermons at the Notre-Dame de Paris, and by the Feuillant theologian Pierre de Saint-Joseph who published a &quot;Defensio sancti Augusti&quot; (&#x27;Defence of Saint Augustine&#x27;) in 1643.

These first years were not favourable to the Jansenists. The Archbishop of Paris, Jean-François de Gondi, forbade the treatment of grace in publications and formally proscribed &quot;Augustinus&quot;, but it nevertheless continued to circulate. On 1 August 1642, the Holy Office issued a decree condemning and forbidding its reading. The decree was powerless in France since the tribunal was unrecognised by the law. On 6 March 1642, Pope Urban VIII followed up with a papal bull entitled , which condemned because it was published in violation of the order that no works concerning grace should be published without the prior permission of the Holy See. He also renewed the censures by Pope Pius V, in in 1567, and by Pope Gregory XIII, of several propositions of Baianism, arguing that they were repeated in .

&quot;In eminenti&quot; was, for a time, treated as invalid because of an alleged ambiguity about the date of its publication. Jansenists attempted to prevent the reception of &quot;In eminenti&quot;, both in Flanders and in France. They alleged that it could not be genuine, since the document attested to be promulgated at Rome on 6 March 1641, whereas the copy sent to Brussels by the nuncio at Cologne was dated in 1642. In reality, the difference was between the Old Style and New Style dates which were both still in use. Thanks to the agitation of the Jansenists in the &quot;Parlement&quot;, its publication in France was delayed until January 1643. The faculty of the Sorbonne formally accepted the bull in 1644.

==The five propositions==
The opponents of Jansenism wanted &quot;Augustinus&quot; to be more thoroughly condemned, since the Jesuits especially considered Jansenism to be heretical in the vein of Calvinism. , ally of the late Richelieu, who became Bishop of Vabres, published in December 1646 a list of eight propositions taken from the &quot;Augustinus&quot; that he considered heretical. A few years later, in 1649, the syndic of the Sorbonne, Nicolas Cornet, frustrated by the continued circulation of &quot;Augustinus&quot;, drew up a list of five propositions from the work and two from &quot;De la fréquente communion&quot;, then asked the Sorbonne faculty to condemn the propositions. Jansen&#x27;s name was not explicitly mentioned, but it was obvious to all that he was being condemned.The cunning cyndic was careful not to give precise statements, as loyalty made it a duty; he did not attribute these propositions to anyone, and if anyone were to pronounce the name of Jansen, he would even say that it was not a question of him, &quot;Non agitur de Jansenio&quot;, [It is not about Jansen], whereas inwardly, it was Jansen and him alone who was in question.
Before the faculty could condemn the propositions, the &quot;parlement&quot; of Paris intervened and forbade the faculty to consider the propositions. The faculty then submitted the propositions to the Assembly of the French clergy in 1650. Consequently, Habert wrote to Pope Innocent X the same year, mentioning five of the initial seven propositions. In his letter, he does not directly mention Jansen, but describes the trouble caused in France by the publication of his work. The five propositions were not formally attributed to Jansen. The letter provoked controversy; more than ninety French bishops signed it, but it was immediately countered by thirteen Augustinian prelates, who wrote a letter of refutation to Rome. In this letter, the prelates denounced the five propositions as &quot;composed in ambiguous terms, which could only produce heated arguments&quot;, and requested the pope to be careful not to condemn Augustinianism too hastily, which they considered to be the official doctrine of the Church on the question of grace. Among these bishops were Henri Arnauld, bishop of Angers and brother of Antoine Arnaud, and , bishop of Beauvais, who would later show fervent support for Port-Royal. At the same time, Antoine Arnaud openly doubted the presence of the five propositions in the work of Jansen, introducing the suspicion of manipulation on the part of the opponents of the Jansenists.
The prelates also asked Innocent X to appoint a commission similar to the to resolve the situation. Innocent X agreed to the majority&#x27;s request, (that is, the request of the ninety bishops) but in an attempt to accommodate the view of the minority, appointed an advisory committee consisting of five cardinals and thirteen consultors to report on the situation. Over the next two years, this commission held 36 meetings including 10 presided by Innocent X. The supporters of Jansenism on the commission drew up a table with three heads: the first listed the Calvinist position (which was condemned as heretical), the second listed the Pelagian/Semipelagian position (as taught by the Molinists), and the third listed the correct Augustinian position (according to the Jansenists). Nevertheless, in 1653, Innocent X sided with the majority and condemned the propositions, promulgating in the form of a papal bull the apostolic constitution &quot;Cum occasione&quot;. The first four propositions were declared heretical and the fifth false.

#That there are some commands of God that just persons cannot keep, no matter how hard they wish and strive, and they are not given the grace to enable them to keep these commands;
# That it is impossible for fallen persons to resist interior grace;
# That it is possible for human beings who lack free will to merit;
# That the Semipelagians were correct to teach that prevenient grace was necessary for all interior acts, including for faith, but were incorrect to teach that fallen humanity is free to accept or resist prevenient grace; and;
# That it is Semipelagian to say that Christ died for all.

The bull was received favourably in France. Some Jansenists including Antoine Arnaud admitted that the propositions are heretical, but argued that they could not be found in &quot;Augustinus&quot;. They maintained that Jansen and his &quot;Augustinus&quot; were orthodox, as they espoused only what Augustine himself taught, and they believed it was impossible that the pope could have condemned Augustine&#x27;s opinion. Arnauld articulated a distinction as to how far the Church could bind the mind of a Roman Catholic. He argued that there is a distinction between matters &quot;de jure&quot; and &quot;de facto&quot;: that a Roman Catholic was obliged to accept the Roman Catholic Church&#x27;s opinion as to a matter of law (i.e., as to a matter of doctrine), but not as to a matter of fact. Arnauld argued that, while he agreed with the doctrine propounded in , he was not bound to accept the pope&#x27;s determination of fact as to what doctrines were contained in Jansen&#x27;s work. The Jansenists were therefore content with the notion that Jansen himself was not openly condemned, and further that Augustine&#x27;s doctrine was still considered orthodox. This displeased the Jesuits and their supporters, who wanted a thoroughgoing condemnation of Jansenism. While the theological problem was technically resolved by Rome, hostility between the Jansenists and the Jesuits became increasingly pronounced.

== The controversies between the Jansenists and the Molinists ==
Even before the promulgation of &quot;Cum occasione&quot;, tensions between Jansenists and Jesuits defending Luis de Molina&#x27;s thesis, the Molinists, had begun. In August 1649, Antoine Singlin, a priest near Port-Royal, preached on the occasion of the Feast of St. Augustine in Port-Royal. In his sermon, he emphasised efficacious grace, thus violating the order of his bishop who had forbidden the issue to be discussed. The ensuing controversy involved many Jansenists, in particular Henri Arnauld, bishop of Angers.

After the promulgation of the bull, the Jesuits exploited what was for them a victory, and restarted hostilities. In 1654, the Jesuit François Annat published the &quot;Chicanes des jansénistes&quot; (&#x27;Deceits of the Jansenists&#x27;), in which he expressed the idea that the pope had in fact condemned Augustinian doctrine, and that the five propositions were indeed contained in &quot;Augustinus&quot;. Antoine Arnaud immediately responded, analysing the propositions and trying to show that they were inaccurate summaries of Jansen&#x27;s views.

Cardinal Mazarin, in order to put an end to the hostilities, convoked the bishops in 1654 and then in 1655, demanding them to sign a declaration condemning the doctrine of Jansen. He recommended the signing of a similar declaration by all the clergy, but the bishops are quite reluctant, so Mazarin&#x27;s demand remained unfulfilled in the majority of dioceses.The first consequence of this attempt was the scandal involving the Duke of Liancourt (, Duke of La Roche-Guyon, known as the Duke of Liancourt). In January 1655, this ally of the Jansenists (his only granddaughter was a boarder at Port-Royal,) was refused absolution by a vicar of the Saint-Sulpice parish in Paris because of his Jansenist connections. Antoine Arnauld responded to this by publishing two pamphlets, &quot;Lettre à une personne de condition&quot; (&#x27;Letter to a person of status&#x27;, addressed to Liancourt) and &quot;Seconde lettre à un duc et pair&quot; (&#x27;Second letter to a duke and peer&#x27;, addressed to the Duke of Luyne). He denounced the arbitrariness of the vicar&#x27;s action and condemned the Jesuits, who were, according to him, adherents to a &#x27;lax morality&#x27;, in plotting against Augustine&#x27;s doctrine of grace. Arnauld declared that he assented to the papal condemnation in &quot;Cum occasione&quot;, but remained silent on whether the condemned propositions could be attributed to Jansen. He openly disputed the concept of &#x27;sufficient grace&#x27; defended by the Molinists. 

The clarity of Arnauld&#x27;s explication ironically prompted his adversaries to ask the College of Sorbonne to examine his last letter. The professors who were responsible for examining the letter were all openly hostile to Augustinianism. They extracted two propositions from the letter which were then condemned. On 31 January 1656, shockingly, Arnauld was barred from the Sorbonne, despite sixty professors having come to his defence. This event pushed Arnauld to retreat to Port-Royal, where he devoted himself to writing with a promising young theologian, Pierre Nicole. At the same time, Blaise Pascal undertook to defend him before public opinion, initiating the campaign of the &quot;Provinciales&quot;.

Later that year, the French Assembly of the Bishops voted to condemn Arnauld&#x27;s distinction regarding the pope&#x27;s ability to bind the mind of believers in matters of doctrine (&quot;de jure&quot;) but not in matters of fact (&quot;de facto&quot;). They asked Pope Alexander VII to condemn Arnauld&#x27;s proposition as heretical. Alexander VII responded, in the apostolic constitution &quot;Ad sanctam beati Petri sedem&quot; promulgated in 1656, that &quot;We declare and define that the five propositions have been drawn from the book of Jansenius entitled , and that they have been condemned in the sense of the same Jansenius and we once more condemn them as such.&quot;

== Blaise Pascal and the campaign of the &quot;Provinciales&quot; ==
When the censure of the &quot;Second letter to a duke and peer&quot; and the condemnation of Antoine Arnauld were certain, Blaise Pascal entered the controversy on the side of the Jansenists. He decided to devote himself to religion a little over a year before. His sister Jacqueline Pascal was one of the major figures at Port-Royal, and he himself had numerous dialogues with the Solitaires (notably the famous ).Pascal was invited by Arnauld to bring the matter before public opinion. On 23 January 1656, nine days before the first official condemnation of Arnauld, a fictional letter entitled &quot;Lettre écrite à un provincial par un de ses amis, sur le sujet des disputes présentes à la Sorbonne&quot; (&quot;Letter written to a provincial by one of his friends, on the subject of the present disputes at the Sorbonne&quot;), was published secretively and anonymously. Seventeen other &quot;Provinciales&quot; followed, and on 24 March 1657, Pascal made a contribution to a work entitled &quot;Écrits des curés de Paris&quot; (&quot;Writings of Parisian priests&quot;), in which the moral laxity of the Jesuits was condemned.

In his &quot;Provinciales&quot;, Pascal denies the existence of a &#x27;Jansenist party&#x27;. According to Augustin Gazier, &quot;for the author of the &quot;Little Letters&quot;, it was a matter of disabusing an overly credulous public, and of bringing out in all its light the perfect orthodoxy of those whom slander represented as heretics. Pascal did not hesitate to say that so-called &#x27;Jansenism&#x27; was a chimera, a crude and abominable invention of the Jesuits, bitter enemies of Saint Augustine and of grace effective in itself.&quot;

The &quot;Provinciales&quot; were a comprehensive defence of Augustinanism and an apology for Port-Royal, but they are best known for their ironical attacks made against the Jesuits, echoing Arnauld&#x27;s (although unlike Arnauld, Pascal did not accede to but believed that the condemned doctrines were orthodox. Nevertheless, he emphasised Arnauld&#x27;s distinction about matters &quot;de jure&quot; and &quot;de facto&quot;). They achieved great success among the cultured who formed public opinion at that time, as they appreciated Pascals&#x27; ridicule of the Jesuits, casuists and Molinists. If the first three letters are directly linked to the convictions of Antoine Arnauld, the following ones have a different purpose, since Pascal saw his convictions justified and so went on the counterattack. He violently attacked the Jesuits accused of advocating moral laxity. These letters, described as &#x27;divine&#x27; by Marquess of Sévigné, were a campaign to change public opinion, turning the public away from theological questions towards the denigration of the supposed moral laxity of the Jesuits. This was not received well by certain Jansenists, who saw in the attacks contained in the letters a breach of Christian charity.

The placement of the letters in the Index of Prohibited Books by Rome represents a context in which Jansenism was moving away from a theological quarrel to a movement increasingly known and established in the secular world. According to Gazier, the main reason for this prohibition was not the theology (which was &#x27;unassailable&#x27;), nor even the attacks against the Jesuits, but rather the fact that religious debates were raised in public, &quot;the doctrinal part of the &quot;Provinciales&quot; is unassailable; they could not be censored by the Sorbonne or condemned by the popes, and if they were put in the Index, like the &quot;Discourse on the Method&quot; [of René Descartes], it was because they were disapproved of for having treated, in French, for the people of the world and for women, contentious questions of which only scholars should have been aware.&quot;

The &#x27;miracle of Saint-Épine&#x27;, which occurred on 24 March 1656, was effective in reducing the attacks against Jansenism and popularising it among the public. The niece of Pascal, Marguerite Périer, a boarder at Port-Royal, was cured of a lacrimal fistula that disfigured her, after having interacted with a relic of Saint-Épine. The Jansenists saw this as divine approval, and, with the Roman Catholic Church officially recognising the healing as a miracle, they were at peace for the moment.

While the Church in France had left the quarrel aside, it was on the political front that the Jansenists became seriously worried.

==Political opposition to Jansenism==
Though initially religious, the opposition to Jansenism quickly gained a political aspect. Upon the death of Louis XIII in 1643, Cardinal Mazarin took the same positions as his predecessor Richelieu in combatting the &#x27;Jansenist party&#x27;. The &#x27;Jansenist party&#x27; tended to attract former Frondeurs after the failure of their revolt in 1653. Although the Jansenists were not involved in the Fronde, they were quickly associated with the revolt because of the support they received from nobles such as Anne Geneviève de Bourbon, Duchess of Longueville (who had a house built in Port-Royal-des-Champs) and her brother Armand de Bourbon, Prince of Conti. The Arnauld family was suspected of being linked to the parliamentary Fronde. In addition, the actions of certain Solitaires to abandon worldly life and to withdraw completely from the Court worried Mazarin, who saw it as a possible source of political dissent.
In 1657, the Assembly of the French clergy, relying on &quot;Ad sanctam beati Petri sedem&quot;, drew up a formula of faith condemning Jansenism. The Assembly declared that signing the formula was compulsory for all French clergy. Many Jansenists remained firmly committed to Arnauld&#x27;s distinction between matters &quot;de jure&quot; and &quot;de facto&quot;, and refused to sign. The &quot;Petites écoles de Port-Royal&quot; (the &#x27;Little Schools of Port-Royal&#x27;) were thus dissolved. The archbishop of Paris, Hardouin de Péréfixe de Beaumont, went several times to the monastery of Port-Royal to urge the nuns to sign the formula, but in vain. He therefore interdicted them from receiving the sacraments on 21 August 1664. This was a severe condemnation of Jansenism. A few days later, the leaders of the Jansenists were forced outside the monastery, then all the nuns who refused to sign were kept together at Port-Royal-des-Champs, while the nuns who did sign were gathered at the monastery in Paris.

Mazarin did not manage to fight effectively against Jansenism; rather it would be Louis XIV who achieved the near-total suppression of the movement. Early in his reign he was haunted by the memory of the Fronde, which proved to be his strongest opponent upon his true assumption of power in March 1660. In December 1660, he brought Mazarin together with the presidents of the Assembly asked them to proceed with coercing the clergy to sign the formula. The signing of the formula, which reiterated the condemnation of the five propositions by Innocent X in &quot;Cum occasione&quot;, was, according to Jean-Pierre Chantin, &quot;a true test of orthodoxy imposed upon the entire clergy&quot;. The Jansenists and the nuns of Port-Royal were divided as to what attitude to adopt. Antoine Arnauld applied the distinction between matters &quot;de jure&quot; and &quot;de facto&quot;; he agreed to condemn the propositions, but maintained reservations about their presence within &quot;Augustinus&quot;. However, the ecclesiastical authorities rejected this distinction. Many priests and nuns refused to sign the formula.

As soon as Mazarin died, on 9 March 1661, Louis XIV ordered the dispersion of the novices and residents of the monasteries of Port-Royal-des-Champs and Port-Royal de Paris. The convent was also forbidden to accept new novices, which guaranteed that it would eventually die out. Affairs were further complicated by several bishops who also desired to maintain the distinction between matters &quot;de jure&quot; and &quot;de facto&quot; regarding the formula. This was the case with four noteworthy bishops, who were condemned by Rome and Louis XIV: François-Étienne Caulet, bishop of Pamiers, Nicolas Pavillon, bishop of Alès, , bishop of Beauvais and Henri Arnauld, Bishop of Angers.

=== Formulary controversy: 1664–1669 ===
At the urging of several bishops, and at the personal insistence of King Louis XIV, Pope Alexander VII sent to France the apostolic constitution &quot;Regiminis Apostolici&quot; in 1664, which required, according to the , &quot;all ecclesiastical personnel and teachers&quot; to subscribe to an included formulary, the &quot;Formula of Submission for the Jansenists&quot;.

The formula was the basis of the Formulary Controversy. Many Jansenists refused to sign it; while some did sign, they made it known that they were agreeing only to the doctrine (matters &quot;de jure&quot;), not the allegations asserted by the bull (matters &quot;de facto&quot;). The latter category included the four Jansenist-leaning bishops, who communicated the bull to their flocks along with messages that maintained the distinction between doctrine and fact. This angered both Louis XIV and Alexander VII, who commissioned nine French bishops to investigate the situation.

Alexander VII died in 1667 before the commission concluded its investigation and his successor, Pope Clement IX, initially appeared willing to continue the investigation of the nine Jansenist-leaning bishops. However, in France, Jansenists conducted a campaign arguing that allowing a papal commission of this sort would constitute a renouncement of the traditional liberties of the Gallican Church, thus playing on traditional French opposition to ultramontanism. They convinced one member of the cabinet (Lyonne) and nineteen bishops of their position. These bishops argued, in a letter to Clement IX, that the infallibility of the Church applied only to matters of revelation, and not to matters of fact. They asserted that this was the position of Caesar Baronius and Robert Bellarmine. They also argued in a letter to Louis XIV that allowing the investigation to continue would result in political discord.

Under these circumstances, the papal nuncio to France recommended that Clement IX accommodate the Jansenists. Clement agreed, and appointed César d&#x27;Estrées, Bishop of Laon, as a mediator in the matter. Two bishops who had signed the letter to the pope, Louis Henri de Pardaillan de Gondrin, Archbishop of Sens, and Félix Vialart de Herse, Bishop of Châlons-sur-Marne, assisted d&#x27;Estrées. D&#x27;Estrées convinced the four bishops, Arnauld, Choart de Buzenval, Caulet and Pavillon, to sign the &quot;Formula of Submission for the Jansenists&quot; (though it seems they may have believed that signing the formulary did not mean assent to the matters &quot;de facto&quot; that it contained). The pope, initially happy that the four bishops had signed, became angry when he was informed that they had done so with reservations. Clement IX ordered his nuncio to conduct a new investigation. Reporting back, the nuncio declared: &quot;they have condemned and caused to be condemned the five propositions with all manner of sincerity, without any exception or restriction whatever, in every sense in which the Church has condemned them&quot;. However, he reported that the four bishops continued to be evasive as to whether they agreed with the pope as to the matter &quot;de facto&quot;. In response, Clement IX appointed a commission of twelve cardinals to further investigate the matter. This commission determined that the four bishops had signed the formula in a less than entirely sincere manner, but recommended that the matter should be dropped to forestall further divisions in the Church. Foreign wars also pressured Louis XIV to avoid internal conflict. The pope agreed and thus issued four briefs, declaring the four bishops&#x27; agreement to the formula was acceptable, thus instituting the &quot;Paix clémentine&quot; (&#x27;Clementine Peace&#x27;) which lasted from 1669 to 1679.

== The Clementine Peace ==
Although the peace of Clement IX was a lull in the public theological controversy, several clergymen remained attracted to Jansenism. Three major groups were:

# The &quot;duped Jansenists&quot;, who continued to profess the five propositions condemned in ;
# The &quot;fin jansénistes&quot;, who accepted the doctrine of &quot;Cum occasione&quot; but who continued to deny the infallibility of the Church in matters &quot;de facto&quot;;
# The &quot;quasi-Jansenists&quot;, who formally accepted both &quot;Cum occasione&quot; and the infallibility of the Church in matters &quot;de facto&quot;, but who nevertheless remained attracted to aspects of Jansenism, notably its stern morality, commitment to virtue, and its opposition to ultramontanism, which was also a political issue in France in the decades surrounding the 1682 &quot;Declaration of the clergy of France&quot;. They served as protectors of the &#x27;duped Jansenists&#x27; and the &quot;fins jansénistes&quot;.

During the Clementine Peace, the Jansenists tried to avoid unnecessary controversy, especially since the growing absolutism of Louis XIV made the attraction of former Frondeurs to Port-Royal and Jansenism suspect. This is why Blaise Pascal&#x27;s &quot;Pensées&quot; (published posthumously in 1670) and Pierre Nicole&#x27;s &quot;Essais de morale et d&#x27;instruction théologiques&quot; (&#x27;Essays on moral and theological instruction&#x27;) are devoid of any theological or political controversy.
The Jansenists at this time distinguished themselves by the quality of their intellectual work and by their desire to put communicate matters of religion to the faithful. Louis-Isaac Lemaistre de Sacy thus published a French New Testament in 1667. Published secretively in Mons (in the Spanish Netherlands), it was condemned by the pope in 1668 because it translated the sacred text into the vernacular and with allegedly Jansenising edits. He then undertook a translation of the Vulgate, starting in 1672, which was not completed until 1695. These thirty volumes are considered an essential text in Biblical scholarship. The &quot;Bible de Sacy&quot; (&#x27;Sacy Bible&#x27;), like Pascal&#x27;s &quot;Pensées&quot;, is considered to be a reputable example of the classical French language of the 17th century.

Despite this intense intellectual activity, Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve, in his work &quot;Port-Royal&quot;, rightly says that it was only a period of respite before further troubles.The ten years which followed the Clementine Peace were for Port-Royal ten years of glory, fundamentally of decline, but of a veiled, embellished decline; these were the beautiful hours of a sweet autumn, of a rich and warm sunset. In an instant, solitude bloomed again and became commonplace, more enamelled than ever. The old spirit within continued and adapted again without much struggle.
== Renewed persecution after the Clementine Peace ==
The death of the Duchess of Longueville, protector of Port-Royal and the Jansenists, in 1679, as well as the signing of the Treaties of Nijmegen and of Saint-Germain the same year, left Louis XIV with a free hand to resume his persecution of Jansenism.
In agreement with the king, the new archbishop of Paris, François de Harlay de Champvallon, expelled the novices and confessors (seventy people) from the monastery of Port-Royal-des-Champs and banned recruitment. Following this measure, the main Jansenist theologians went into exile: Pierre Nicole settled in Spanish Flanders until 1683, Antoine Arnauld took refuge in Brussels in 1680 and was joined by in 1685, an Augustinian Oratorian.

In 1696, the work of Martin de Barcos (nephew of Jean du Vergier de Hauranne), &quot;Expression de la foi catholique touchant la grâce et la prédestination&quot; (&#x27;Expression of the Catholic faith, touching on grace and predestination&#x27;), was published by the Benedictine Gabriel Gerberon, then in exile in Holland. This work was immediately condemned by the archbishop of Paris, Louis Antoine de Noailles, although he was very deferential towards Augustine&#x27;s writings. Notably, he approved Pasquier Quesnel&#x27;s &quot;Réflexions morales&quot; in 1694, due its markedly Augustinian character. The Jansenists reacted strongly to the condemnation of Barcos&#x27; book, and criticised Noailles.

=== Pasquier Quesnel and his &quot;Réflexions morales&quot;: 1692–1710 ===
Quesnel was also a member of the Oratory of Jesus in Paris from 1657 until 1681, when he was expelled on account of his Jansenism. He sought the protection of Pierre du Cambout de Coislin, bishop of Orléans, who harbored Quesnel for four years, until Quesnel joined Antoine Arnauld in Brussels in 1689. In 1692, Quesnel published the &quot;Nouveau Testament en français avec des réflexions morales sur chaque verset&quot; (&#x27;New Testament in French with moral reflections on each verse&#x27;), a devotional guide to the New Testament that laid out the Jansenist position in strong terms. This work, consistently republished because of its success, was classically Augustinian. Quesnel remained measured on questions of grace, but on the other hand was fiercely Gallican in the vein of Edmond Richer. Indeed, Quesnel was seen as the functional successor of Antoine Arnauld upon his death in 1694, and therefore as the leader of the &#x27;Jansenist party&#x27;.

The &quot;Réflexions morales&quot; did not initially arouse controversy; not only was it recommended by Noailles but it was also approved for publication by Félix Vialart de Herse, bishop of Châlons-sur-Marne. However, in the years that followed, several bishops became aware of the book&#x27;s Jansenist tendencies and issued condemnations: , bishop of Apt, in 1703; Charles-Béningne Hervé, bishop of Gap, in 1704; and both , bishop of Besançon, and , bishop of Nevers, in 1707. When the Holy Office drew the to the attention of Clement XI, he issued the papal brief (1708), proscribing the book for &quot;savouring of the Jansenist heresy&quot;. As a result, in 1710, Jean-François de l&#x27;Escure de Valderil, bishop of Luçon, and , bishop of La Rochelle, forbade the reading of the book in their dioceses. 

=== &quot;Case of Conscience&quot;: 1701–1709 ===
The tensions generated by the continuing presence of these elements in the French Roman Catholic Church came to a head in the Case of Conscience of 1701, which was initiated by a priest from Clermont-Ferrand. The case involved the question of whether or not absolution should be given to a cleric who refused to affirm the infallibility of the Church in matters &quot;de facto&quot; (even if he did not preach against it but merely maintained a &#x27;respectful silence&#x27;). A provincial conference, consisting of forty theology professors from the Sorbonne, headed by Noël Alexandre, declared that the cleric should receive absolution.

The publication of this &#x27;Case of Conscience&#x27; provoked outrage among the anti-Jansenist elements in the Roman Catholic Church. The decision given by the scholars was condemned by several French bishops; by Cardinal Louis Antoine de Noailles, archbishop of Paris; by the theological faculties at Leuven, Douai and eventually Paris; and, finally, in 1703, by Pope Clement XI. The scholars who had signed the Case of Conscience then backed away, all of the signatories withdrew their signatures and the theologian who had championed the result of the Case of Conscience, , was expelled from the Sorbonne.

Louis XIV and his grandson, Philip V of Spain, then asked the pope to issue a papal bull condemning the practice of maintaining a &#x27;respectful silence&#x27; as to the issue of the infallibility of the Church in matters &quot;de facto&quot;.

The pope obliged, issuing the apostolic constitution , on 16 July 1705. At the subsequent Assembly of the French Clergy, all those present, except P.-Jean-Fr. de Percin de Montgaillard, bishop of Saint-Pons, voted to accept and Louis XIV promulgated it as binding law in France.

=== Dissolution of Port-Royal and promulgation of &quot;Unigenitus&quot;: 1708–1713 ===
Louis XIV also sought the dissolution of Port-Royal-des-Champs, the stronghold of Jansenist thought, and this was achieved in 1708 when the pope issued a bull enacting this. The remaining nuns were forcibly removed in 1709 and dispersed among various other French convents and the buildings were razed in 1709. The convent of Port-Royal de Paris remained in existence until it was closed in the general dechristianisation of France during the French Revolution.All these condemnations allowed Louis XIV to make arguments to definitively reduce the movement to a &#x27;republican sect&#x27;, that is to say, a sect opposed to the royal absolutist regime. Taking advantage of the War of the Spanish Succession, he had Quesnel imprisoned by Humbertus Guilielmus de Precipiano, archbishop of Mechelen in the Spanish Netherlands in 1703, and had all his papers seized, although he escaped and fled to Amsterdam, where he lived for the remainder of his life. This was followed by the arrest of the entire network of correspondents woven by Quesnel over fifteen years throughout France. The centres of the secret publication of Jansenist writings were discovered, forcing Jansenists to flee abroad, most often to the Spanish Netherlands or the Dutch Republic, passing through monasteries such as the abbey of Hautefontaine, on the border between Champagne and independent Lorraine.

Louis XIV asked the pope for a final condemnation, specifically for the &quot;Réflexions morales&quot; of Quesnel. Clement XI sent a papal brief in 1708, but it was not received by the &quot;parlement&quot; of Paris. The Jesuit priest Michel Le Tellier, the king&#x27;s confessor, tried to convince the bishops to ask for a formal condemnation of the work, but unsuccessfully. The king therefore asked the pope for a papal bull condemning the book. In response, Clement XI promulgated the bull &quot;Unigenitus Dei Filius&quot; on 8 September 1713. It was written with the contribution of Gregorio Selleri, a lector at the College of Saint Thomas, the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, &quot;Angelicum&quot;, and later Master of the Sacred Palace, fostered the condemnation of Jansenism by condemning one hundred and one propositions from the of Quesnel as heretical, and as identical with propositions already condemned in the writings of Jansen. These propositions as well as the work itself are seen as a summary of Jansenist doctrine.

== The reception of the papal bull &quot;Unigenitus&quot; ==

By condemning the one hundred and one propositions taken from Quesnel&#x27;s &quot;Réflexions morales&quot;, the papal bull &quot;Unigenitus&quot; marks a significant turning point in the history of Jansenism. Those Jansenists who accepted the bull became known as &quot;acceptants&quot;.

The bull saw in the propositions listed a summary of Jansenism, but, in addition to questions relating to the problem of grace, traditional positions on Gallicanism and the theology of Edmond Richer are condemned, which brought even more theologians to oppose the Jansenists, who in turn felt threatened.

The atmosphere of the final years of the reign of the aging Louis XIV was characterised by opposition to the bull. To actually be applied, the bull had to be registered with the &quot;parlement&quot; of Paris. However, the &quot;parlement&quot; refused to ratify the bull until the French bishops had taken a position on it, believing that they had no authority over religious matters deriving from their political power. Several bishops, and with them many theologians, publicly proposed the calling (&quot;appellation&quot;) of a general council to resolve the question; they were thus called the &quot;appelants&quot;. Between 1713 and 1731, more than a thousand pamphlets were published on this subject.

In the midst of this dispute, Louis XIV died in 1715, and the government of France was taken over by Philippe II, Duke of Orléans, regent for the five-year-old Louis XV of France. Unlike Louis XIV, who had stood solidly behind &quot;Unigenitus&quot;, Philippe II expressed ambivalence during the &quot;Régence&quot; period. With the change in political mood, three theological faculties that had previously voted to accept &quot;Unigenitus&quot; (Paris, Nantes and Reims) voted to rescind their acceptance. The Duke of Orléans was not a friend of the Jesuits; he hastened to dismiss Michel Le Tellier, the former confessor of Louis XIV, who he replaced with Abbot Claude Fleury, a Gallican suspected of Jansenism, as confessor and tutor of the young Louis. At the demand of the bishops to refuse the bull, he wrote to Clement XI to request clarifications and rectifications for &quot;Unigenitus&quot;. The pope refused, appealing to his infallibility (although papal infallibility was not a dogma until its proclamation at the First Vatican Council, it was more and more often put forward and accepted during the disputes of this era). Aspiring to continuity with the reign of Louis XIV, the Regent considered himself bound to fulfill the promise of his predecessor, which was to seek a compromise that offended neither the pope nor the Gallican clergy. Augustin Gazier describes this as a fundamentally political rather than religious settlement.[The] Duke of Orléans, who was not a believer, subordinated religion to politics. He was imbued with the idea that royalty never dies, and that consequently kings are destined to make the same mistakes as their predecessors; they are in continuity with each other. [... Louis XIV] had promised the pope to receive the bull &quot;Unigenitus&quot;, and the pope insisted that the promise be strictly kept; Philippe d&#x27;Orléans therefore saw the need to satisfy Clement XI and consequently to bring the recalcitrant prelates to a compromise, if it were not absolutely impossible.However the discussions between the different parties were a failure, and in 1717, opposition to the bull became more direct. In March, four bishops filed a notarial deed at the Sorbonne, demanding a general council to appeal &quot;Unigenitus&quot;. They were joined by hundreds of French priests, monks and nuns and were supported by the &quot;parlements&quot;. For this they relied on the &quot;Declaration of the Clergy of France&quot; of 1682, which was approved by the Assembly of the French clergy and by Louis XIV. This important expression of Gallicanism placed the authority of a general council over the pope. The four bishops were Jean Soanen, bishop of Senez, Charles Joachim Colbert, bishop of Montpellier, Pierre de La Broue, bishop of Mirepoix and Pierre de Langle, bishop of Boulogne. The Inquisition condemned this appeal in 1718 and the pope excommunicated the bishops and the &quot;appelants&quot; through the letters &quot;Pastoralis officii&quot;. Far from disarming the French clergy, many of whom were then advocating conciliarism, the clergy who had appealed &quot;Unigenitus&quot; to a general council, then appealed &quot;Pastoralis officii&quot; to a general council as well. They renewed their appeal in 1719, accompanied by the archbishop of Paris Louis Antoine de Noailles, then again in 1720. After examining propositions condemned by &quot;Unigenitus,&quot; Noailles determined that as set out in the bull and apart from their context in the , some of the propositions condemned by the pope were in fact orthodox. He therefore refused to accept the bull and joined the party of the &quot;appelants&quot;. In total, one cardinal, 18 bishops, and 3,000 clergy of France supported an appeal to a general council. However, the majority of clergy in France (four cardinals, 100 bishops, 100,000 clergymen) stood by the pope.

The Regent decided to put an end to this dispute. In 1722, he reinstated the obligation to sign the &quot;Formula of Submission for the Jansenists&quot; in order to obtain benefits or university degrees. This policy was maintained until the end of the regency and many &quot;appelants&quot; received &quot;lettres de cachet&quot; (&#x27;letters of the signet&#x27;) which announced their arrest without trial on the king&#x27;s authority, from 1724 to 1725. In 1727, Jean Soanen, who had been the &quot;de facto&quot; leader of Jansenism since the death of Quesnel, was condemned by the Synod of Embrun led by the future Cardinal de Tencin. He was exiled to La Chaise-Dieu by a &quot;lettre de cachet&quot;, where he died in 1740. In 1728, Noailles finally submitted to the Pope and assented to &quot;Unigenitus&quot;.

The conviction of Soanen, which the Jansenists described in their writings as the &#x27;brigandage of Embrun&#x27;, caused discontent among the &quot;appelants&quot;, but Noailles&#x27; successor in Paris wanted to silence the resistance. The new archbishop Charles-Gaspard-Guillaume de Vintimille du Luc banished nearly three hundred Jansenist priests from his diocese, and closed the main sanctuaries of the movement, the Saint-Magloire seminary, the College of Sainte Barbe and the House of Sainte-Agathe, all three in Paris. In 1730, the bull became state law. Clergy who had not signed the formula could no longer retain their ecclesiastical offices, which were considered vacant.

The &quot;appelants&quot; consisted of, between 1717 and 1728, more than seven thousand clerics and around thirty prelates (with one hundred thousand members of the laity under their authority). Not all were Jansenists, but the Gallican fringe of the clergy was still shaken by the intransigence of Clement XI. The territorial distribution of the Jansenists and Gallicans in France at the beginning of the 18th century is known. At its peak in 1718, the convocation movement affected forty-five dioceses, but it was mainly the dioceses of Paris, Châlons, Tours, Senez and Auxerre that were prominent as well as the archdiocese of Lyon.

== The popularisation of Jansenism ==

Jansenists, from the 17th century onwards, tended to rely on miracle stories to justify their cause. One of the first and most notable was the healing of Marguerite Périer in 1656 by the relic of Sainte-Épine, which occurred when Jansenism was beginning to be seriously attacked, and was followed in that century by numerous reports of other miracles. Certain Jansenists thus gained a reputation as thaumaturges and their relics were in high demand. For example, the abbot of Pontchâteau, &quot;Solitaire&quot; and &#x27;gardener&#x27; of Port-Royal, had his coffin forced open in 1690 after a little girl was healed during his funeral. Increasingly, Jansenism was becoming a public affair involving the miraculous. The democratisation of the conflict among parish priests caused by the bull &quot;Unigenitus&quot; and monarchical oppression only strengthened this trend. There were several miracles linked directly or indirectly to Jansenism between 1710 and 1730. They were not directly instigated by the &quot;appelant&quot; priests, but very often took place in their parishes, such as a miracle of 1725, in which Madame Lafosse, the wife of a cabinetmaker, was healed during a Eucharistic procession in the parish of Sainte-Marguerite in Paris, in which the parish priest (and bearer of the monstrance) was a notorious &quot;appelant&quot;. The miracle was recognised, processions were made and the stories were popularised by brochures and engravings.

The struggle of the &quot;appelants&quot; was supported by numerous brochures explaining the points of dispute plainly and for a general reading public. The faithful were invited to form their own opinion of the controversy, by the exhortation of priests such as the Oratorian Vivien de La Borde. The press, whether public or underground, also involved itself in religious matters. The Jansenists began a public debate with the pamphlet &quot;Supplément à la Gazette d&#x27;Hollande&quot; (&#x27;Supplement to the Gazette of Holland&#x27;). The Jansenists responded with &quot;Nouvelles ecclésiastiques ou Mémoires pour servir à l&#x27;histoire de la constitution «Unigenitus»&quot; (&#x27;Ecclesiastical news or Memoirs to serve as a basis for a history of the constitution &quot;Unigenitus&quot;&#x27;).

This weekly paper was already circulating in handwritten form, but it was printed secretively from 1728. With a circulation of six thousand copies a week, it reached a very wide audience, in all social classes. The &quot;Nouvelles écclesiastiques&quot; served to popularise the debate and to establish links between different Jansenist groups. The Jansenists also published anti-Jesuit propaganda and played a central role in plotting and promoting the expulsion of the Jesuits from France in 1762–64. The paper ceased to exist in 1803.

The Jansenist clergy developed a unique interpretation of the time of persecution they were experiencing; a hermeneutic of the Bible known as &quot;figurism&quot;, which almost certainly originates from the teaching of the Oratorian in around 1710. For Duguet, just as the Old Testament prefigured the coming of Christ, so the stories and prophecies of the Scriptures, especially the Book of Revelation, prefigure (or are &quot;figures&quot; of) current or future events. Thus the bull &quot;Unigenitus&quot;, considered an error of the pope and the Church, was the beginning of great upheavals that would announce the return of the Prophet Elijah. Following his return, Christ will reign for a thousand years with the elect and the &#x27;Friends of the Truth&#x27; who believe in efficacious grace, also converting the Jews. This vision of time and events, mainly taught at the seminary of Saint-Magloire in Paris by Abbot d&#x27;Étemare, spread among the clergy and the public. For the Jansenists, it was a way of interpreting their persecution and status as a dwindling minority. They saw themselves as defending the cause of divine truth alone, against a church and secular authority who betrayed it.

The popularisation of Jansenism can also be attributed to their pastoral theology which led to popular education and assistance. 

=== The phenomenon of the &quot;Convulsionnaires&quot; of Saint-Médard ===

From 1731, the dramatic popularisation of Jansenism gave rise to the phenomenon of the &quot;convulsionnaires&quot;. Initially a series of miracles linked to the tomb of the Jansenist deacon François de Pâris in the Saint-Médard Cemetery in Paris, including religious ecstasy, the phenomenon transformed into an expression of opposition to papal and royal authority. The convulsions spread among the Parisian people including the bourgeoisie during the 1730s. The connection between the larger French Jansenist movement and the smaller, more radical phenomenon is difficult to state with precision. Brian Strayer noted, in &quot;Suffering Saints&quot;, almost all were Jansenists, but very few Jansenists embraced the phenomenon. Nevertheless, the phenomenon persisted until the 19th century.&quot;The format of their seances changed perceptibly after 1732,&quot; according to Strayer. &quot;Instead of emphasizing prayer, singing, and healing miracles, believers now participated in &#x27;spiritual marriages&#x27; (which occasionally bore earthly children), encouraged violent convulsions [...] and indulged in the &quot;secours&quot; (erotic and violent forms of torture), all of which reveals how neurotic the movement was becoming.&quot; The movement descended into brutal cruelties that &quot;clearly had sexual overtones&quot; in their practices of penance and mortification of the flesh. In 1735, the &quot;parlements&quot; regained jurisdiction over the &quot;convulsionnaires&quot;, which changed into an underground movement of clandestine sects. The next year &quot;an alleged plot&quot; by &quot;convulsionnaire&quot; revolutionaries to overthrow the and assassinate Louis XV was thwarted. The &quot;Augustinian &quot; were then absconded from Paris to avoid police surveillance. This &quot;further split the Jansenist movement.&quot;

According to Strayer, by 1741 the leadership was &quot;dead, exiled, or imprisoned,&quot; and the movement was divided. The police&#x27;s role increased and the &quot;parlements&quot;&#x27; role decreased &quot;in the social control of Jansenism&quot; but cells continued engaging in seances, torture, and apocalyptic and treasonous rhetoric. Strayer related a case of torture documented in 1757 where a woman was &quot;beat [...] with garden spades, iron chains, hammers, and brooms [...] jabbed [...] with swords, pelted [...] with stones, buried [...] alive, [...] crucified.&quot; In another case documented in 1757, a woman &quot;was cut with a knife numerous times&quot; causing gangrene. By 1755 there were fewer than eight hundred &quot;convulsionnaires&quot; in France. In 1762 the criminalized some of their practices &quot;as &#x27;potentially dangerous&#x27; to human life.&quot; The last crucifixion was documented in 1788.

== Jansenism in the &quot;parlements&quot; ==
=== The conjunction of Jansenism and parliamentarism ===
The &quot;parlements&quot; of the &quot;Ancien Régime&quot;, and in particular the &quot;parlement&quot; of Paris, had long been defenders of Gallicanism against Rome. Since the beginning of the Jansenist controversy, the &quot;parlements&quot; tended to sympathise with Jansenists, reluctant to register the papal bulls condemning the movement.

This happened upon the promulgation of the bull &quot;Unigenitus&quot;. The attorney-general Henri François d&#x27;Aguesseau considered the promulgation of the bull to be proof of the fallibility of the pope. He encouraged parliamentarians not to accept the bull and wait for a reaction from the bishops. It was necessary for Louis XIV to use letters patent to force registration of the bull. Despite this, the letters &quot;Pastoralis officii&quot; were not received in 1718, which alleviated the fears of the &quot;appelants&quot; in the short term.In fact, a &quot;lit de justice&quot; was required for the bull to be registered as state law in 1730, so great was the parliamentary resistance.

René Taveneaux, in his &quot;Jansenism and Politics&quot;, underlines the importance of Jansenist recruitment among the parliamentarians of the 18th century. According to him, Jansenism had a &#x27;bourgeois base&#x27; which dated back to the 17th century, with the Arnauld, Lemaistre, Pascal and other families, who were considered &#x27;Nobles of the Robe&#x27;. Marie-José Michel also underlines the attraction of entire elite families to Port-Royal and Jansenism from the beginning of the movement, and speaks of a &quot;proliferating Jansenisation of elites&quot;.

Lucien Goldmann&#x27;s thesis is that this was an expression of class spirit, which would have taken root during the Fronde along with a discontent regarding the centralising absolutist monarchy. Faced with the growing power of the royal commissioners to the detriment of the officials (of bourgeois recruitment), the latter would have practiced increasingly anti-establishment &#x27;critical retreat from the world&#x27;. Taveneaux moderates this interpretation with a Marxist analysis of a &#x27;meeting ground&#x27; between Jansenism and the bourgeoisie, arguing that the bourgeois noble was free under the Ancien Régime, detached from the seigneurial hierarchy, and that this individualistic situation, was, by some, easily associated with Jansenist morality, which preferred the development of the interior life in contrast to the splendour of Tridentine liturgy, and a demanding moral rigorism rather than the easily accessible sacraments characteristic of Jesuit theology. The essentially urban basis of Jansenism also allowed this &#x27;meeting ground&#x27; between it and the parliamentary bourgeoisie.
=== The Jansenist cause and the parliamentary revolts of the 18th century ===
The &quot;parlements&quot;, especially that of Paris, were in constant rebellion against monarchical power during the 18th century. Jansenists and &quot;appelants&quot; therefore found the parliamentarians to be a close ally. Moreover, the weapon of the Jansenists to resist both the king and the pope was legal; the &#x27;appeal as from an abuse&#x27;, in order to protest an injustice and deny the pope&#x27;s or a bishop&#x27;s right to exercise their authority on a specific point. The &quot;appelants&quot; brought their demands before the &quot;parlement&quot;, an organ of justice in which the Jansenist magistrates would employ their rhetoric and legal arsenal to combine the Jansenist cause with a defence of the independence of the &quot;parlements&quot;, thus winning the support of parliamentarians who were Gallicans or resistant to royal power. However, &quot;most often, Jansenist magistrates carefully avoided any reference to religious convictions, aware that a theological discourse would have been inadmissible in an assembly of judges.&quot; Jansenism was therefore readily confused with the incessant parliamentary struggles of the 18th century, while its theological nature faded. Numerically speaking, the presence of Jansenists was modest. For Paris, about a quarter of magistrates in the 1730s were Jansenists, including a group of lawyers influential enough to initiate two general strikes of their order in 1732 with the aim of bolstering the independence of the &quot;parlement&quot;.

One of these influential lawyers was . Bailiff of the Tour du Temple, which bore the right of asylum and was therefore one of the most important hubs of the Jansenist network, taking advantage of the right to harbour numerous banned publications. The Temple also housed the famous &#x27;Perrette box&#x27;, which contained the Jansenists&#x27; financing fund; an object of curiosity and fantasy among anti-Jansenists. Another of these lawyers was Gabriel-Nicolas Maultrot, nicknamed the &#x27;second-class lawyer&#x27; because of the many &quot;appelant&quot; priests he defended.

The most significant conflict involving the parliamentarians and Jansenism was the affair of the &#x27;confession notes&#x27;. In 1746, the archbishop of Paris Christophe de Beaumont proposed that the faithful must be able to provide a proof of a &#x27;confession note&#x27; signed by a priest who approved &quot;Unigenitus&quot; in order to receive extreme unction. The measure encountered major opposition, and many legal appeals were filed which were quashed by the king&#x27;s council. In 1749, a large demonstration occurred after the burial of a Jansenist college principal who died without being granted confession. Among the four thousand people who comprised the procession, there were many parliamentarians.

An important religious event of the second half of the 18th century was the expulsion of the Jesuits in 1764, which united Jansenism and the monarchy for a time. However, Jansenism joined the side of the magistrates in their revolt against the policies of Chancellor de Maupeou and his Triumvirate to destroy the parliamentary system. The most radical members of the revolt joined what was called the &#x27;patriot party&#x27;, the spearhead of pre-Revolutionary protest. The synthesis of their struggles and demands with the theses of Jean-Jacques Rousseau was to give substance to the ideological beginnings of the French Revolution.

== Jansenism and the French Revolution ==
=== The role of the Jansenists in the Civil Constitution of the Clergy ===
Among the early defenders of the French Revolution were personalities known for their Gallicanism, sympathy for Jansenism and more or less marked adherence to the theology of Edmond Richer. The role of the Jansenists in the Revolution was essentially a product of the ecclesiological character of late Jansenism, which was tinged with Gallicanism.

The role of Jansenising priests was noted from the beginning of the Revolution. Indeed, without the addition of a few priests to the Third Estate during the assembly of the Estates General of 1789, it would not have been able to declare itself a National Assembly on 17 June 1789. These priests were led by Abbot Henri Grégoire, whose attachment to Port-Royal and Jansenism was known. Grégoire shared with the Jansenists a figurist vision of history, which underlay his statement that the Revolution was part of the fulfilment of God&#x27;s will. Around Grégoire and the priests favourable to the Revolution mainly Gallicans and other Jansenists from the &quot;parlements&quot; gathered together. Louis Adrien Le Paige was generally favourable to the Revolution. Likewise, Armand-Gaston Camus and Jean-Denis Lanjuinais, renowned parliamentarians, were heavily involved in Revolutionary events while remanining attached to the Jansenist cause. Lanjuinais was notably a member of the ecclesiastical committee which prepared the Civil Constitution of the Clergy. The importance of Jansenists in the drafting of this constitution, so favourable to their demands on many points, meant that the Abbot Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès attacked those who &quot;seem to have seen in the Revolution merely a superb opportunity to lift up the theological importance of Port-Royal and to establish the apotheosis of Jansenius over the tomb of his enemies&quot;. The Civil Constitution of the Clergy satisfied the Jansenists on many points; it put an end to practices that were widely criticised, for example the residence of bishops outside of their dioceses or non-canonical benefices. The Constitution reinstated diocesan synods, considerably reduced the influence of the pope and reproved formulas such as that of Alexander VII. Furthermore, it satisfied the wealthy fringe of the clergy by establishing election within the Gallican Church and by promoting cooperation between parish priests and prelates, rather than a relationship of subordination.

For these Jansenists, the Civil Constitution of the Clergy and all the ecclesiastical constitution that resulted from it were nothing other than the culmination of all the religious and parliamentary struggles of the 18th century. Dale K. Van Kley lists five points which brought together the interests of Gallican Jansenists and those of France in the early Revolution, and which Camus in particular developed.

* The administration of ecclesiastical property fell to the hierarchy, but its ownership fell to the Church in France as a whole. By property and goods, not only material goods are meant but also &#x27;spiritual keys&#x27;, that is, the sacraments and anathemas.
* The Church was not only made up of its clerical hierarchy, but of all the Roman Catholic faithful. As France almost entirely consisted of Roman Catholics, it can be said that the National Assembly, which brought together all French people, was a representation of the Church. It could therefore declare that the property of the Church was the property of the nation, and so sell it to repay the national debt or pay priests and bishops.
* There was no usurpation of the Church, since the state only acted on the public, external and temporal aspects of the Church&#x27;s mission, leaving the spiritual aspect untouched. Even when the National Assembly suppressed monastic orders, redrew the ecclesiastical map or abrogated the 1515 Concordat of Bologna, it denied that it affected the spiritual mission of the Church.
* The suppression of ecclesiastical governance were justified on the grounds that the sacrament of ordination is purely spiritual, and gives to the one who receives it the unlimited and illimitable power to preach and administer the sacraments. On the other hand, the actual exercise of this power was the responsibility of the Assembly since it was temporal. A priest who did not submit to the Assembly could therefore be denied a parish, for example.
* Camus further justified the constitution by claiming that the Early Church was a model of spiritual authority detached from the temporal, and therefore that the Constitutional Church was only returning to this state of purity. The Church could therefore free itself from the approval of the pope, who was not considered superior to other bishops.
The Jansenist and Gallican influence in the Civil Constitution of the Clergy explains why so many of the new constitutional bishops were classified as Jansenists or at least as Jansenist sympathisers. Thus, in addition to Abbé Grégoire, bishop of Blois and &quot;de facto&quot; head of the Constitutional Church, were Claude Debertier, Jean-Baptiste Pierre Saurine, Louis Charrier de La Roche and about fifteen others who, without necessarily being &quot;appelants&quot;, nevertheless identified themselves strongly with Jansenism and Richer.

Laypeople and clerics joined the &quot;Société de philosophie chrétienne&quot; (&#x27;Society of Christian philosophy&#x27;), which pursued religious studies during the Revolution in a strongly Jansenist spirit. In the final years of the Revolution, the Society published the &quot;Annales de la religion&quot; (&#x27;Annals of religion&#x27;), a Gallican and Jansenist journal, which published the first version of Abbé Grégoire&#x27;s &quot;Ruines de Port-Royal des Champs en 1801&quot; (&#x27;Ruins of Port-Royal-des-Champs in 1801&#x27;). Members of the Society frequently took residences for reflection at Port-Royal-des-Champs, and were in close contact with the Italian Jansenists and Scipione de&#x27; Ricci.

There were, however, a significant number of Jansenists who completely rejected the Revolution. As for clergymen, the best known were and . But others, like Abbots Mey, Dalléas and the Oratorian clergy of Lyon, were also very much in opposition to the Civil Constitution of the Clergy. They were supported by canonists like Gabriel-Nicolas Maultrot, and by pious laypeople such as Nicolas Bergasse in Lyon or in Paris. Some, like , a notable Jansenist, swore the oath of loyalty to the Constitution, but only with great hesitation.

=== Analysis of the Jansenist involvement in the Revolution ===
&quot;Let the Constituent Assembly, once it has emerged from the stormy discussions that mark its beginning and the votes of its major state laws, address the civil constitution of the clergy; Jansenist inspiration will preside over the organisation of the new Church. Camus will triumph over Louis XIV; the ecclesiastical committee will avenge the ashes of Port-Royal, and the Jansenist legislators who spoke so much about returning to the organisation of the Early Church will in fact return it to martyrdom.&quot; (Abbé Sicard, &quot;The Old Clergy of France&quot;, 1893)Jansenism is often cited, if not as one of the causes of the Revolution, at least as having shaped the state of mind necessary for its outbreak. This accusation was first made by counter-revolutionaries, who saw the Jansenists as allies of Protestants and Freemasons; others supposedly responsible for the fall of the French monarchy. Even if the reasons for this accusation are erroneous, there was a strong link between Jansenism and the Revolution.

For the counter-revolutionaries and ultramontanists of the 19th century, Jansenism was accused of having prepared and accompanied the Revolution for the following reasons.

* Jansenism maintained a seditious spirit. Its revolts and resistance against popes and kings were a negative influence for the people, who could reproduce in politics the religious attitude of Jansenists.
* Jansenism discouraged the faithful. They preferred to distance themselves from religion rather than satisfy the demands of Jansenist priests. This accusation is based on the correlation between the geographical distribution of the &quot;appelants&quot; and constitutional priests during the Revolution and the zones of dechristianisation. However this correlation is difficult to interpret.
* Through its association with Gallicanism, Jansenism was a source of schism in France under the Revolution, between the constitutional clergy, favourable to a national church, and the &#x27;refractory clergy&#x27; who followed the condemnation of the Civil Constitution of the Clergy by Pope Pius VI.
* Finally, Jansenism was often associated with republicanism, because it dissociated itself from court life, with the &quot;Solitaires&quot; giving an image of a &#x27;Republic of Letters&#x27;, and because leading figures during the Revolution, such as Abbé Grégoire, did not hide their attachment to Port-Royal.

Among 19th-century republicans, who were quite favourable to Port-Royal and Jansenism as movements which fought against absolute monarchy and royal authority, there were also defenders of the theory according to which the Jansenists were largely responsible for the outbreak of the Revolution. Thus Jules Michelet, Louis Blanc, Henri Martin and Charles-Louis Chassin argued for a partly Jansenist origin of the Revolution.

If it is possible to associate Jansenism and the Revolution outside the religious domain, it is because there was a tradition of protest among Jansenists and because socially, those who drove the Revolution (bourgeoisie of the legal and parliamentary worlds) were the same as those who embraced the &quot;appelant&quot; cause in the 18th century.

Some (mainly among the Jesuits) were convinced of the existence of a Jansenist plot aimed at overthrowing monarchical power. At the beginning of the 20th century, historians such as Louis Madelin and Albert Mathiez refuted this Jansenist conspiracy thesis and emphasised a conjunction of forces and demands as responsible for both the outbreak of the Revolution and the Civil Constitution of the Clergy. The theory that the explanation of the Revolution must appeal to several causes, of which Jansenism is only one among others, is now the consensus among historians.

==Jansenism outside France==
The problem of grace concerned all Roman Catholic countries in the 17th century, and Jansenism, born outside of the Kingdom of France, did not remain confined to France. However, during the early period of Jansenism, that is the 17th century, most of the history of Jansenism took place within the kingdom. It was with the bull &quot;Unigenitus&quot; that Jansenism truly expanded outside of France.

=== The Spanish Netherlands—Leuven ===
As noted by Jonathan Israel Jansenism initially had strong support in the Spanish Netherlands, where Jansen himself had been active, supported by such major figures of the church hierarchy as Jacobus Boon, archbishop of Mechelen and Antonie Triest, bishop of Ghent. Though the Church in the Spanish Netherlands eventually took up the persecution of Jansenism, with Jansenist clergy being replaced by their opponents and the monument to Jansen in the Cathedral of Ypres being symbolically demolished in 1656. Nevertheless the Spanish authorities were less zealous in this persecution than the French.

The (Old) University of Leuven, which published &quot;Augustinus&quot;, remained Augustinian in orientation since the time of Jansen. The popes were less demanding to the university, undoubtedly because they did not have a close political relationship with it as they did with Louis XIV in France. In 1677, a Baianist faction from the theological faculty submitted 116 propositions of moral laxity for censure to Pope Innocent XI. They were textually drawn from the letter of accusation of the professors of Leuven, and thus the Roman authorities suppressed dissertations dealing with the question of the true origin of the propositions, which was regarded as ambiguous. Innocent XI selected 65 propositions from the submission and &quot;limited himself to condemning the deviations of moral doctrine&quot;, avoiding a revival of the controversy on grace. The 65 propositions were described as &quot;at the very least scandalous and pernicious in practice&quot;, leading the Pope to censure them through a decree of the Inquisition in March 1679, yet &quot;without naming the probabilism prevalent in Jesuit circles.&quot; The Holy Office previously censured 45 propositions of moral doctrine between two decrees dated to 24 September 1665, and 18 March 1666. According to Denzinger, the propositions submitted, by both the University of Leuven and the University of Paris, were &quot;frequently taken out of context and sometimes expanded by elements that are not found in the original, so that most often one must speak of fictitious authors.&quot;

Until the 1690s, it was possible to sign Formula of Pope Alexander VII without specifying one&#x27;s interpretation of it regarding matters &quot;de jure&quot; and &quot;de facto&quot;. Twice the archbishop of Mechelen, Humbertus Guilielmus de Precipiano, tried to toughen the signing conditions, but he lost a lawsuit against the university. It was not until 1710 that the absolute and unqualified signing of the Formula was made compulsory.

&quot;Unigenitus&quot; was accepted without question from 1715, but the letters &quot;Pastoralis officii&quot; of Pope Clement XI provoked fierce conflict between the archbishop of Mechelen and the university. After legal proceedings, episodes of refusal of the sacraments similar to what occurred in France in the 1740s and an exile of professors to the Dutch Republic, the university appeared to submit to the bull and its papal interpretation in 1730.

The University of Leuven was, due to its alumni Baius and Jansen, the cradle of Jansenism and remained, during the 17th and 18th centuries until its suppression, the bastion and the hub of Jansenist Augustinian theology in Europe, with professors such as Jansen, Petrus Stockmans, Johannes van Neercassel, Josse Le Plat and especially the famous Zeger Bernhard van Espen and his students Johann Nikolaus von Hontheim or Charles Joseph Mathieu Lambrechts, professor of canon law, rector of the university in 1786, Freemason, and Minister of Justice in the French Directory under Napoleon. As Henri Francotte says, &quot;Jansenism reigned supreme at the University of Leuven&quot;.

As late as 1818, Charles Lambrechts, former rector of the university, ex-senator and minister of Napoleon, recalled the &#x27;vexations&#x27; of the Roman Catholic Church against his predecessor van Espen.The encroachments of the Catholic clergy and their pretentions were so vexatious, that, in a time when their religion was dominant, no other remedy had been found for their abuse of power, other than the appeals in question. This is what prompted the famous van Espen to write, at the age of eighty, his treatise &quot;De recursu ad Principem&quot;, in order to put a barrier up against the ever-resurgent abuses of clerical jurisdictions; but this virtuous clergyman, who distributed to the poor all the income from the chair of canon law which he occupied at the University of Leuven, was soon obliged to resort to appeal for himself as from an abuse; still, this remedy could not entirely save him from persecution by intolerant priests. Burdened with years, glory and infirmities, he was forced to seek in Holland shelter from their vexations; he soon died in Amsterdam amid feelings of piety and resignation, after having spent his life defending the discipline and customs of the Early Church, of which he was the most zealous.

=== In the Dutch Republic ===
The Dutch Republic was the place of exile for many French Jansenists. They gathered first in Amsterdam, then increasingly in Utrecht. Since the 16th century, this small town had been the seat of the Dutch Mission aimed at the conversion of the Dutch who had become largely Reformed. Jansenist refugees from France and the Spanish Netherlands were made welcome, increasing the Jansenist influence among Dutch Roman Catholics. As a result, the Dutch Mission gained a strong Jansenist element in both theology and morality. Politically, the Dutch Jansenists were more inclined than other Roman Catholics to reach accommodation with the Protestant authorities and sought to make themselves independent of papal control. Moreover, theologically the Jansenist doctrines were considered to be closer to the dominant Dutch Reformed Protestantism. Dutch Jansenism (sometimes called &#x27;Quesnelism&#x27; after Pasquier Quesnel) was accused by its opponents of being &#x27;crypto-Calvinism within the Church&#x27;. The controversy between Jansenists and anti-Jansenists (the latter naturally led by the Jesuits) increasingly tore up the Dutch Roman Catholic Church in the late 17th and early 18th century, with the authorities of the Dutch Republic actively involved on the one side and the papacy and kings of France, Spain, Portugal, and Poland on the other. Moreover, some Dutch Roman Catholics seeking greater independence from papal control were identified as being &#x27;Jansenists&#x27;, even if not necessarily adhering to the theological doctrines of Jansenism.
The opposition towards the Jesuits and Roman Catholic clergy in general in the Republic of the 1680s prompted a more &#x27;national attitude&#x27; among Dutch Roman Catholics, who began to stray from papal authority and adjust to their environment within their local hierarchies. The minority status of Roman Catholicism paradoxically allowed greater freedom for the local churches, which elected its bishop and had him confirmed by the pope, even if he only bore the title of &#x27;vicar apostolic&#x27; so as not to irritate the government. Relations between Utrecht and French Jansenism had developed early on, since vicar apostolic Johannes van Neercassel, friend of Antoine Arnauld and Pasquier Quesnel, and in 1673 published an &#x27;uncompromisingly Jansenist work&#x27;, &quot;Amor Poenitens&quot;, which was frequently criticised by the Jesuits. His successor, Petrus Codde, who was influenced by Arnauld and Quesnel, and did much to promote Jansenism in the Dutch Mission including harbouring French Jansenist refugees, was suspended by Clement XI in 1702, despite his popularity with the local population. He appointed a successor who was unpopular with the local Roman Catholics. In August 1702, the States of Holland forbade Dutch Roman Catholics from recognising a vicar general who was not approved by its representatives. This meant that Dutch Roman Catholics were split between submitting to the authority of the Pope at the expense of the States or vice versa.

In April 1723, tensions culminated when the &#x27;refractory&#x27; clergy appointed Cornelius van Steenoven as &#x27;Archbishop of Utrecht&#x27;, who the majority of the Roman Catholic laity supported, in opposition to papal authority, thus establishing a formal schism between the ultramontane and Jansenist-leaning Roman Catholics. The canons of Utrecht remained without a bishop for almost fifteen years, during which it was ministered mainly by exiled French Jansenists. French bishops also ordained Dutch priests to ensure the survival of this small church.

In 1724, Utrecht once again had bishops. It was the &quot;appelant&quot; Dominique Marie Varlet, coadjutor bishop of the diocese &quot;in partibus&quot; of Babylon, who settled in the Dutch Republic after fierce disputes with the Holy See. He agreed to successively ordain four bishops elected by the chapter of Utrecht. This is when the &#x27;Little Church of Utrecht&#x27;, now called the Old Catholic Church, was founded. With each new ordination of a bishop, the Church sent a request for canonical institution to the pope, who invariably condemned it as a schismatic body. Throughout the 18th century, these two rival Catholic Churches were active in competition. The question of whether, and to what degree, this breakaway church was Jansenist was highly controversial; the Jesuits having a clear polemical interest in emphasising its identification as such.

The links between the Old Catholic Church and the French Jansenists are numerous and lasting. From a place of refuge in the 18th century, Utrecht has become a place of conservation of Jansenist history and traditions. There are numerous French Jansenist archives in Utrecht and Amersfoort (where the seminary was located). The funds from the Perrette box were regularly used to partially finance this church. The French Jansenists hoped, until the middle of the 19th century, to have priests ordained by Utrecht to found a church of the same kind in France, although this project never came to fruition.

=== Italy ===
The influence of Jansenism in Italy can be explained with reference to the political fragmentation of the peninsula into numerous states that were traditionally hostile to the papacy. Relations with French Jansenists were established in the 17th century due to contacts established with religious orders, especially Benedictines and Dominicans. The Republic of Venice played an important role in the translation (into Latin or Italian) and dissemination of French Jansenist texts. However, Jansenist ideas only had an impact in northern Italy and did not pass south of Rome.

In the 18th century, it was the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia and the Grand Duchy of Tuscany in particular that were influenced by Jansenism. By its proximity to France, and the fact that it is partly French-speaking, Piedmont constituted an ideal refuge for Jansenists. Thus, took refuge for a time at Tamié Abbey, while others found refuge in Chambéry. Joining the opposition to &quot;Unigenitus&quot;, Victor Amadeus II of Savoy expelled the Jesuits and replaced them with exiled Port-Royalists. In 1761, the bishop of Asti encouraged the priests to take a stand in favour of the Church in Utrecht. The Jansenists in exile therefore had significant influence in this part of Italy.

In the Italian territories under Habsburg Austrian domination, the situation was more complex. There, Jansenism encountered Josephinism, which guided Austrian policy at that time. Both systems worked to counter the influence of the pope and the Jesuits by applying the principle of the superiority of the state over religious affairs, which was characteristic of Gallicanism. Jansenism was therefore, in a sense, more moderate religiously but harsher politically, because it was mixed with the Gallican theology of Edmond Richer. In 1761, Empress Maria Theresa of Austria opened a seminary in Vienna in the Port-Royalist spirit, calling on professors from Leuven and Holland, and had as a confessor an influential Jansenist, the Abbot of Terme. He also established the &quot;Nouvelles ecclésiastiques&quot; in Vienna in 1784.

In Lombardy, a territory administered directly by Vienna, the theologians Pietro Tamburini, professor of the seminary at Brescia then at the University of Pavia, and Giuseppe Zola propagated the theology of Richer which was deeply imbued with Jansenism. They published works on grace in the same spirit as the Port-Royalist theologians. Their works influenced many clergymen, such as Scipione de&#x27; Ricci, bishop of Pistoia and Prato. He was previously vicar general of Florence, where he helped Grand Duke Peter Leopold carry out his religious reforms. De&#x27; Ricci was also interested in the &quot;Convulsionnaires&quot;, and sought to transform his diocese according to his convictions. Thus he introduced into his diocese the &quot;Catechism of Montpellier&quot;, which was particularly appreciated by Jansenists, distributed to his priests the &quot;Réflexions morales&quot; of Pasquier Quesnel, and finally convened a synod in Pistoia in 1786 to have his Jansenist orientation approved, along with a radical reform of the Latin liturgy. The synod and De&#x27; Ricci were firmly disavowed by Rome and he was forced to resign in 1791, while his positions were condemned by the papal bull &quot;Auctorem fidei&quot; in 1794.

The Republic of Genoa was also affected by Jansenism, where Port-Royalist writings were widely distributed. A Genoese priest, , made contact with the French Jansenists at the end of the 18th century, and in particular with Henri Grégoire. At the time of the Concordat of 1801, he travelled with Grégoire throughout Europe and then settled between 1801 and 1810 at Port-Royal-des-Champs. He also had a significant influence upon the Francophile Italian elites. Thus, he converted Countess Manzoni, raised in the Reformed faith, who was the mother of the great Italian poet Alessandro Manzoni, during one of her visits to Paris. The influence of Italian Jansenism upon the founding fathers of the Risorgimento is well-known, since Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour, father of Italian unity, and Giuseppe Mazzini, Italian revolutionary, were immersed in the education of Jansenist priests.

== Jansenism in the 19th century and beyond ==
The 19th century was the last century in which Jansenism, real or supposed, was still a force that could count in the Roman Catholic Church. Under this term the spiritual and material descendants of the 17th- and 18th-century Jansenists are amalgamated: those who formed the &quot;Société de Port-Royal&quot; (&#x27;Society of Port-Royal&#x27;), and the supporters of Gallicanism who attempted one last time to establish themselves before their disappearance following the First Vatican Council. The debates over grace and the authority of the pope were ended during this council, which proclaimed papal infallibility and established ultramontanism, causing Jansenism to gradually disappear from theological discourse.

Jansenism then became a way of being, a qualifier synonymous with austerity and moral rigour, rather than a theological doctrine. In 1891, Léon Séché described Jansenism and Jansenists in this way.The old quarrel of Jansenism has had its day, and the name &#x27;Jansenist&#x27;, far from harming those it names, is rather designed to win them esteem and respect. [...] Because there is a Jansenist state of mind, just as there is an Orléanist state of mind. It&#x27;s quite difficult to define, but so it is. [...] In private life, if this man is even the slightest part Jansenist, he will be mysterious and withdrawn, rigid and severe in morals. Simple and straight, sober and hard on his body, he will pass nothing on to others in terms of conduct. Gullible to the point of superstition, he will draw all kinds of horoscopes from the Scriptures and see the finger of God everywhere. In politics, he can be a monarchist as well as a republican, the form of government being, in short, indifferent to him, but he will always be constitutional and liberal. Of religion, he may not practice, nor ever approach the sacraments, but believes himself to be a very good Christian.However, some wars were still being waged against ultramontanism and in defence of the memory of Port-Royal and Jansenism. Thus, newspapers appeared throughout the 19th century, defending the Gallican and Jansenist tradition of the Church in France. After the disappearance of the &quot;Annales de la religion&quot; in 1803, Henri Grégoire and a few survivors of the Constitutional Church including published between 1818 and 1821 the &quot;Chronique religieuse&quot; (&#x27;Religious chronicle&#x27;), described by Augustin Gazier as a &#x27;combat magazine&#x27;. It defended the constitutional priests who refused to submit to the Concordat of 1801 and who were deprived of absolution and sometimes of the sacraments by their bishops (such as Grégoire himself). The tone was openly Gallican and defended Jansenism while denying that it was anything other than the traditional doctrine of the Church, &quot;Jansenism is the doctrine of grace effective in itself, that is to say the necessity, for every good work, of a grace by which God produces in us will and action. Now this is the doctrine of the Church; therefore those who are attached to it are pure and good Catholics.&quot; The tone was less forceful than in the &quot;Nouvelles ecclésiastiques&quot; or the &quot;Annales de la religion&quot;.

A few years later, a defensive journal was reborn, designed with the same principle; the &quot;Revue ecclésiastique&quot; (&#x27;Ecclesiastical magazine&#x27;). This monthly review appeared from 1838 to 1848. It was designed, financed and distributed by the men of the Parisian Jansenist society grouped within the &quot;Société de Port-Royal&quot;. The organisation was very hierarchical and was based on a core of full members who delegated the writing of articles to provincial correspondants. The &quot;Revue ecclésiastique&quot; became known above all for the harsh debates it had with ultramontane publications. But it always remained within the limit of written debate, despite the widespread practice of pseudonymy for the editors of the articles. The authors based their arguments on their reading of numerous canonical, historical and theological works contained in the Parisian Jansenst libraries. The magazine did not at all approve of the publication of &quot;Port-Royal&quot; by Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve.Two reasons have prevented us until now from talking about the work of Mr. Sainte-Beuve. 1) the scant real value of a book in which the author poses as a man of the world and a philosopher to judge the actions, doctrines and feelings of men who are essentially and above all Christians; 2) the extent and difficulty of the work to be done to identify all the errors and blunders into which Mr. Sainte-Beuve must necessarily have fallen by placing himself in the point of view he has chosen.The last magazine intended to defend Jansenism in the 19th century was (&#x27;The Catholic Observer&#x27;), which appeared from 1855 to 1864. It was first led by the former editors of the &quot;Revue ecclésiastique&quot;, and quickly joined by a priest with an assertive character; a defender of Gallicanism and critic of the Jesuits, . was a magazine with a strong polemical tone, which detailed in its columns what it considered to be the errors of the Church in France. Its exchanges with &quot;L&#x27;Univers&quot; of Louis Veuillot were coarse. The magazine also caused a scandal in 1856 by commenting at length and harshly on each of the courses on Port-Royal and Jansenism given to the faculty of theology by the young abbot Charles Lavigerie, until he abandoned his courses after two years.The publication of the magazine ceased in 1861 in the midst of some confusion, when Abbé Guettée converted to Eastern Orthodoxy.

During the 19th century, Jansenists were part of the abolition societies in France. The Jansenists had criticised Jesuit missions in the New World and advocated for liberation.

Jansenism in the 19th century was also a stance, a qualifier allocated to certain politicians or intellectuals representing moral rigorism and an attachment to Gallican principles. This was how a certain number of politicians of the Bourbon Restoration, the July Monarchy or the French Third Republic were frequently associated with Jansenism, such as Pierre Paul Royer-Collard, Victor Cousin or Jules Armand Dufaure.

In the 20th century, like Gustave Flaubert who wrote in his &quot;Dictionary of Received Ideas&quot;, &quot;Jansenism: we don&#x27;t know what it is, but it&#x27;s fashionable to talk about it&quot;, the term &#x27;Jansenist&#x27; was most often associated with personalities having no other trait in common with the Jansenists of the 17th century than a noticeable moral rigour and austerity. Lionel Jospin was thus described as representing &quot;Jansenist, demanding, rigorous democracy&quot;, while the bullfighter José Tomas was described as &quot;the Jansenist of the arena, the incorruptible of the &quot;muleta&quot;&quot; by &quot;Télérama&quot;.

Pope Francis argues that new forms of Jansenist dualism can still be identified within the life of the Catholic church:

== Jansenism in art ==
* Robert Bresson was a filmmaker influenced by Jansenism.
* 1969: &quot;My Night at Maud&#x27;s&quot;, a film by Éric Rohmer. The film deals in part with Pascalian morality and Jansenism. Rohmer returns to the subject in &quot;A Tale of Winter&quot; (1992).
* 1969: The Milky Way, a film by Luis Buñuel, features a duel between a Jesuit priest and a Jansenist.
* 1991: &quot;All the World&#x27;s Mornings&quot;, a novel by Alain Courneau, which features Jean de Sainte-Colombe, a follower of Jansenist philosophy.
* 2006: &quot;Fragments sur la grâce&quot;, a film by Vincent Dieutre.
* 2009: &quot;The Portuguese Nun&quot;, a film by Eugène Green.

==See also==
* Antoine Le Maistre
* Augustinian soteriology
* Crypto-Protestantism
* Dale K. Van Kley
* Jean Racine
* Molinism
* Saint-Medard, Paris

==References==
==Further reading==
* Crichton, J. D., &quot;Saints or Sinners?: Jansenism and Jansenisers in Seventeenth Century France&quot; (Dublin, Veritas Publications, 1996)
* Doyle, William (2000). &quot;Jansenism: Catholic Resistance to Authority from the Reformation to the French Revolution: Studies in European History&quot; (Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan Press)
* 
* Ogg, David. &quot;Europe in the 17th Century&quot; (8th ed. 1960): 323-.
* Strayer, E. Brian, &quot;Suffering Saints: Jensenits and Convulsionaries in France, 1640–1799&quot; (Eastborne, Sussex Academic Press, 2008)
* Swann, Julian, &quot;Politics and the Parlement of Paris Under Louis XV 1754–1774&quot; (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1995)

==External links==
* &quot;Provincial Letters&quot; by Blaise Pascal (1656)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1287" start="0" end="9" title="Jansenism" label="Jansenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="39" end="59" title="Christian theology" label="theological movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="67" end="84" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="106" end="112" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411054" start="181" end="190" title="Free will in theology" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q205194" start="195" end="207" title="Grace in Christianity" label="divine grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="251" end="266" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184037" start="342" end="358" title="Absolutism (European history)" label="royal absolutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="521" end="546" title="St. Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="640" end="649" title="Salvation in Christianity" label="salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135949" start="721" end="725" title="Fall of man" label="Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="842" end="849" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q274053" start="854" end="868" title="ultramontanism" label="ultramontanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="1074" end="1093" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q102728" start="1136" end="1141" title="Ypres" label="Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q318943" start="1143" end="1159" title="Cornelius Jansen" label="Cornelius Jansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741911" start="1198" end="1220" title="Augustinus (Jansenist book)" label="&amp;quot;Augustinus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="1258" end="1264" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q551799" start="1335" end="1362" title="Jean du Vergier de Hauranne" label="Jean du Vergier de Hauranne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820675" start="1366" end="1393" title="Saint-Cyran-en-Brenne Abbey" label="Saint-Cyran-en-Brenne Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q353887" start="1459" end="1474" title="Antoine Arnauld" label="Antoine Arnauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719763" start="1974" end="1991" title="limited atonement" label="limited atonement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719777" start="1996" end="2014" title="irresistible grace" label="irresistible grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q101266" start="2134" end="2149" title="Pope Innocent X" label="Pope Innocent X"/>
<link wikidata="Q620035" start="2157" end="2179" title="apostolic constitution" label="apostolic constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q690572" start="2186" end="2199" title="Cum occasione" label="Cum occasione"/>
<link wikidata="Q845694" start="2618" end="2627" title="casuistry" label="casuistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279437" start="2672" end="2692" title="Lettres provinciales" label="Lettres provinciales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290" start="2784" end="2797" title="Blaise Pascal" label="Blaise Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q652981" start="2874" end="2901" title="Port-Royal-des-Champs" label="Port-Royal-des-Champs Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q719942" start="3007" end="3020" title="Pierre Nicole" label="Pierre Nicole"/>
<link wikidata="Q742" start="3025" end="3036" title="Jean Racine" label="Jean Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q155961" start="3151" end="3166" title="Pope Clement IX" label="Pope Clement IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195138" start="3277" end="3301" title="Catholic hierarchy" label="Roman Catholic hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="3510" end="3516" title="heresy in Christianity" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416492" start="3520" end="3536" title="Crypto-Calvinism" label="Crypto-Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="3651" end="3660" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q129967" start="3787" end="3797" title="Pope Clement XI" label="Clement XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670578" start="3873" end="3883" title="Unigenitus" label="Unigenitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q691381" start="3979" end="4004" title="Louis Antoine de Noailles" label="Louis Antoine de Noailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="4128" end="4141" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q274053" start="4201" end="4215" title="ultramontanism" label="ultramontanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="4293" end="4301" title="Louis XV" label="Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q477324" start="4316" end="4342" title="Suppression of the Jesuits" label="Suppression of the Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="4371" end="4392" title="First French Republic" label="First French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q206979" start="4401" end="4433" title="Civil Constitution of the Clergy" label="Civil Constitution of the Clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q795240" start="4454" end="4479" title="Catholic Church in France" label="Catholic Church in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q273665" start="4491" end="4515" title="Caesaropapism" label="subservient to the State"/>
<link wikidata="Q190857" start="4620" end="4641" title="First Vatican Council" label="First Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q275016" start="4762" end="4781" title="papal infallibility" label="papal infallibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651445" start="6160" end="6180" title="Augustinian theology" label="Augustinian theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="6210" end="6232" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="6241" end="6257" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q274053" start="6335" end="6349" title="ultramontanism" label="ultramontanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="6354" end="6369" title="papal authority" label="papal authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q740931" start="6380" end="6388" title="Gallicanism" label="Gallican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936090" start="6758" end="6780" title="Parlement" label="&amp;quot;parlements&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="6894" end="6901" title="Secularism" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6980" end="6988" title=":fr:_figurisme" label="figurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q387521" start="7015" end="7043" title="Convulsionnaires of Saint-Médard" label="&amp;quot;convulsionnaires&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="7085" end="7107" title="Austrian Enlightenment" label="Austrian Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="7136" end="7145" title="modernity" label="modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="7556" end="7568" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="7611" end="7619" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="7921" end="7925" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="7950" end="7957" title="House of Bourbon" label="Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q234081" start="8009" end="8022" title="Ancien régime" label="Ancien Régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="8818" end="8826" title="Europe" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="8852" end="8871" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="8878" end="8884" title="Heresy in Christianity" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367940" start="8935" end="8958" title="Catholic theology" label="Roman Catholic doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8994" end="9003" title="Free will in theology#Christianity" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q205194" start="9033" end="9038" title="Grace (Christianity)" label="grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q75561" start="9168" end="9200" title="Catechism of the Catholic Church" label="Catechism of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="9499" end="9510" title="theological" label="theological"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="9557" end="9576" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="9618" end="9634" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q318943" start="9721" end="9737" title="Cornelius Jansen" label="Cornelius Jansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651445" start="9777" end="9796" title="Augustinian theology" label="Augustinian thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852175" start="9878" end="9890" title="divine grace" label="divine grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q825" start="9898" end="9901" title="God in Christianity" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="9953" end="9962" title="Salvation in Christianity" label="salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="10009" end="10027" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q162593" start="10053" end="10061" title="Pelagius" label="Pelagius"/>
<link wikidata="Q15290" start="10132" end="10136" title="good" label="good"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="10153" end="10159" title="virtue" label="virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478791" start="10480" end="10509" title="Total depravity" label="man&amp;#x27;s free will was lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q184186" start="10529" end="10541" title="original sin" label="original sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q70899" start="10545" end="10549" title="Adam" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719777" start="10577" end="10594" title="efficacious grace" label="efficacious grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870968" start="10806" end="10823" title="Medieval theology" label="Medieval theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="10919" end="10933" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="11153" end="11164" title="Scholasticism" label="Scholastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="11280" end="11291" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="11323" end="11336" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="11341" end="11352" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q122398" start="11552" end="11563" title="Pelagianism" label="Pelagianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="11987" end="11993" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q301664" start="12001" end="12013" title="Diego Laynez" label="Diego Laynez"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="12239" end="12252" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="12269" end="12289" title="Renaissance humanism" label="Renaissance humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q328945" start="12428" end="12446" title="Thomism" label="Thomistic theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q192499" start="12574" end="12594" title="Doctor of the Church" label="Doctor of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="12666" end="12672" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406012" start="12689" end="12702" title="Michel de Bay" label="Michel de Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q131945" start="12728" end="12739" title="Pope Pius V" label="Pope Pius V"/>
<link wikidata="Q436077" start="12825" end="12839" title="Luis de Molina" label="Luis de Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557861" start="12862" end="12881" title="University of Évora" label="University of Évora"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="13121" end="13160" title="Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith" label="Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q693380" start="13290" end="13316" title="Old University of Leuven" label="(Old) University of Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741911" start="13597" end="13619" title="Augustinus (Jansenist book)" label="&amp;quot;Augustinus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q208762" start="13742" end="13750" title="chaplain" label="chaplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q549426" start="13781" end="13797" title="Libert Froidmont" label="Libert Froidmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q23583381" start="13835" end="13851" title="Henricus Calenus" label="Henricus Calenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104153" start="13853" end="13858" title="Canon (priest)" label="canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="13987" end="13995" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135949" start="14190" end="14201" title="Fall of man" label="Fall of man"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="14504" end="14542" title="Calvinist soteriology" label="Calvin&amp;#x27;s theory of predestination"/>
<link wikidata="Q122398" start="14756" end="14767" title="Pelagianism" label="Pelagianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319515" start="14819" end="14834" title="Semipelagianism" label="Semipelagianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135949" start="14863" end="14874" title="fall of man" label="fall of man"/>
<link wikidata="Q184186" start="14879" end="14891" title="original sin" label="original sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177169" start="14992" end="15000" title="Molinism" label="Molinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q551799" start="15174" end="15201" title="Jean du Vergier de Hauranne" label="Jean du Vergier de Hauranne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820675" start="15222" end="15243" title="Abbey of Saint-Cyran-en-Brenne" label="Saint-Cyran-en-Brenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="15337" end="15342" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q134674" start="15510" end="15517" title="Bayonne" label="Bayonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="15539" end="15553" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233889" start="15798" end="15807" title="Th.D." label="doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="15843" end="15851" title="exegesis" label="exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q205194" start="15952" end="15957" title="Grace (Christianity)" label="grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q691402" start="15986" end="16009" title="Philip IV of Spain" label="King Philip IV of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q464464" start="16037" end="16052" title="Diocese of Ypres" label="Bishop of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="16464" end="16487" title="French Wars of Religion" label="French Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q273545" start="16691" end="16720" title="French school of spirituality" label="French school of spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278654" start="16748" end="16764" title="Oratory of Jesus" label="Oratory of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243948" start="16784" end="16810" title="Pierre de Bérulle" label="Cardinal Pierre de Bérulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186677" start="17035" end="17043" title="humility" label="humility"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="17080" end="17086" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q26702" start="17345" end="17363" title="Cardinal Richelieu" label="Cardinal Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312847" start="17788" end="17798" title="contrition" label="contrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312847" start="18036" end="18054" title="perfect contrition" label="perfect contrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="18148" end="18158" title="Sacrament" label="sacraments"/>
<link wikidata="Q10909316" start="18162" end="18169" title="penance" label="penance"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="18178" end="18187" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312847" start="18833" end="18853" title="imperfect contrition" label="imperfect contrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q43739" start="19203" end="19214" title="Pope Pius X" label="Pope Pius X"/>
<link wikidata="Q440118" start="19310" end="19333" title="Marie Angélique Arnauld" label="Marie Angélique Arnauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064917" start="19349" end="19357" title="Arnauld family" label="Arnaulds"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="19390" end="19398" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646408" start="19407" end="19413" title="abbess" label="abbess"/>
<link wikidata="Q652981" start="19417" end="19438" title="Port-Royal-des-Champs" label="Port-Royal-des-Champs"/>
<link wikidata="Q206090" start="19442" end="19460" title="Cistercian convent" label="Cistercian convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q76817" start="19464" end="19481" title="Magny-les-Hameaux" label="Magny-les-Hameaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="19588" end="19593" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820659" start="19618" end="19637" title="Port-Royal de Paris" label="Port-Royal de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421111" start="19935" end="19953" title="Antoine Le Maistre" label="Antoine Le Maistre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489506" start="20132" end="20168" title="Solitaires of Port-Royal" label="&amp;quot;Solitaires&amp;quot; of Port-Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q920033" start="20453" end="20481" title="Petites écoles de Port-Royal" label="Petites écoles de Port-Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q742" start="20592" end="20603" title="Jean Racine" label="Jean Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q353887" start="20661" end="20676" title="Antoine Arnauld" label="Antoine Arnauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q787286" start="20864" end="20872" title="College of Sorbonne" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="20901" end="20920" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="21046" end="21068" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865480" start="21223" end="21231" title="Bastille" label="Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="21783" end="21789" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="21914" end="21921" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321540" start="21959" end="21969" title="mortal sin" label="mortal sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754656" start="22297" end="22307" title="venial sin" label="venial sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="22526" end="22531" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3340181" start="23122" end="23137" title="Nicolas Caussin" label="Nicolas Caussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="23159" end="23169" title="Louis XIII of France" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q551799" start="23618" end="23632" title="Duvergier de Hauranne, Jean" label="Vergier&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295688" start="23641" end="23657" title="Martin de Barcos" label="Martin de Barcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581823" start="23948" end="23964" title="Spanish Flanders" label="Spanish Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="23973" end="23987" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278654" start="24189" end="24199" title="Oratory of Jesus" label="Oratorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="24204" end="24214" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q787286" start="24282" end="24290" title="College of Sorbonne" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q26702" start="24397" end="24415" title="Cardinal Richelieu" label="Cardinal Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="24491" end="24510" title="Notre-Dame de Paris" label="Notre-Dame de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410147" start="24523" end="24532" title="Congregation of the Feuillants" label="Feuillant"/>
<link wikidata="Q21209068" start="24544" end="24566" title="Pierre de Saint-Joseph" label="Pierre de Saint-Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242250" start="24731" end="24750" title="Archbishop of Paris" label="Archbishop of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246374" start="24752" end="24774" title="Jean-François de Gondi" label="Jean-François de Gondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="24937" end="24948" title="Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith" label="Holy Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q131579" start="25104" end="25119" title="Pope Urban VIII" label="Pope Urban VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="25139" end="25149" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="25315" end="25323" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q131945" start="25357" end="25368" title="Pope Pius V" label="Pope Pius V"/>
<link wikidata="Q83029" start="25389" end="25406" title="Pope Gregory XIII" label="Pope Gregory XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406012" start="25435" end="25443" title="Baianism" label="Baianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="25808" end="25812" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="25855" end="25863" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q157037" start="25871" end="25877" title="nuncio" label="nuncio"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="25881" end="25888" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="25951" end="25980" title="Old Style and New Style dates" label="Old Style and New Style dates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936090" start="26066" end="26075" title="Parlement" label="Parlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="26378" end="26387" title="Heresy" label="heretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="26403" end="26412" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q877701" start="26455" end="26471" title="Bishop of Vabres" label="Bishop of Vabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339249" start="26629" end="26635" title="syndic" label="syndic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3340217" start="26653" end="26667" title="Nicolas Cornet" label="Nicolas Cornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242473" start="27432" end="27462" title="Parlement of Paris" label="&amp;quot;parlement&amp;quot; of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867066" start="27579" end="27608" title="Assembly of the French clergy" label="Assembly of the French clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q101266" start="27648" end="27663" title="Pope Innocent X" label="Pope Innocent X"/>
<link wikidata="Q725440" start="28052" end="28060" title="Prelate" label="prelates"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="28098" end="28102" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130579" start="28447" end="28460" title="Henri Arnauld" label="Henri Arnauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q38380" start="28472" end="28478" title="Angers" label="Angers"/>
<link wikidata="Q174257" start="28526" end="28534" title="Beauvais" label="Beauvais"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="29093" end="29102" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164608" start="29116" end="29126" title="consultors" label="consultors"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="29351" end="29360" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q122398" start="29428" end="29436" title="Pelagian" label="Pelagian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319515" start="29437" end="29449" title="Semipelagian" label="Semipelagian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177169" start="29477" end="29486" title="Molinists" label="Molinists"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="29522" end="29533" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="29694" end="29704" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q620035" start="29709" end="29731" title="apostolic constitution" label="apostolic constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q690572" start="29738" end="29751" title="Cum occasione" label="Cum occasione"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="30131" end="30140" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921755" start="30144" end="30149" title="Merit (Catholicism)" label="merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319515" start="30162" end="30175" title="Semipelagianism" label="Semipelagians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268825" start="30203" end="30219" title="prevenient grace" label="prevenient grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="31624" end="31631" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q436077" start="32028" end="32042" title="Luis de Molina" label="Luis de Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177169" start="32062" end="32071" title="Molinism" label="Molinists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856748" start="32100" end="32115" title="Antoine Singlin" label="Antoine Singlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60797" start="32220" end="32226" title="sermon" label="sermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719777" start="32242" end="32259" title="efficacious grace" label="efficacious grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130579" start="32409" end="32422" title="Henri Arnauld" label="Henri Arnauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q38380" start="32434" end="32440" title="Angers" label="Angers"/>
<link wikidata="Q535000" start="32577" end="32591" title="François Annat" label="François Annat"/>
<link wikidata="Q166056" start="32998" end="33014" title="Cardinal Mazarin" label="Cardinal Mazarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q164361" start="33617" end="33627" title="absolution" label="absolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q295844" start="33646" end="33659" title="Saint-Sulpice, Paris" label="Saint-Sulpice"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="33670" end="33675" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q353887" start="33714" end="33729" title="Antoine Arnauld" label="Antoine Arnauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q787286" start="34589" end="34608" title="College of Sorbonne" label="College of Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q719942" start="35062" end="35075" title="Pierre Nicole" label="Pierre Nicole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290" start="35095" end="35108" title="Blaise Pascal" label="Blaise Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279437" start="35193" end="35205" title="Provinciales" label="Provinciales"/>
<link wikidata="Q127254" start="35481" end="35499" title="Pope Alexander VII" label="Pope Alexander VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678179" start="35613" end="35641" title="Ad sanctam beati Petri sedem" label="Ad sanctam beati Petri sedem"/>
<link wikidata="Q318943" start="35762" end="35771" title="Cornelius Jansen" label="Jansenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q318943" start="35842" end="35851" title="Cornelius Jansen" label="Jansenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290" start="36090" end="36103" title="Blaise Pascal" label="Blaise Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q468020" start="36240" end="36257" title="Jacqueline Pascal" label="Jacqueline Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489506" start="36349" end="36359" title="Solitaires of Port-Royal" label="Solitaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q237103" start="38581" end="38600" title="Marie de Rabutin-Chantal, marquise de Sévigné" label="Marquess of Sévigné"/>
<link wikidata="Q22765" start="38930" end="38955" title="Index of Prohibited Books" label="Index of Prohibited Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q731224" start="39537" end="39560" title="Discourse on the Method" label="Discourse on the Method"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="39571" end="39585" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q517440" start="39799" end="39810" title="Marguerite Périer" label="Saint-Épine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189470" start="40034" end="40041" title="fistula" label="fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="40560" end="40570" title="Louis XIII" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q166056" start="40580" end="40596" title="Cardinal Mazarin" label="Cardinal Mazarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q656186" start="40754" end="40763" title="Frondeurs" label="Frondeurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q256663" start="40966" end="41015" title="Anne Geneviève de Bourbon" label="Anne Geneviève de Bourbon, Duchess of Longueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q465844" start="41081" end="41115" title="Armand de Bourbon, Prince of Conti" label="Armand de Bourbon, Prince of Conti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134237" start="41302" end="41307" title="Royal court" label="Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867066" start="41392" end="41421" title="Assembly of the French clergy" label="Assembly of the French clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678179" start="41440" end="41468" title="Ad sanctam beati Petri sedem" label="Ad sanctam beati Petri sedem"/>
<link wikidata="Q920033" start="41775" end="41803" title="Petites écoles de Port-Royal" label="Petites écoles de Port-Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837192" start="41903" end="41935" title="Hardouin de Péréfixe de Beaumont" label="Hardouin de Péréfixe de Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291244" start="42051" end="42062" title="Interdict (Catholic canon law)" label="interdicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="42480" end="42489" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820659" start="43667" end="43686" title="Port-Royal de Paris" label="Port-Royal de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086142" start="44064" end="44087" title="François-Étienne Caulet" label="François-Étienne Caulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q209834" start="44099" end="44106" title="Pamiers" label="Pamiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3340656" start="44108" end="44124" title="Nicolas Pavillon" label="Nicolas Pavillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193183" start="44136" end="44140" title="Alès" label="Alès"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130579" start="44167" end="44180" title="Henri Arnauld" label="Henri Arnauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="44315" end="44324" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q620035" start="44364" end="44386" title="apostolic constitution" label="apostolic constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308411" start="44393" end="44413" title="Regiminis Apostolici" label="Regiminis Apostolici"/>
<link wikidata="Q15699657" start="44546" end="44555" title="formulary (model documents)" label="formulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308411" start="44567" end="44607" title="Formula of Submission for the Jansenists" label="Formula of Submission for the Jansenists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077553" start="44649" end="44670" title="Formulary Controversy" label="Formulary Controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155961" start="45294" end="45309" title="Pope Clement IX" label="Pope Clement IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q740931" start="45581" end="45596" title="Gallicanism" label="Gallican Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q274053" start="45647" end="45661" title="ultramontanism" label="ultramontanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13637955" start="45811" end="45838" title="infallibility of the Church" label="infallibility of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="45866" end="45876" title="revelation" label="revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q317900" start="45950" end="45965" title="Caesar Baronius" label="Caesar Baronius"/>
<link wikidata="Q298664" start="45970" end="45987" title="Robert Bellarmine" label="Robert Bellarmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q157037" start="46142" end="46154" title="papal nuncio" label="papal nuncio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150810" start="46251" end="46271" title="César d&amp;#x27;Estrées" label="César d&amp;#x27;Estrées"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503220" start="46273" end="46287" title="Bishop of Laon" label="Bishop of Laon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687335" start="46369" end="46405" title="Louis Henri de Pardaillan de Gondrin" label="Louis Henri de Pardaillan de Gondrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165364" start="46407" end="46425" title="Archbishop of Sens" label="Archbishop of Sens"/>
<link wikidata="Q975484" start="46455" end="46482" title="Bishop of Châlons-sur-Marne" label="Bishop of Châlons-sur-Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q155961" start="48060" end="48070" title="Clement IX" label="Clement IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847489" start="48574" end="48587" title="infallibility" label="infallibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q274053" start="48772" end="48786" title="ultramontanism" label="ultramontanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249462" start="48873" end="48908" title="Declaration of the clergy of France" label="Declaration of the clergy of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184037" start="49130" end="49140" title="Absolutism (European history)" label="absolutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290" start="49243" end="49256" title="Blaise Pascal" label="Blaise Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17360856" start="49270" end="49277" title="Pensées" label="Pensées"/>
<link wikidata="Q719942" start="49321" end="49334" title="Pierre Nicole" label="Pierre Nicole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213787" start="49691" end="49720" title="Louis-Isaac Lemaistre de Sacy" label="Louis-Isaac Lemaistre de Sacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="49745" end="49758" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q83407" start="49793" end="49797" title="Mons, Belgium" label="Mons"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="49806" end="49825" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spanish Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="49912" end="49922" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q131175" start="50000" end="50007" title="Vulgate" label="Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903124" start="50152" end="50165" title="Bible de Sacy" label="Bible de Sacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063392" start="50377" end="50406" title="Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve" label="Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q256663" start="50980" end="51002" title="Anne Geneviève de Bourbon" label="Duchess of Longueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q316900" start="51087" end="51107" title="Treaties of Nijmegen" label="Treaties of Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q551302" start="51115" end="51128" title="Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1679)" label="Saint-Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q686100" start="51273" end="51306" title="François de Harlay de Champvallon" label="François de Harlay de Champvallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q652981" start="51383" end="51404" title="Port-Royal-des-Champs" label="Port-Royal-des-Champs"/>
<link wikidata="Q719942" start="51501" end="51514" title="Pierre Nicole" label="Pierre Nicole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581823" start="51526" end="51542" title="Spanish Flanders" label="Spanish Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q353887" start="51555" end="51570" title="Antoine Arnauld" label="Antoine Arnauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="51586" end="51594" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278654" start="51645" end="51654" title="Oratory of Jesus" label="Oratorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295688" start="51678" end="51694" title="Martin de Barcos" label="Martin de Barcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q551799" start="51706" end="51733" title="Jean du Vergier de Hauranne" label="Jean du Vergier de Hauranne"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="51926" end="51937" title="Benedictines" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093756" start="51938" end="51954" title="Gabriel Gerberon" label="Gabriel Gerberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q102911" start="51973" end="51980" title="Holland" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q691381" start="52046" end="52071" title="Louis Antoine de Noailles" label="Louis Antoine de Noailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390575" start="52162" end="52178" title="Pasquier Quesnel" label="Pasquier Quesnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387796" start="52600" end="52628" title="Pierre du Cambout de Coislin" label="Pierre du Cambout de Coislin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885764" start="52630" end="52647" title="bishop of Orléans" label="bishop of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="52965" end="52978" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q740931" start="53206" end="53214" title="Gallicanism" label="Gallican"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047983" start="53230" end="53243" title="Edmond Richer" label="Edmond Richer"/>
<link wikidata="Q975484" start="53587" end="53614" title="bishop of Châlons-sur-Marne" label="bishop of Châlons-sur-Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426608" start="53750" end="53763" title="bishop of Apt" label="bishop of Apt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886768" start="53798" end="53811" title="bishop of Gap" label="bishop of Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364148" start="53833" end="53851" title="bishop of Besançon" label="bishop of Besançon"/>
<link wikidata="Q873021" start="53859" end="53875" title="bishop of Nevers" label="bishop of Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="53895" end="53906" title="Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith" label="Holy Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268531" start="53962" end="53973" title="papal brief" label="papal brief"/>
<link wikidata="Q871565" start="54120" end="54135" title="bishop of Luçon" label="bishop of Luçon"/>
<link wikidata="Q870899" start="54143" end="54164" title="bishop of La Rochelle" label="bishop of La Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42168" start="54460" end="54476" title="Clermont-Ferrand" label="Clermont-Ferrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q164361" start="54527" end="54537" title="absolution" label="absolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165462" start="54841" end="54855" title="Noël Alexandre" label="Noël Alexandre"/>
<link wikidata="Q691381" start="55134" end="55159" title="Louis Antoine de Noailles" label="Louis Antoine de Noailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242250" start="55161" end="55180" title="archbishop of Paris" label="archbishop of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q770639" start="55222" end="55227" title="University of Douai" label="Douai"/>
<link wikidata="Q129967" start="55276" end="55291" title="Pope Clement XI" label="Pope Clement XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q170467" start="55550" end="55567" title="Philip V of Spain" label="Philip V of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867066" start="55858" end="55887" title="Assembly of the French Clergy" label="Assembly of the French Clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q875367" start="55954" end="55974" title="bishop of Saint-Pons" label="bishop of Saint-Pons"/>
<link wikidata="Q652981" start="56177" end="56198" title="Port-Royal-des-Champs" label="Port-Royal-des-Champs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344444" start="56539" end="56596" title="dechristianisation of France during the French Revolution" label="dechristianisation of France during the French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="56814" end="56843" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158735" start="56874" end="56908" title="Humbertus Guilielmus de Precipiano" label="Humbertus Guilielmus de Precipiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092186" start="56910" end="56932" title="archbishop of Mechelen" label="archbishop of Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="56940" end="56959" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spanish Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="57032" end="57041" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="57346" end="57365" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spanish Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="57373" end="57387" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095630" start="57438" end="57451" title="Hautefontaine" label="Hautefontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q273827" start="57475" end="57484" title="Champagne (province)" label="Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137" start="57501" end="57509" title="Lorraine" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268531" start="57645" end="57656" title="papal brief" label="papal brief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242473" start="57697" end="57727" title="Parlement of Paris" label="&amp;quot;parlement&amp;quot; of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q554702" start="57747" end="57764" title="Michel Le Tellier" label="Michel Le Tellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="57929" end="57939" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670578" start="58006" end="58039" title="Unigenitus" label="&amp;quot;Unigenitus Dei Filius&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q246887" start="58171" end="58216" title="Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas" label="Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q624849" start="58251" end="58278" title="Theologian of the Pontifical Household" label="Master of the Sacred Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="58389" end="58398" title="heretical" label="heretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q740931" start="59077" end="59088" title="Gallicanism" label="Gallicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047983" start="59109" end="59122" title="Edmond Richer" label="Edmond Richer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242473" start="59408" end="59438" title="Parlement of Paris" label="&amp;quot;parlement&amp;quot; of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q51645" start="59762" end="59777" title="Ecumenical council" label="general council"/>
<link wikidata="Q155596" start="60040" end="60068" title="Philippe II, Duke of Orléans" label="Philippe II, Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="60070" end="60076" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="60099" end="60117" title="Louis XV of France" label="Louis XV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362712" start="60241" end="60248" title="Régence" label="Régence"/>
<link wikidata="Q259388" start="60393" end="60399" title="University of Nantes" label="Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496149" start="60404" end="60409" title="University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q554702" start="60522" end="60539" title="Michel Le Tellier" label="Michel Le Tellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q929742" start="60603" end="60616" title="Claude Fleury" label="Claude Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q275016" start="60876" end="60889" title="Papal infallibility" label="infallibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q190857" start="60966" end="60987" title="First Vatican Council" label="First Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936090" start="62304" end="62326" title="Parlement" label="&amp;quot;parlements&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249462" start="62362" end="62397" title="Declaration of the Clergy of France" label="Declaration of the Clergy of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867066" start="62439" end="62468" title="Assembly of the French clergy" label="Assembly of the French clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685828" start="62607" end="62618" title="Jean Soanen" label="Jean Soanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q643728" start="62630" end="62635" title="Senez" label="Senez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958156" start="62637" end="62660" title="Charles Joachim Colbert" label="Charles Joachim Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="62672" end="62683" title="Montpellier" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387571" start="62685" end="62703" title="Pierre de La Broue" label="Pierre de La Broue"/>
<link wikidata="Q467137" start="62715" end="62723" title="Mirepoix, Ariège" label="Mirepoix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387592" start="62728" end="62744" title="Pierre de Langle" label="Pierre de Langle"/>
<link wikidata="Q81997" start="62756" end="62764" title="Boulogne-sur-Mer" label="Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="62770" end="62781" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210856" start="62825" end="62839" title="Excommunication in the Catholic Church" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163981" start="63006" end="63018" title="conciliarism" label="conciliarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q691381" start="63242" end="63267" title="Louis Antoine de Noailles" label="Louis Antoine de Noailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308411" start="63924" end="63964" title="Formula of Submission for the Jansenists" label="Formula of Submission for the Jansenists"/>
<link wikidata="Q772128" start="64124" end="64141" title="lettres de cachet" label="lettres de cachet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239818" start="64439" end="64457" title="Cardinal de Tencin" label="Cardinal de Tencin"/>
<link wikidata="Q249464" start="64476" end="64490" title="La Chaise-Dieu" label="La Chaise-Dieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q915425" start="64726" end="64736" title="brigandage" label="brigandage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180333" start="64896" end="64942" title="Charles-Gaspard-Guillaume de Vintimille du Luc" label="Charles-Gaspard-Guillaume de Vintimille du Luc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110002" start="65091" end="65114" title="College of Sainte Barbe" label="College of Sainte Barbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q975484" start="65871" end="65878" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Châlons" label="Châlons"/>
<link wikidata="Q379511" start="65880" end="65885" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Tours" label="Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q866941" start="65897" end="65904" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Auxerre" label="Auxerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364921" start="65940" end="65959" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Lyon" label="archdiocese of Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q517440" start="66155" end="66172" title="Marguerite Périer" label="Marguerite Périer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60042658" start="66400" end="66412" title="Thaumaturgy" label="thaumaturges"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="66423" end="66429" title="Relic" label="relics"/>
<link wikidata="Q818116" start="66477" end="66488" title="Pontchâteau" label="Pontchâteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q115665045" start="67183" end="67205" title="Eucharistic procession" label="Eucharistic procession"/>
<link wikidata="Q335661" start="67297" end="67307" title="monstrance" label="monstrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278654" start="67727" end="67736" title="Oratory of Jesus" label="Oratorian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68720" end="68767" title="Suppression of the Society of Jesus#Suppression in France 1764" label="expulsion of the Jesuits from France in 1762–64"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="68913" end="68924" title="Hermeneutics" label="hermeneutic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="68932" end="68937" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="69078" end="69091" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="69117" end="69123" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="69189" end="69207" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670578" start="69297" end="69307" title="Unigenitus" label="Unigenitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133507" start="69438" end="69452" title="Prophet Elijah" label="Prophet Elijah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493080" start="69476" end="69514" title="Premillennialism" label="Christ will reign for a thousand years"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719777" start="69586" end="69603" title="efficacious grace" label="efficacious grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166481" start="69610" end="69629" title="Conversion of the Jews (future event)" label="converting the Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056335" start="70075" end="70092" title="pastoral theology" label="pastoral theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q538925" start="70106" end="70123" title="popular education" label="popular education"/>
<link wikidata="Q387521" start="70305" end="70333" title="Convulsionnaires of Saint-Médard" label="&amp;quot;convulsionnaires&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086301" start="70409" end="70426" title="François de Pâris" label="François de Pâris"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096310" start="70476" end="70493" title="religious ecstasy" label="religious ecstasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="70648" end="70659" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358616" start="71586" end="71612" title="mortification of the flesh" label="mortification of the flesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="71898" end="71906" title="Louis XV" label="Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936090" start="73112" end="73167" title="Parlement" label="&amp;quot;parlements&amp;quot; of the &amp;quot;Ancien Régime&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242473" start="73191" end="73221" title="Parlement of Paris" label="&amp;quot;parlement&amp;quot; of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q740931" start="73250" end="73261" title="Gallicanism" label="Gallicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670578" start="73509" end="73519" title="Unigenitus" label="Unigenitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278923" start="73548" end="73579" title="Henri François d&amp;#x27;Aguesseau" label="Henri François d&amp;#x27;Aguesseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="73781" end="73790" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="73798" end="73812" title="letters patent" label="letters patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q974274" start="74023" end="74037" title="lit de justice" label="lit de justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995003" start="74492" end="74510" title="Nobles of the Robe" label="Nobles of the Robe"/>
<link wikidata="Q656186" start="74841" end="74847" title="The Fronde" label="Fronde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184037" start="74899" end="74909" title="Absolutism (European history)" label="absolutist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="75194" end="75201" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q112061889" start="75573" end="75591" title="Tridentine liturgy" label="Tridentine liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780965" start="76237" end="76260" title="appeal as from an abuse" label="appeal as from an abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495070" start="77482" end="77496" title="Tour du Temple" label="Tour du Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086455" start="78170" end="78192" title="Christophe de Beaumont" label="Christophe de Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146443" start="78360" end="78375" title="extreme unction" label="extreme unction"/>
<link wikidata="Q477324" start="78805" end="78837" title="Suppression of the Society of Jesus" label="expulsion of the Jesuits in 1764"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266161" start="78985" end="79006" title="René Nicolas Charles Augustin de Maupeou" label="Chancellor de Maupeou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792592" start="79015" end="79026" title="Maupeou Triumvirate" label="Triumvirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="79178" end="79191" title="French Revolution" label="Revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="79265" end="79286" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="79516" end="79533" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047983" start="79658" end="79671" title="Edmond Richer" label="Edmond Richer"/>
<link wikidata="Q657326" start="79965" end="79977" title="Third estate" label="Third Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463941" start="80005" end="80028" title="Estates General of 1789" label="Estates General of 1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q784689" start="80078" end="80095" title="National Assembly (French Revolution)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q561218" start="80145" end="80159" title="Henri Grégoire" label="Henri Grégoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q677472" start="80605" end="80624" title="Armand-Gaston Camus" label="Armand-Gaston Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q344816" start="80629" end="80650" title="Jean-Denis Lanjuinais" label="Jean-Denis Lanjuinais"/>
<link wikidata="Q206979" start="80858" end="80890" title="Civil Constitution of the Clergy" label="Civil Constitution of the Clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q294344" start="81027" end="81049" title="Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès" label="Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès"/>
<link wikidata="Q274410" start="81486" end="81495" title="Benefice" label="benefices"/>
<link wikidata="Q111161" start="81534" end="81540" title="Synod" label="synods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308411" start="81619" end="81640" title="Regiminis Apostolici" label="that of Alexander VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q725440" start="81809" end="81817" title="Prelate" label="prelates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210503" start="82096" end="82112" title="Dale K. Van Kley" label="Dale K. Van Kley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233636" start="82515" end="82525" title="Sacraments of the Catholic Church" label="sacraments"/>
<link wikidata="Q211517" start="82530" end="82539" title="Anathema" label="anathemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627409" start="83275" end="83295" title="Concordat of Bologna" label="Concordat of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="83878" end="83890" title="Early Church" label="Early Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782975" start="84272" end="84294" title="Constitutional bishopric" label="constitutional bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q160927" start="84410" end="84415" title="Blois" label="Blois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248669" start="85399" end="85422" title="Scipione de&amp;#x27; Ricci" label="Scipione de&amp;#x27; Ricci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278654" start="85610" end="85619" title="Oratory of Jesus" label="Oratorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="85630" end="85634" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="85734" end="85743" title="Canonist" label="canonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090417" start="85806" end="85822" title="Nicolas Bergasse" label="Nicolas Bergasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q876424" start="86036" end="86056" title="National Constituent Assembly (France)" label="Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="86315" end="86324" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q652981" start="86380" end="86390" title="Port-Royal-des-Champs" label="Port-Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12716225" start="86775" end="86798" title="Counter-revolutionary" label="counter-revolutionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="86836" end="86847" title="Protestantism" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="86852" end="86862" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q274053" start="87085" end="87100" title="Ultramontanism" label="ultramontanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q206979" start="87687" end="87709" title="Constitutional clergy" label="constitutional priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344444" start="87749" end="87767" title="dechristianisation" label="dechristianisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q126287984" start="87891" end="87897" title="schism" label="schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128019" start="88109" end="88121" title="Pope Pius VI" label="Pope Pius VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="88170" end="88183" title="republicanism" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q310791" start="88737" end="88751" title="Jules Michelet" label="Jules Michelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q355112" start="88753" end="88764" title="Louis Blanc" label="Louis Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q954657" start="88766" end="88778" title="Henri Martin (historian)" label="Henri Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958191" start="88783" end="88804" title="Charles-Louis Chassin" label="Charles-Louis Chassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q586479" start="89392" end="89405" title="Louis Madelin" label="Louis Madelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343174" start="89410" end="89424" title="Albert Mathiez" label="Albert Mathiez"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="89844" end="89858" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670578" start="90143" end="90153" title="Unigenitus" label="Unigenitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101078" start="90261" end="90276" title="Jonathan Israel" label="Jonathan Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="90323" end="90342" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spanish Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265364" start="90441" end="90453" title="Jacobus Boon" label="Jacobus Boon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092186" start="90455" end="90477" title="archbishop of Mechelen" label="archbishop of Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149954" start="90482" end="90496" title="Antonie Triest" label="Antonie Triest"/>
<link wikidata="Q869096" start="90498" end="90513" title="bishop of Ghent" label="bishop of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029057" start="90699" end="90717" title="St Martin&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Ypres" label="Cathedral of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q693380" start="90854" end="90880" title="Old University of Leuven" label="(Old) University of Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741911" start="90898" end="90920" title="Augustinus (Jansenist book)" label="&amp;quot;Augustinus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="91127" end="91136" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q101286" start="91263" end="91279" title="Pope Innocent XI" label="Pope Innocent XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="91870" end="91881" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16591370" start="91926" end="91937" title="Catholic probabilism" label="probabilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q63637" start="92123" end="92132" title="Heinrich Joseph Dominicus Denzinger" label="Denzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="92203" end="92222" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308411" start="92443" end="92472" title="Regiminis Apostolici" label="Formula of Pope Alexander VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="92612" end="92620" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158735" start="92622" end="92656" title="Humbertus Guilielmus de Precipiano" label="Humbertus Guilielmus de Precipiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q129967" start="92960" end="92975" title="Pope Clement XI" label="Pope Clement XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="93201" end="93215" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q661867" start="93350" end="93355" title="Michael Baius" label="Baius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217571" start="93565" end="93581" title="Petrus Stockmans" label="Petrus Stockmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047395" start="93583" end="93606" title="Johannes van Neercassel" label="Johannes van Neercassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084011" start="93608" end="93621" title="Josse Le Plat" label="Josse Le Plat"/>
<link wikidata="Q184457" start="93648" end="93672" title="Zeger Bernhard van Espen" label="Zeger Bernhard van Espen"/>
<link wikidata="Q426954" start="93690" end="93718" title="Johann Nikolaus von Hontheim" label="Johann Nikolaus von Hontheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961532" start="93722" end="93755" title="Charles Joseph Mathieu Lambrechts" label="Charles Joseph Mathieu Lambrechts"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="93815" end="93824" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q219817" start="93857" end="93873" title="French Directory" label="French Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="93880" end="93888" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="94132" end="94153" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780965" start="94805" end="94840" title="Appeal as from an abuse" label="appeal for himself as from an abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="95257" end="95271" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q803" start="95378" end="95385" title="Utrecht" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651169" start="95452" end="95465" title="Dutch Mission" label="Dutch Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="95526" end="95534" title="Reformed Christianity" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="96068" end="96090" title="Reformed Christianity" label="Reformed Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390575" start="96155" end="96171" title="Pasquier Quesnel" label="Pasquier Quesnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047395" start="97451" end="97474" title="Johannes van Neercassel" label="Johannes van Neercassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q930028" start="97685" end="97697" title="Petrus Codde" label="Petrus Codde"/>
<link wikidata="Q769041" start="98027" end="98044" title="States of Holland and West Friesland" label="States of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q922828" start="98379" end="98402" title="Cornelius van Steenoven" label="Cornelius van Steenoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q366252" start="98932" end="98954" title="Dominique Marie Varlet" label="Dominique Marie Varlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q853982" start="98956" end="98972" title="coadjutor bishop" label="coadjutor bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217609" start="98994" end="99005" title="in partibus" label="in partibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="99015" end="99022" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="99250" end="99269" title="Old Catholic Church" label="Old Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519600" start="99298" end="99308" title="ordination" label="ordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033370" start="99352" end="99373" title="canonical institution" label="canonical institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q992" start="100003" end="100013" title="Amersfoort" label="Amersfoort"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="100025" end="100033" title="seminary" label="seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="100374" end="100379" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="100660" end="100672" title="Benedictines" label="Benedictines"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="100677" end="100687" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="100693" end="100711" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="100952" end="100980" title="Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia" label="Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154849" start="100989" end="101011" title="Grand Duchy of Tuscany" label="Grand Duchy of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="101137" end="101145" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229179" start="101222" end="101233" title="Tamié Abbey" label="Tamié Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q165090" start="101264" end="101272" title="Chambéry" label="Chambéry"/>
<link wikidata="Q209579" start="101324" end="101350" title="Victor Amadeus II of Savoy" label="Victor Amadeus II of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122" start="101441" end="101445" title="Asti" label="Asti"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="101638" end="101655" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q667737" start="101729" end="101740" title="Josephinism" label="Josephinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q740931" start="101968" end="101979" title="Gallicanism" label="Gallicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047983" start="102120" end="102133" title="Edmond Richer" label="Edmond Richer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="102144" end="102176" title="Maria Theresa" label="Empress Maria Theresa of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="102198" end="102204" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="102435" end="102443" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388195" start="102506" end="102522" title="Pietro Tamburini" label="Pietro Tamburini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221" start="102553" end="102560" title="Brescia" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219317" start="102573" end="102592" title="University of Pavia" label="University of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q599761" start="102598" end="102611" title="Giuseppe Zola" label="Giuseppe Zola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248669" start="102816" end="102839" title="Scipione de&amp;#x27; Ricci" label="Scipione de&amp;#x27; Ricci"/>
<link wikidata="Q13376" start="102851" end="102858" title="Pistoia" label="Pistoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377" start="102863" end="102868" title="Prato" label="Prato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044528" start="102888" end="102901" title="vicar general" label="vicar general"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="102905" end="102913" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q151321" start="102931" end="102955" title="Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Grand Duke Peter Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q387521" start="103031" end="103059" title="Convulsionnaires of Saint-Médard" label="&amp;quot;Convulsionnaires&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390575" start="103320" end="103336" title="Pasquier Quesnel" label="Pasquier Quesnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056684" start="103361" end="103377" title="Synod of Pistoia" label="synod in Pistoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870687" start="103635" end="103649" title="Auctorem fidei" label="Auctorem fidei"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="103670" end="103687" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q561218" start="103889" end="103903" title="Henri Grégoire" label="Henri Grégoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="104177" end="104185" title="Reformed Christianity" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064" start="104238" end="104256" title="Alessandro Manzoni" label="Alessandro Manzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="104361" end="104373" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q166092" start="104395" end="104425" title="Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour" label="Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q187336" start="104456" end="104472" title="Giuseppe Mazzini" label="Giuseppe Mazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="104716" end="104737" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q740931" start="104966" end="104977" title="Gallicanism" label="Gallicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190857" start="105071" end="105092" title="First Vatican Council" label="First Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q275016" start="105196" end="105215" title="papal infallibility" label="papal infallibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q274053" start="105232" end="105246" title="ultramontanism" label="ultramontanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271338" start="105457" end="105467" title="Léon Séché" label="Léon Séché"/>
<link wikidata="Q561218" start="106816" end="106830" title="Henri Grégoire" label="Henri Grégoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q206979" start="106858" end="106879" title="Constitutional Church" label="Constitutional Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428015" start="107125" end="107142" title="Concordat of 1801" label="Concordat of 1801"/>
<link wikidata="Q209495" start="108268" end="108278" title="Provinces of France" label="provincial"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="108510" end="108520" title="Pseudonym" label="pseudonymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063392" start="108791" end="108820" title="Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve" label="Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204824" start="109809" end="109823" title="L&amp;#x27;Univers" label="L&amp;#x27;Univers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404639" start="109833" end="109847" title="Louis Veuillot" label="Louis Veuillot"/>
<link wikidata="Q369832" start="110043" end="110060" title="Charles Lavigerie" label="Charles Lavigerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="110219" end="110236" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207162" start="110650" end="110669" title="Bourbon Restoration in France" label="Bourbon Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q58202" start="110675" end="110688" title="July Monarchy" label="July Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="110696" end="110717" title="French Third Republic" label="French Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q965524" start="110769" end="110794" title="Pierre Paul Royer-Collard" label="Pierre Paul Royer-Collard"/>
<link wikidata="Q434346" start="110796" end="110809" title="Victor Cousin" label="Victor Cousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182701" start="110813" end="110833" title="Jules Armand Dufaure" label="Jules Armand Dufaure"/>
<link wikidata="Q43444" start="110862" end="110878" title="Gustave Flaubert" label="Gustave Flaubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026751" start="110902" end="110930" title="Dictionary of Received Ideas" label="Dictionary of Received Ideas"/>
<link wikidata="Q187099" start="111230" end="111243" title="Lionel Jospin" label="Lionel Jospin"/>
<link wikidata="Q549322" start="111343" end="111354" title="bullfighter" label="bullfighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q377629" start="111476" end="111484" title="Télérama" label="Télérama"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="111493" end="111505" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55391" start="111639" end="111653" title="Robert Bresson" label="Robert Bresson"/>
<link wikidata="Q542527" start="111709" end="111732" title="My Night at Maud&amp;#x27;s" label="My Night at Maud&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422304" start="111864" end="111880" title="A Tale of Winter" label="A Tale of Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214845" start="111903" end="111916" title="The Milky Way (1969 film)" label="The Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q51545" start="111928" end="111939" title="Luis Buñuel" label="Luis Buñuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155371" start="112012" end="112041" title="All the World&amp;#x27;s Mornings" label="All the World&amp;#x27;s Mornings"/>
<link wikidata="Q472729" start="112091" end="112113" title="Jean de Sainte-Colombe" label="Jean de Sainte-Colombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3212220" start="112236" end="112254" title="The Portuguese Nun" label="The Portuguese Nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421111" start="112302" end="112320" title="Antoine Le Maistre" label="Antoine Le Maistre"/>
<link wikidata="Q60792396" start="112323" end="112346" title="Augustinian soteriology" label="Augustinian soteriology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790388" start="112349" end="112369" title="Crypto-Protestantism" label="Crypto-Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210503" start="112372" end="112388" title="Dale K. Van Kley" label="Dale K. Van Kley"/>
<link wikidata="Q742" start="112391" end="112402" title="Jean Racine" label="Jean Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177169" start="112405" end="112413" title="Molinism" label="Molinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q574970" start="112416" end="112435" title="Saint-Medard, Paris" label="Saint-Medard, Paris"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52278" wikidata="Q9576" url="?curid=52278" title="James Callaghan">
<text>Leonard James Callaghan, Baron Callaghan of Cardiff ( ; 27 March 191226 March 2005), commonly known as Jim Callaghan, was a British statesman and Labour Party politician who served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1976 to 1979 and Leader of the Labour Party from 1976 to 1980. Callaghan is the only person to have held all four Great Offices of State, having also served as Chancellor of the Exchequer from 1964 to 1967, Home Secretary from 1967 to 1970 and Foreign Secretary from 1974 to 1976. He was a Member of Parliament (MP) from 1945 to 1987.

Born into a working-class family in Portsmouth, Callaghan left school early and began his career as a tax inspector, before becoming a trade union official in the 1930s. He served as a lieutenant in the Royal Navy during the Second World War. He was elected to Parliament at the 1945 election, and was regarded as being on the left wing of the Labour Party. He was appointed to the Attlee government as a parliamentary secretary in 1947, and began to move increasingly towards the right wing of the Labour Party, while maintaining his reputation as a &quot;Keeper of the Cloth Cap&quot;that is, seen as maintaining close ties between Labour and the trade unions. Following Labour&#x27;s defeat at the 1951 election, Callaghan increasingly became regarded as a leader of the right wing of the Labour Party, and stood for the positions of deputy leader in 1960 and for leader in 1963, but was defeated by George Brown for the former and Harold Wilson for the latter.

Following Labour&#x27;s victory at the 1964 election, Wilson appointed Callaghan as Chancellor of the Exchequer; this appointment coincided with a turbulent period for the British economy, during which Callaghan had to tackle both a chronic balance of payments deficit and various speculative attacks on the pound sterling, with its exchange rate to other currencies being fixed by the Bretton Woods system. On 18 November 1967, having initially denied that it would do so, the Government devalued the pound sterling. In the wake of the decision, Wilson moved Callaghan to the role of Home Secretary. During this time, Callaghan was responsible for overseeing the operations of the British Army to support the police in Northern Ireland, following a request from the Northern Ireland government. Callaghan remained in the Shadow Cabinet during Labour&#x27;s period in Opposition from 1970 to 1974; upon Labour&#x27;s victory at the 1974 election, Wilson appointed Callaghan as Foreign Secretary. Callaghan was responsible for renegotiating the terms of Britain&#x27;s membership of the European Communities (EC), and strongly supported the successful &quot;Yes&quot; vote campaign in the 1975 referendum, which confirmed the UK&#x27;s membership of the EC.

When Wilson suddenly announced his retirement in March 1976, Callaghan defeated five other candidates to be elected Leader of the Labour Party; he was appointed prime minister on 5 April 1976. Despite winning a narrow majority in the House of Commons at the 1974 election, Labour had lost this by the time Callaghan became prime minister, and several by-election defeats and defections in his early months forced Callaghan to strike a confidence and supply agreement with the Liberal Party. While this initially proved stable, in the wake of significant industrial disputes and widespread strikes in the 1978–79 &quot;Winter of Discontent&quot;, and the defeat of the referendum on devolution for Scotland, led to minor parties joining the Conservatives to pass a motion of no-confidence in Callaghan on 28 March 1979. Although remaining personally popular in opinion polls, Callaghan led Labour to defeat at the 1979 election and was replaced by Conservative Margaret Thatcher. The 1979 defeat marked the beginning of 18 years in opposition for the Labour Party, the longest in its history.

Callaghan served as Labour leader and Leader of the Opposition until November 1980. He attempted to reform the process by which Labour elected its leader. After leaving the leadership, he returned to the backbench, and between 1983 and 1987 was Father of the House of Commons. On retiring from the Commons in 1987, he was elevated to the House of Lords as Baron Callaghan of Cardiff. He died in 2005 at the age of 92, and remains to date the UK&#x27;s longest-lived former prime minister. He is the last prime minister to have served in the British Armed Forces and the only prime minister to serve in the Royal Navy. He is also the only prime minister to have held all four of the Great Offices of State.

==Early life and career, 1912–1945==
Leonard James Callaghan was born at 38 Funtington Road, Copnor, Portsmouth, England, on 27 March 1912. He took his middle name from his father, James (1877–1921), who was the son of an Irish Catholic father who had fled to England during the Great Irish Famine, and a Jewish mother. Callaghan&#x27;s father ran away from home in the 1890s to join the Royal Navy; as he was a year too young to enlist, he gave a false date of birth and changed his surname from Garogher to Callaghan so that his true identity could not be traced. He rose to the rate of Chief Petty Officer.

His mother was Charlotte Callaghan (&quot;&quot; Cundy, 1879–1961) an English Baptist. As the Catholic Church at the time refused to marry Catholics to members of other denominations, James Callaghan senior abandoned Catholicism and married Charlotte in a Baptist chapel. Their first child was Dorothy Gertrude Callaghan (1904–82).

James Callaghan senior served in the First World War on board the battleship HMS &quot;Agincourt&quot;. After he was demobbed in 1919, he joined the Coastguard and the family moved to the town of Brixham in Devon, but he died only two years later of a heart attack in 1921 at the age of 44, leaving the family without an income and forced to rely on charity to survive. Their financial situation was improved in 1924 when the first Labour government was elected, and introduced changes allowing Mrs Callaghan to be granted a widow&#x27;s pension of ten shillings a week, on the basis that her husband&#x27;s death was partly due to his war service.

===Early career===
In his early years, Callaghan was known by his first name Leonard. When he entered politics in 1945 he decided to be known by his middle name James, and from then on he was referred to as James or Jim. He attended Portsmouth Northern Secondary School. He gained the Senior Oxford Certificate in 1929, but could not afford entrance to university and instead sat the Civil Service entrance exam. At the age of 17, Callaghan left to work as a clerk for the Inland Revenue at Maidstone in Kent. While working at the Inland Revenue, Callaghan joined the Maidstone branch of the Labour Party and the Association of the Officers of Taxes (AOT), a trade union for this branch of the Civil Service; within a year of joining he became the office secretary of the union. In 1932 he passed a Civil Service exam which enabled him to become a senior tax officer, and that same year he became the Kent branch secretary of the AOT. The following year he was elected to the AOT&#x27;s national executive council. In 1934, he was transferred to Inland Revenue offices in London. Following a merger of unions in 1936, Callaghan was appointed a full-time union official and to the post of assistant secretary of the Inland Revenue Staff Federation (IRSF), and resigned from his Civil Service duties.

During his time working in the Inland Revenue in the early 1930s, Callaghan met his future wife Audrey Moulton, and they were married in July 1938 at Maidstone.

His union position at the IRSF brought Callaghan into contact with Harold Laski, the Chairman of the Labour Party&#x27;s National Executive Committee and an academic at the London School of Economics. Laski encouraged him to stand for Parliament, although later he requested several times that Callaghan study and lecture at the LSE.

===War service===
Following the outbreak of World War II, in 1940, Callaghan applied to join the Royal Navy, but was initially turned down on the basis that a trade union official was deemed to be a reserved occupation. He was finally allowed to join the Royal Navy Volunteer Reserve as an Ordinary Seaman in 1942. While he trained for his promotion, his medical examination revealed that he was suffering from tuberculosis, so he was admitted to the Royal Naval Hospital Haslar in Gosport near Portsmouth. After he recovered, he was discharged and assigned to duties with the Admiralty in Whitehall. He was assigned to the Japanese section, and wrote a service manual for the Royal Navy &quot;The Enemy: Japan&quot;. He then served in the East Indies Fleet on board the escort carrier HMS &quot;Activity&quot;, and was promoted to the rank of lieutenant in April 1944. As of 2025, Callaghan remains the last British prime minister to be an armed forces veteran and the only one ever to have served in the Royal Navy.

While on leave from the Navy, Callaghan was selected as a Parliamentary candidate for Cardiff South: he narrowly won the local party ballot with twelve votes, against the next highest candidate George Thomas, who received eleven. Callaghan had been encouraged to put his name forward for the Cardiff South seat by his friend Dai Kneath, a member of the IRSF National executive from Swansea, who was in turn an associate and friend of the local Labour Party secretary, Bill Headon.

By 1945, he was serving on in the Indian Ocean. After VE Day, he returned, along with other prospective candidates, to the United Kingdom to stand in the general election.

==Attlee government, 1945–1951==

The Labour Party won the overdue general election in a landslide victory on 26 July 1945, bringing Clement Attlee to power, in charge of the first-ever majority Labour government. Callaghan won his Cardiff South seat at the 1945 general election (and would hold a Cardiff-area seat continuously until his retirement in 1987). He defeated the sitting Conservative MP, Sir Arthur Evans, by 17,489 votes to 11,545. He campaigned on such issues as the rapid demobilisation of the armed forces and for a new housing construction programme. He stood on the left wing of the party, and was a vocal critic of the United States in 1945, joining 22 other rebels in voting against accepting the Anglo-American loan. Callaghan did not join the Keep Left group of left-wing Labour MPs, but he did sign a letter in 1947 with 20 other MPs from the group calling for a &#x27;socialist foreign policy&#x27; which would create an alternative to the capitalism of the United States and the totalitarianism of the USSR.

In October 1947 Callaghan got his first junior government job, when he was appointed Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Transport under Alfred Barnes. Callaghan was given responsibility for improving road safety, and most notably he persuaded the government to introduce zebra crossings, and to extend the use of cat&#x27;s eyes on trunk roads. Callaghan did not oppose the government&#x27;s use of emergency powers to break dockers strikes in both 1948 and 1949, however he sympathised with the feelings of ordinary dockers and wrote to Attlee to protest over how the Dock Labour Scheme was operated.

He moved to be Parliamentary and Financial Secretary to the Admiralty from February 1950, where he was a delegate to the Council of Europe, where he supported plans for economic co-operation but resisted plans for a European army. When the Korean War broke out in 1950, Callaghan was given responsibility for deciding how the money allocated to the Royal Navy for rearmament was spent.

==In opposition, 1951–1964==
After Labour lost power in the 1951 general election, Callaghan, who was popular with Labour MPs, was elected to the Shadow Cabinet, he would serve on the party&#x27;s front bench for the next 29 years, either in opposition of in government. He was now associated with the Gaitskellite wing of the party on the Labour right, although he avoided joining any faction. He served as the Labour spokesman on Transport (1951–53); Fuel and Power (1953–55); Colonial Affairs (1956–61) and Shadow Chancellor (1961–64). He ran unsuccessfully for the Deputy Leadership of the party in 1960. When Hugh Gaitskell died in January 1963, Callaghan ran to succeed him, but came third in the leadership contest, which was won by Harold Wilson.

==Wilson government. 1964–1970==

===Chancellor of the Exchequer, 1964–1967===
In October 1964, Conservative Prime Minister Alec Douglas-Home (who had only been in power for twelve months since the resignation of Harold Macmillan) was forced to call a general election, the parliament being about to expire. Labour won a narrow majority, gaining 56 seats for a total of 317 to the Conservatives&#x27; 304. The new Labour government under Harold Wilson immediately faced economic problems; Wilson acted within his first hours to appoint Callaghan as the new chancellor of the Exchequer. Callaghan&#x27;s time as chancellor was characterised by an ultimately doomed effort to stave off devaluation of the pound: The previous chancellor, Reginald Maudling, had initiated fiscally expansionary measures which had helped create a pre-election economic boom; by greatly increasing domestic demand this had caused imports to grow much faster than exports, thus when Labour entered government they faced a balance of payments deficit of £800,000,000 (), and sterling came under immediate speculative attack. Both Wilson and Callaghan took a strong stance against devaluation of sterling, partly due to the perception that the devaluation carried out by the previous Labour government in 1949 had contributed to that government&#x27;s downfall. The alternative to devaluation, however, was a series of austerity measures designed to reduce demand in the economy in order to reduce imports, and to stabilise the balance of payments and the value of sterling.
Just ten days after taking up his post, Callaghan immediately introduced a 15% surcharge on imports, with the exception of foodstuffs and raw materials. This measure was intended to tackle the balance of payments deficit; however, it caused an uproar amongst Britain&#x27;s international trading partners. The outcry was so intense that it caused the government to announce that the surcharge was a temporary measure. Callaghan later admitted in his autobiography that he could have handled the matter better, and in his haste to tackle the balance of payments problem, had failed to consult foreign governments.

On 11 November, Callaghan gave his first budget and announced increases in income tax, petrol tax and the introduction of a new capital gains tax, actions which most economists deemed necessary to take the heat out of the balance and sterling deficit. In line with Labour&#x27;s manifesto commitments, the budget also contained social measures to increase the state pension and the widows pension; measures which were disliked by the City and speculators, causing a run on the pound. On 23 November, it was decided to increase the bank rate from 2% to 7%, which generated a large amount of criticism. Handling the situation was made more difficult by the attitude of Lord Cromer, the Governor of the Bank of England, who argued against the fiscal policies of the new Labour government. When Callaghan and Wilson threatened to call a new general election, the governor soon raised a £3,000,000,000 loan to stabilise the reserves and the deficit.

His second budget came on 6 April 1965, in which he announced efforts to deflate the economy and reduce home import demand by £250,000,000. Shortly afterwards, the bank rate was reduced from 7% down to 6%. For a brief time, the economy and British financial market stabilised, allowing in June for Callaghan to visit the United States and to discuss the state of the British economy with President Lyndon B. Johnson and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).

In July, the pound came under extreme pressure and Callaghan was forced to create harsh temporary measures to demonstrate control of the economy. These include delaying all current government building projects and postponing new pension plans. The alternative was to allow the pound to float or to devalue it. Callaghan and Wilson, however, were again adamant that a devaluation of the pound would create new social and economic problems and continued to take a firm stance against it. The government continued to struggle both with the economy and with the slender majority which, by 1966, had been reduced to one. On 28 February, Harold Wilson formally announced an election for 31 March 1966. On 1 March, Callaghan gave a &#x27;little budget&#x27; to the Commons and announced the historic decision that the UK would adopt decimal currency. (It was actually not until 1971, under a Conservative government, that the United Kingdom moved from the system of pounds, shillings and pence to a decimal system of 100 pence to the pound.) He also announced a short-term mortgage scheme which allowed low-wage earners to maintain mortgage schemes in the face of economic difficulties. Soon afterwards, at the 1966 general election, Labour won 363 seats compared to 252 seats against the Conservatives, giving the Labour government an increased majority of 97 seats.

Callaghan introduced his next Budget on 4 May. He had informed the house that he would bring a full Budget to the House when he made his &#x27;little budget&#x27; speech prior to the election. The main point of his budget was the introduction of a Selective Employment Tax, penalising the service industry and favouring the manufacturing industry. Twelve days after the budget, the National Union of Seamen called a national strike and the problems facing Sterling were multiplied. Additional strikes caused the balance of payments deficit to increase. However, a £3,300,000,000 loan from Swiss banks was due by the end of the year. On 14 July, the bank rate was increased again to seven percent, and on 20 July Callaghan announced a ten-point emergency package to deal with the crisis which included further tax rises and a six-month freeze on wage increases. By early 1967, the economy had begun to stabilise once again with the balance of payments moving into equilibrium, the bank rate was reduced to 6% in March and 5.5% in May.

It was under these conditions that Callaghan beat Michael Foot in a vote to become Treasurer of the Labour Party.

The economy was soon in turmoil again by June, with the Six-Day War in the Middle East. Several Arab countries, such as Kuwait and Iraq, announced an oil embargo against Britain, accusing it of intervening on the Israeli side in the conflict, resulting in a rise in oil prices which had a disastrous effect on the balance of payments. Furthermore, the economy was hit in mid-September when a national dock strike lasted for eight weeks. The final straw, however, was an EEC report which suggested that the pound could not be sustained as a reserve currency and it was suggested again that the pound should be devalued. Callaghan responded by pointing out that, had it not been for the Middle East crisis, Britain would have been heading for a balance of payments surplus in 1967. However, rumours that devaluation was on the cards led to heavy selling of Sterling on world markets.

Callaghan now privately confided in Wilson that he doubted that the pound could be saved, this was reinforced after a meeting with Alec Cairncross, head of the Government Economic Service, who told him in no uncertain terms that the value of Sterling could not be maintained, and in his view it should be devalued as soon as possible. The IMF offered a contingency fund of $3 billion, but Wilson and Callaghan refused this because of several conditions attached which they believed would allow the IMF to interfere with economic policy. On Wednesday 15 November, the historic decision was taken to commit the government to a 14.3% devaluation from the existing fixed exchange rate of $2.80 to the pound, to $2.40 to the pound. They intended to announce the decision publicly on the 18th. However, in the run up to the public announcement, Callaghan found himself in a tricky situation when answering questions in the House of Commons: One backbencher Robert Sheldon tabled a motion concerning a rumour that Britain would be receiving a loan from banks. Callaghan did not wish to lie to the Commons, but at the same time going public about the devaluation decision before the 18th would be financially disastrous for the country. He answered the initial question by stating that he did not comment on rumours. However a follow-up question was made by Stan Orme suggesting that devaluation was preferable to deflation, which caused a major problem. Callaghan replied that he had &quot;nothing to add or subtract from, anything I have said on previous occasions on the subject of devaluation&quot;... Speculators seized on the fact that he had not denied there would be a devaluation and started selling Sterling. Over the next 24 hours, the flight from Sterling cost the country £1,500 million. The situation was a great political controversy at the time. As Denis Healey in his autobiography notes:

Before the devaluation, Jim Callaghan had announced publicly to the Press and the House of Commons that he would not devalue, something he later said was necessary to maintain confidence in the pound and avoid creating jitters in the financial markets. Callaghan immediately offered his resignation as chancellor, and increasing political opposition forced Wilson to accept it. Wilson then moved Roy Jenkins, the home secretary, to be chancellor; Callaghan became the new home secretary on 30 November 1967.

===Home secretary, 1967–1970===
Callaghan was responsible for the Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1968, a controversial piece of legislation prompted by Conservative assertions that an influx of Kenyan Asians would soon inundate the country. It passed through the Commons in a week and placed entry controls on holders of British passports who had &quot;no substantial connection&quot; with Britain by setting up a new system. In his memoirs &quot;Time and Chance&quot;, Callaghan wrote that introducing the Commonwealth Immigrants Bill had been an unwelcome task but that he did not regret it. He said the Asians had &quot;discovered a loophole&quot; and he told a BBC interviewer: &quot;Public opinion in this country was extremely agitated, and the consideration that was in my mind was how we could preserve a proper sense of order in this country and, at the same time, do justice to these peopleI had to balance both considerations&quot;. An opponent of the Act, Conservative MP Ian Gilmour, said that it was &quot;brought in to keep the blacks out. If it had been the case that it was 5,000 white settlers who were coming in, the newspapers and politicians, Callaghan included, who were making all the fuss would have been quite pleased&quot;.

Also significant was the passing of the Race Relations Act in the same year, making it illegal to refuse employment, housing or education on the basis of ethnic background. The Act extended the powers of the Race Relations Board at the time, to deal with complaints of discrimination and unfair attitudes. It also set up a new supervisory body, the Community Relations Commission, to promote &quot;harmonious community relations&quot;. Presenting the Bill to Parliament, Callaghan said: &quot;The House has rarely faced an issue of greater social significance for our country and our children.&quot;

====Northern Ireland====

Callaghan&#x27;s tenure as home secretary was marked by the emerging conflict in Northern Ireland: Like all British governments since the partition of Ireland in 1921, Harold Wilson&#x27;s Labour government preferred not to intervene in the affairs of Northern Ireland. However in August 1969, escalating sectarian violence between the province&#x27;s Protestant and Catholic communities, gave the Government of Northern Ireland little choice but to ask the British government to intervene directly and send in troops, and it was as home secretary that Callaghan took the decision to deploy British Army troops in the province. In return Callaghan and Wilson demanded that various reforms be implemented in the province, such as the phasing out of the Protestant paramilitary B-Specials, and their replacement by the Ulster Defence Regiment, which was open to Catholic recruits, and various reforms to reduce discrimination against Catholics, such as reforms to the voting franchise, and a reform of local government boundaries and housing allocations. Although the troops were initially welcomed by Northern Ireland&#x27;s Catholics, by early 1970 this had soured, and the Provisional IRA emerged, and embarked on what became a decades long violent campaign during what became known as The Troubles.

====In Place of Strife====
In 1969, Callaghan, a strong defender of the Labour–trade union link, led the successful opposition in a divided cabinet to Barbara Castle&#x27;s White Paper &quot;In Place of Strife&quot; which sought to modify trade union law. Amongst its numerous proposals were plans to force unions to call a ballot before a strike was held and the establishment of an Industrial Board to enforce settlements in industrial disputes. Ten years later, Callaghan&#x27;s actions in opposing trade union reform would come back to haunt him during the Winter of Discontent.

==In opposition, 1970–1974==
Wilson&#x27;s government went on to be unexpectedly defeated by Edward Heath at the 1970 general election.

Callaghan initially became Shadow Home Secretary, later becoming Shadow Foreign Secretary. In 1973 after an approach from the Conservative Chancellor Anthony Barber he agreed to have his name go forward for the job of Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), however this was vetoed by the French government.

==Wilson government, 1974–1976==
===Foreign secretary, 1974–1976===
When Wilson won the next general election and returned as prime minister in March 1974, he appointed Callaghan as Foreign Secretary.

In July 1974 a crisis erupted in Cyprus, when there was a coup d&#x27;etat on the island, sponsored by the Greek military junta, which installed the pro-Greek puppet leader Nikos Sampson as the President, who threatened to unify the island with Greece. Immediately inter-communal violence broke out between the island&#x27;s Greek and Turkish communities, and Turkey responded by launching an invasion of the island to protect the Turkish community. Britain was involved in the dispute as a signature of the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee. Britain sent troops alongside the UN to prevent further advancement of Turkish troops. Callaghan led diplomatic efforts to secure a ceasefire, and called on both sides to attend tripartite meetings on the crisis with Britain. On 22 July a ceasefire was called. The tripartite talks got underway, and in August an agreement was reached to make the ceasefire permanent, with a buffer zone patrolled by the UN between the Greek and Turkish controlled parts of the island. As of 2025 the island remains partitioned.

Labour had entered office with the policy of renegotiating the terms of the United Kingdom&#x27;s membership of the European Community, and then holding a referendum on remaining in the EC on these terms. Callaghan was put in charge of these negotiations. When the talks concluded, Callaghan led the Cabinet in declaring the new terms acceptable and he supported a successful &quot;Yes&quot; vote in the 1975 European Community referendum. Callaghan had formerly been on the eurosceptic wing of the Labour Party, however during the negotiations and referendum he converted to be a pro-European. He was awarded the Freedom of the City of Cardiff on 16 March 1975.

In 1975, Callaghan flew out to Uganda in order to bring home the British lecturer Denis Hills, who had been sentenced to death by Uganda&#x27;s dictator Idi Amin for writing a book critical of him. After an appeal for clemency by both the Queen and the prime minister, Amin agreed to release Hills on the condition that Callaghan appeared in person to take him back to the UK.

Also in 1975, Argentina made territorial claims on the Falkland Islands. In response, Callaghan sent HMS &quot;Endurance&quot; to the islands, in order to send a message to Argentina that Britain would defend them. Seven years later, in 1982, Callaghan criticised the government of Margaret Thatcher for its decision to withdraw &quot;Endurance&quot; from the islands; a decision which contributed to the Argentine invasion that year.

====1976 leadership election====

Barely two years after beginning his second spell as prime minister, Wilson announced his resignation on 16 March 1976. Although this came as a surprise to most people, Callaghan had been tipped off by Wilson several days in advance. Callaghan was the favourite to win the subsequent leadership election; although he was the oldest candidate, at 64 years old, he was also the most experienced and least divisive. Popularity with all parts of the Labour movement saw him through the ballot of Labour MPs to win the leadership vote. On 5 April 1976, Callaghan became Prime Minister.

==Prime Minister of the United Kingdom: 1976–1979==
Callaghan was the only prime minister to have held all three leading Cabinet positionschancellor of the exchequer, home secretary and foreign secretaryprior to becoming prime minister.

On becoming Prime Minister, Callaghan immediately reshuffled the Cabinet: Anthony Crosland was given Callaghan&#x27;s previous job as Foreign Secretary, while Merlyn Rees became Home Secretary, replacing Roy Jenkins who Callaghan nominated to become President of the European Commission. Callaghan removed Barbara Castle, with whom he had a poor relationship from the Cabinet, and gave her job at social security to David Ennals. 
===IMF loan===
Callaghan came to office at a troubled time for the British economy, which was still recovering from the 1973–75 global recession, and was beset by double-digit inflation, and rising unemployment. Within months of entering office, his government was faced with a financial crisis, which caused the Chancellor Denis Healey to ask the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for a large loan of $3900 million in order to maintain the value of sterling. The IMF demanded large cuts in public spending in return for the loan, which caused consternation among Labour&#x27;s supporters. The Cabinet was split on the issue, and the left of the party led by Tony Benn put forward an Alternative Economic Strategy as a proposed alternative to the loan, which involved protectionism, but this option was ultimately rejected. After tough negotiations the government was able to negotiate a reduction in the proposed public spending cuts from £5000 million to £1,500 million in the first year, and then £1000 million a year over the next two years. In the event, it turned out that the loan had not been necessary, as it was based on an overestimation of the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement by the Treasury: The government only had to draw on half of the loan, and it was paid back in full by 1979. By 1978, the economic situation showed signs of improvement, with unemployment falling, and inflation falling to single digits. Healey was able to introduce an expansionary budget in April 1978.

Callaghan was widely judged to have handled the IMF crisis skilfully, avoiding any resignations from the Cabinet, and negotiating much lower spending cuts than had been originally demanded.

===Minority government===
Callaghan&#x27;s time as prime minister was dominated by the troubles in running a government with a minority in the House of Commons: Labour had won a narrow majority of three seats at the October 1974 election, however by April 1976, their overall majority had disappeared, due to by-election losses and the defection of two MPs to the breakaway Scottish Labour Party, which left Callaghan heading a minority government, forced to do deals with smaller parties in order to govern. An arrangement negotiated in March 1977 with Liberal Party leader David Steel, known as the Lib–Lab pact, lasted until August the following year. Deals were then forged with various small parties including the Scottish National Party (SNP) and the Welsh nationalist Plaid Cymru, prolonging the life of the government. The nationalist parties, in turn, demanded devolution to their respective constituent countries in return for their supporting the government. When referendums for Scottish and Welsh devolution were held in March 1979 the Welsh devolution referendum saw a large majority vote against, while the Scottish referendum returned a narrow majority in favour, but failed to reach the required threshold of 40% of the electorate in support. When the Labour government duly refused to push ahead with setting up the proposed Scottish Assembly, the SNP withdrew its support for the government: this finally brought the government down as the Conservatives triggered a vote of no confidence in Callaghan&#x27;s government that was lost by a single vote on 28 March 1979, necessitating a general election.

===Policies===

Callaghan&#x27;s time as prime minister saw broad continuation of the policies which Labour had adopted since it had been elected in 1974 under Wilson. Callaghan continued the policies of the &quot;social contract&quot; which sought to control inflation through a voluntary wage restraint agreement with the trade unions. Although the public spending cuts after 1976 made it more difficult for the government to deliver the increased benefits which had been promised as part of the package. Another policy continuation was the National Enterprise Board (NEB) which formed the centrepiece of the government&#x27;s industrial policy. In practice the NEB&#x27;s main activity became one of rescuing failing companies.

Despite its lack of Parliamentary majority, Callaghan&#x27;s government was able to carry out a number of reforms in many areas (see Labour government, 1974–1979#Major contributions), among these was the Race Relations Act 1976, which established the Commission for Racial Equality to promote racial equality.

In 1977 Callaghan&#x27;s government nationalised the shipbuilding industry, creating British Shipbuilders, and the aircraft industry, creating British Aerospace.

During his first year in office, Callaghan started what has since become known as &#x27;The Great Debate&#x27;, when he spoke at Ruskin College, Oxford, about the &#x27;legitimate concerns&#x27; of the public about the quality of education in the nation&#x27;s maintained schools. This discussion led to greater involvement of the government, through its ministries, in the curriculum and administration of state education, leading to the eventual introduction of the National curriculum some ten years later. Early in his premiership he caused controversy with the appointment of Peter Jay, his then son-in-law as the British Ambassador to the United States.

===Proposed 1978 election===
Over the summer of 1978 most opinion polls showed Labour with a lead of up to five points, and the expectation grew that Callaghan would call an autumn election which would have given him a second term in office until autumn 1983. The economy had started to improve by this time: 1978 was a year of economic recovery for Britain, with inflation falling to single digits, unemployment declining during the year from a peak of 1.5 million in the third quarter of 1977, to 1.3 million a year later, and general living standards going up by more than 8%. Famously, he strung along the opposition and was expected to make his declaration of election in a broadcast on 7 September 1978. Instead he announced that the election would be delayed until the following year, which was met with almost universal surprise. His decision not to call an election was seen by many as a sign of his dominance of the political scene and he ridiculed his opponents by singing old-time music hall star Vesta Victoria&#x27;s song &quot;Waiting at the Church&quot; at that month&#x27;s Trades Union Congress meeting. This was celebrated by the TUC but has since been interpreted as a moment of hubris. Callaghan intended to convey the message that he had not promised an election.

Callaghan&#x27;s failure to call an election during 1978 was later widely seen as a political miscalculation; indeed, he himself later admitted that not calling an election was an error of judgement. However, private polling by the Labour Party in the autumn of 1978 had shown the two main parties with about the same level of support.

===Winter of Discontent===
Callaghan&#x27;s method of dealing with the long-term economic difficulties involved wage restraint, which had been operating for four years with reasonable success. He gambled that a fifth year would further improve the economy and allow him to be re-elected in 1979, and so he attempted to hold pay rises to 5% or less. The trade unions rejected continued wage restraint and in a wave of widespread strikes over the winter of 1978–79 (known as the Winter of Discontent) secured higher pay. The industrial unrest made his government unpopular, and Callaghan&#x27;s response to one interview question only made it worse. Returning to the United Kingdom from the Guadeloupe Conference in January 1979, Callaghan was asked, &quot;What is your general approach, in view of the mounting chaos in the country at the moment?&quot; Callaghan replied, &quot;Well, that&#x27;s a judgement that you are making. I promise you that if you look at it from outside, and perhaps you&#x27;re taking rather a parochial view at the moment, I don&#x27;t think that other people in the world would share the view that there is mounting chaos.&quot; This reply was reported in &quot;The Sun&quot; under the headline &quot;Crisis? What Crisis?&quot;. Callaghan also later admitted in regard to the Winter of Discontent that he had &quot;let the country down&quot;.

===1979 general election===

The Winter of Discontent saw Labour&#x27;s performance in the opinion polls slump dramatically. They had topped most of the pre-winter opinion polls by several points, but in February 1979 at least one opinion poll was showing the Conservatives 20 points ahead of Labour and it appeared inevitable that Labour would lose the forthcoming election.

In the buildup to the election, the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot; and &quot;The Guardian&quot; supported Labour, while &quot;The Sun&quot;, the &quot;Daily Mail&quot;, the &quot;Daily Express&quot;, and &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; supported the Conservatives.
On 28 March 1979, the House of Commons passed a motion of no-confidence by one vote, 311–310, which forced Callaghan to call a general election which was held on 3 May. The Conservatives under Margaret Thatcher ran a campaign on the slogan &quot;Labour Isn&#x27;t Working&quot;. Although Callaghan remained personally more popular with the electorate than Thatcher, the Conservatives won the election with an overall majority of 43 seats. The Labour vote held up, with the party winning a similar number of votes to 1974, however the Conservatives benefited from a surge in turnout.

During the 1979 election campaign, Callaghan detected a sea-change in public opinion, which he privately opined:

 &quot;You know there are times, perhaps once every thirty years, when there is a sea-change in politics. It then does not matter what you say or what you do. There is a shift in what the public wants and what it approves of. I suspect there is now such a sea change and it is for Mrs Thatcher.&quot; 

After losing power in 1979, Labour spent the next 18 years in opposition, pejoratively described as the period in wilderness for the party.

==Leader of the opposition, 1979–1980==
In the immediate aftermath of the election defeat, Callaghan wanted to resign as leader, but was persuaded to stay on in the hope that he would provide some stability, and ease the way for Denis Healey to be elected as his successor. During Callaghan&#x27;s 17 month stint as opposition leader, the Labour Party was torn apart by factional struggles between the left and right of the party. In the event, the left succeeded in electing Michael Foot as his successor following the November 1980 leadership election, and he returned to the backbenches.

==Backbenches and retirement, 1980–2005==
In 1982, along with his friend Gerald Ford, he co-founded the annual AEI World Forum.

In 1983, he attacked Labour&#x27;s plans to reduce defence, and the same year became Father of the House as the longest continually-serving member of the Commons.

In 1987, he was made a Knight Companion of the Garter and stood down at the 1987 general election after 42 years as an MP. He was one of the last remaining MPs elected in the Labour landslide of 1945. Shortly afterwards, he was elevated to the House of Lords on 5 November 1987 as a life peer with the title Baron Callaghan of Cardiff, &quot;of the City of Cardiff in the County of South Glamorgan&quot;. In 1987, his autobiography, &quot;Time and Chance&quot;, was published. He also served as a non-executive director of the Bank of Wales.

His wife Audrey, a former chairman (1969–82) of Great Ormond Street Hospital, spotted a letter to a newspaper which pointed out that the copyright of &quot;Peter Pan&quot;, which had been assigned by J. M. Barrie to the hospital, was going to expire at the end of that year, 1987 (50 years after Barrie&#x27;s death, the then-current copyright term). In 1988, Callaghan moved an amendment to the Copyright Designs &amp; Patents Act, then under consideration in the House of Lords, to grant the hospital a right to royalty in perpetuity despite the lapse of copyright, and it was passed by the government.

During the 1980s, Lord Callaghan supported the work of the Jim Conway Memorial Foundation (JCF), a registered educational charity. He gave the foundation&#x27;s inaugural memorial lecture in 1981 and took the Chair for a JCF symposium in 1990, being the final event of that ten year lecture series.

Tony Benn recorded in his diary entry of 3 April 1997 that during the 1997 general election campaign, Callaghan was telephoned by a volunteer at Labour headquarters asking him if he would be willing to become more active in the party. According to Benn:One young woman in her mid-twenties rang up Jim Callaghan and said to him on the phone, &quot;Have you ever thought of being a bit more active in politics?&quot; So Callaghan said, &quot;Well I was a Labour Prime Ministerwhat more could I do?&quot;

During an interview broadcast on the BBC Radio 4 programme &quot;The Human Button&quot;, Callaghan became the only prime minister to go on record with his opinion on ordering a retaliation in the event of a nuclear attack on the United Kingdom:&quot;If it were to become necessary or vital, it would have meant the deterrent had failed, because the value of the nuclear weapon is frankly only as a deterrent&quot;, he said. &quot;But if we had got to that point, where it was, I felt, necessary to do it, then I would have done it. I&#x27;ve had terrible doubts, of course, about this. I say to you, if I had lived after having pressed that button, I could never, ever have forgiven myself.&quot;

In October 1999, Callaghan told &quot;The Oldie Magazine&quot; that he would not be surprised to be considered as Britain&#x27;s worst prime minister in 200 years. He also said in this interview that he &quot;must carry the can&quot; for the Winter of Discontent.

One of his final public appearances came on 29 April 2002, when shortly after his 90th birthday, he sat alongside the then-Prime Minister Tony Blair and three other surviving former prime ministers at the timeEdward Heath, Margaret Thatcher and John Major at Buckingham Palace for a dinner which formed part of the celebrations for the Golden Jubilee of Elizabeth II, alongside his daughter Margaret, Baroness Jay, who had served as leader of the House of Lords from 1998 until 2001.

==Personal life==
Callaghan&#x27;s interests included rugby (he played lock for Streatham RFC before the Second World War), tennis and agriculture. He married Audrey Elizabeth Moulton, whom he had met when they both worked as Sunday School teachers at the local Baptist church, in July 1938 and had three childrenone son and two daughters.
* Margaret, Baroness Jay of Paddington, who married first Peter Jay and later Professor Mike Adler.
* Julia, who married Ian Hamilton Hubbard and settled in Lancashire
* Michael, who married Jennifer Morris and settled in Essex.

In 1968, Callaghan purchased a farm in Ringmer, East Sussex, and in his retirement he and his wife commenced full time farming there.

Although there is much doubt about how much belief Callaghan retained into adult life, the Baptist nonconformist ethic was a profound influence throughout all of his public and private life. It is claimed that Callaghan was an atheist, who lost his belief in God while he was working as a trade union official. His son Michael Callaghan disagrees: &quot;My father, Jim Callaghan, was brought up as a practising Baptist and as a young man was a Sunday school teacher. As a young man embracing socialism he had difficulties reconciling his new beliefs with the teachings of his church, but he was persuaded to stay in his Baptist chapel. [...] Incidentally, the title of his autobiography is &#x27;Time and Chance&#x27;, a quote from Ecclesiastes 9:11.&quot;

==Death==
Callaghan died on 26 March 2005, at the age of 92, at his home in Ringmer, East Sussex, of lobar pneumonia, cardiac failure and kidney failure. He died just one day before his 93rd birthday and 11 days after his wife of 67 years, who had spent the last four years of her life in a nursing home due to Alzheimer&#x27;s disease. He died as Britain&#x27;s longest-lived former prime minister, having surpassed Harold Macmillan&#x27;s record 39 days earlier. Callaghan died 4 months before former Prime Minister Edward Heath.

Lord Callaghan was cremated, and his ashes were scattered in a flowerbed around the base of the &quot;Peter Pan&quot; statue near the entrance of London&#x27;s Great Ormond Street Hospital, where his wife had formerly been chair of the board of governors.

His Order of the Garter Banner was transferred from St George&#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle to Llandaff Cathedral in Cardiff following his death.

==Historiography==
His contribution and legacy are still contested. The left-wing of the Labour Party considers him a traitor whose betrayals of true socialism laid the foundations for Thatcherism. They point to his decision in 1976 to allow the IMF to control the government budget. They accuse him of abandoning the traditional Labour commitment to full employment. They blame his rigorous pursuit of a policy of controlling income growth for the Winter of Discontent. Writers on the right of the Labour Party complained that he was a weak leader who was unable to stand up to the left. New Labour writers who admire Tony Blair identify Callaghan with the old-style partisanship that was a dead end, and which a new generation of modernisers had to repudiate.

Practically all commentators agree that Callaghan made a serious mistake by not calling an election in the autumn of 1978. Bernard Donoughue, a senior official in his government, depicts Callaghan as a strong and efficient administrator who stood heads above his predecessor Harold Wilson. The standard scholarly biography by Kenneth O. Morgan is generally favourableat least for the middle of his premiershipwhile admitting failures at the beginning, at the end, and in his leadership role following Margaret Thatcher&#x27;s victory. The treatment found in most textbooks and surveys of the period remains largely negative.

Historians Alan Sked and Chris Cook have summarised the general consensus of historians regarding Labour in power in the 1970s:

==Arms==
==See also==

* 1976 sterling crisis
* Shadow Cabinet of James Callaghan

==References==
===Bibliography===

==Further reading==
=== Books by Callaghan ===
* Callaghan, James. &quot;Time and Chance&quot;. Collins, 1987.
* Callaghan, James. &quot;Challenges and Opportunities for British Foreign Policy &quot;. Fabian Society, 1975.

=== Biographies and studies ===

* Allen, David. &quot;James Callaghan, 1974–76.&quot; in &quot;British Foreign Secretaries Since 1974&quot; (Routledge, 2004) pp. 61–80.
* Ashton, Nigel. &quot;&#x27;A Local Terrorist Made Good&#x27;: the Callaghan government and the Arab–Israeli peace process, 1977–79&quot;. &quot;Contemporary British History&quot; 31.1 (2017): 114–135 online .
* Bell, Patrick. &quot;The Labour Party in Opposition 1970–1974&quot; (Routledge, 2012).
* Brivati, Brian. &quot;(Leonard) James Callaghan, Lord Callaghan of Cardiff.&quot; in &quot;Biographical Dictionary of British Prime Ministers&quot; (Routledge, 2002) pp. 350–357.
* Byrne, Christopher, Nick Randall, and Kevin Theakston. &quot;The Collapse of Keynesian Welfarism 1970–1979: Heath, Wilson, Callaghan.&quot; in &quot;Disjunctive Prime Ministerial Leadership in British Politics&quot; (Palgrave Pivot, Cham, 2020). 51–83.
* Childs, David. &quot;Britain since 1945: A Political History&quot; (7th edn 2012), pp. 190–212.
* Conroy, Harry. &quot;James Callaghan&quot; (Haus, 2006).
* Davies, Andrew. &quot;To build a New Jerusalem : the British Labour Party from Keir Hardie to Tony Blair&quot; (1996) online
* Dell, Edmund. &quot;The Chancellors: A History of the Chancellors of the Exchequer, 1945–90&quot; (HarperCollins, 1997), pp. 304–46, covers his term as Chancellor.
* Denver, David, and Mark Garnett. &quot;British General Elections Since 1964: Diversity, Dealignment, and Disillusion&quot; (2014) 
* Derbyshire, Dennis. &quot;Politics in Britain: From Callaghan to Thatcher (Political Spotlights)&quot;. (Chambers, 1990).
* Deveney, Paul J. &quot;Callaghan&#x27;s Journey to Downing Street&quot; (2010), scholarly study to 1976.
* Donoughue, Bernard. &quot;Prime Minister: Conduct of Policy Under Harold Wilson and James Callaghan, 1974–79&quot; (Jonathan Cape, 1987).
* Dorey, Peter. &quot;&#x27;Should I stay or should I go?&#x27;: James Callaghan&#x27;s decision not to call an autumn 1978 general election&quot;. &quot;British Politics&quot; (2016) 11#1 pp 95–118. abstract 
* Dorey, Peter. A Rather Novel Constitutional Experiment&#x27;: The Formation of the 1977–8 &#x27;Lib–Lab Pact. &quot;Parliamentary History&quot; 30#3 (2011): 374–394.
* Donoughue, Bernard. &quot;The Heat of the Kitchen&quot; (Politico&#x27;s Publishing, 2003).
* Hay, Colin. &quot;The winter of discontent thirty years on.&quot; &quot;The Political Quarterly&quot; 80.4 (2009): 545–552.
* Hennessy, Peter. &quot;The Prime Minister: the office and its holders since 1945&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan, 2001), pp. 376–96.
* Hickson, Kevin, and Jasper Miles, eds. &quot;James Callaghan: An Underrated Prime Minister?&quot; (Biteback, 2020) 
* Hickson, Kevin, and Anthony Seldon, eds. &quot;New Labour, Old Labour: The Wilson and Callaghan Governments 1974–1979&quot; (Routledge, 2004).
* Holmes, Martin. &quot;The Labour government, 1974–79: political aims and economic reality&quot; (Macmillan, 1985).
* Hopkins, Stephen. &quot;The memoir writing of the Wilson and Callaghan governments: The Labour Party and constitutional policy in Northern Ireland.&quot; in &quot;The Northern Ireland Troubles in Britain&quot; (Manchester University Press, 2016) pp. 57–72.
* Hughes, R. Gerald, et al. &quot;Labour&#x27;s Defence and Foreign Policy, 1976–79.&quot; in &quot;James Callaghan: An Underrated Prime Minister?&quot; (Biteback, 2020) pp. 235–258.
* Jefferys, Kevin (ed). &quot;Leading Labour&quot; (I. B. Tauris, 1999).
* Jones, Tudor. &quot;Remaking the Labour Party: From Gaitskell to Blair&quot; (Routledge, 2005).
* Kirkup, Jonathan, ed. &quot;The Lib-Lab Pact: A Parliamentary Agreement, 1977–78&quot; (2014) 
* Leonard, Dick. &quot;James Callaghan—Labour&#x27;s conservative.&quot; in &quot;A Century of Premiers: Salisbury to Blair&quot; (2005) pp, 282–299. online
* Marsh, Steve. &quot;Wilson, Callaghan and the management of Anglo-American relations, 1974–1976.&quot; &quot;Contemporary British History&quot; (2020): 1–26. https://doi.org/10.1080/13619462.2020.1785292 
* Meredith, Stephen. &quot;The oratory of James Callaghan.&quot; in &quot;Labour orators from Bevan to Miliband&quot; (Manchester University Press, 2016) online .
* Meredith, Stephen. &quot;Labours old and new: the parliamentary right of the British Labour Party 1970–79 and the roots of New Labour&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2008).
* Morgan, Kenneth O. &quot;James Callaghan, 1976–1979.&quot; in &quot;From New Jerusalem to New Labour: British Prime Ministers from Attlee to Blair&quot; ( Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2010) pp. 123–143. online
* Morgan, Kenneth O. &quot;United Kingdom: a comparative case study of labour prime ministers Attlee, Wilson, Callaghan and Blair.&quot; &quot;The Journal of Legislative Studies&quot; 10.2–3 (2004): 38–52. https://doi.org/10.1080/135723304200032220
* Morgan, Kenneth O. &quot;Callaghan: A Life&quot; (Oxford University Press, 1997). online 
* Morgan, Kenneth O. &quot;Michael Foot: a life&quot; (HarperPress, 2007) online
* Morgan, Kenneth O. &quot;Britain since 1945: The People&#x27;s Peace&quot; (2nd edn 2001), pp. 397–433.
* Pryce, Sue. &quot;James Callaghan 1976–9: A Caretaker.&quot; in Sue Pryce, &quot;Presidentializing the Premiership&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan, 1997), pp. 147–162.
* Rodgers, William. &quot;Government under Stress. Britain&#x27;S Winter of Discontent 1979&quot;. &quot;The Political Quarterly&quot; 55#2 (1984): 171–179.
* Rogers, Chris. &quot;Economic policy and the problem of sterling under Harold Wilson and James Callaghan.&quot; &quot;Contemporary British History&quot; 25#3 (2011): 339–363.
* Rosen, Greg. &quot;Dictionary of Labour Biography&quot; (Politico&#x27;s Publishing, 2001).
* Rosen, Greg. &quot;Old Labour to New&quot; (Politico&#x27;s Publishing, 2005).
* Shepherd, John. &quot;The Fall of the Callaghan Government, 1979.&quot; in &quot;How Labour Governments Fall: From Ramsay Macdonald to Gordon Brown&quot; (London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2013). 113–140.
* Shepherd, John. &quot; Crisis? what crisis? : the Callaghan government and the British winter of discontent&quot; (Manchester University Press, 2013).
* Silverwood, James, and Peter Wolstencroft. &quot;The Ruskin Speech and Great Debate in English education, 1976–1979: A study of motivation.&quot; &quot;British Educational Research Journal&quot; 49.4 (2023): 766–781 on Callaghan&#x27;s speech at Ruskin College, Oxford in October 1976. online
* Sked, Alan and Chris Cook. &quot;Post-War Britain: A Political History&quot; (4th edn 1993), pp. 312–28.
* Thomas, James. &quot;&#x27;Bound in by history&#x27;: The Winter of Discontent in British politics, 1979–2004.&quot; &quot;Media, Culture &amp; Society&quot; 29#2 (2007): 263–283.
* Turner, Alwyn. &quot;Crisis? What Crisis?: Britain in the 1970s&quot; (2013), pp. 181–204.
* Wass, Douglas. &quot;Decline to Fall: The Making of British Macro-economic Policy and the 1976 IMF Crisis&quot; (2008) 

=== Memoirs ===
* Healey, Denis. &quot;The Time of My Life&quot;. Michael Joseph, 1989.
==External links==

* More about James Callaghan on the Downing Street website.
* An interview with Chancellor Callaghan after an IMF interview at Rio, Brazil
* Official portrait of James Callaghan by David Griffiths 
* &#x27;Prime Ministers in the Post-War World: James Callaghan&#x27;, lecture by Kenneth O. Morgan at Gresham College on 5 June 2007 (with video and audio files available for download)
* 
*Bronze bust of James Callaghan in the UK Parliamentary Collection





|-


|-


|-


|-


|-


|-


|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="0" end="51" title="James Callaghan" label="Leonard James Callaghan, Baron Callaghan of Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="103" end="116" title="James Callaghan" label="Jim Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="146" end="158" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="184" end="220" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615378" start="243" end="269" title="Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="Leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546165" start="340" end="362" title="Great Offices of State" label="Great Offices of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="386" end="413" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="433" end="447" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="470" end="487" title="Foreign Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="516" end="536" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="598" end="608" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q457271" start="747" end="757" title="Lieutenant (navy)" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="765" end="775" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="823" end="833" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="841" end="854" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="1945 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7724649" start="944" end="961" title="Attlee government" label="Attlee government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477319" start="967" end="990" title="parliamentary secretary" label="parliamentary secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722280" start="1263" end="1276" title="1951 United Kingdom general election" label="1951 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q25183583" start="1416" end="1420" title="1960 Labour Party deputy leadership election" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467480" start="1439" end="1443" title="1963 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q334073" start="1465" end="1477" title="George Brown, Baron George-Brown" label="George Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="1497" end="1510" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q220208" start="1567" end="1580" title="1964 United Kingdom general election" label="1964 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="1769" end="1788" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575344" start="1809" end="1827" title="speculative attack" label="speculative attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="1836" end="1850" title="pound sterling" label="pound sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q188532" start="1914" end="1934" title="Bretton Woods system" label="Bretton Woods system"/>
<link wikidata="Q115811656" start="2017" end="2044" title="1967 sterling devaluation" label="devalued the pound sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q690413" start="2192" end="2222" title="Operation Banner" label="operations of the British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482143" start="2238" end="2264" title="Royal Ulster Constabulary" label="police in Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071923" start="2295" end="2322" title="O&amp;#x27;Neill ministry" label="Northern Ireland government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443523" start="2350" end="2364" title="Second Shadow Cabinet of Harold Wilson" label="Shadow Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q119524" start="2460" end="2473" title="February 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="1974 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="2614" end="2634" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931610" start="2716" end="2731" title="1975 United Kingdom European Communities membership referendum" label="1975 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467481" start="2857" end="2887" title="1976 Labour Party leadership election" label="defeated five other candidates"/>
<link wikidata="Q21406588" start="3221" end="3252" title="confidence and supply agreement" label="confidence and supply agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="3262" end="3275" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247283" start="3404" end="3424" title="Winter of Discontent" label="Winter of Discontent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395662" start="3454" end="3491" title="1979 Scottish devolution referendum" label="referendum on devolution for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="3526" end="3539" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579001" start="3550" end="3573" title="1979 vote of no confidence in the Callaghan ministry" label="motion of no-confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q918450" start="3699" end="3712" title="1979 United Kingdom general election" label="1979 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="3746" end="3763" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741536" start="3917" end="3941" title="Leader of the Opposition (United Kingdom)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q67477657" start="4124" end="4154" title="Father of the House (United Kingdom)" label="Father of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="4217" end="4231" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061672" start="4331" end="4366" title="List of prime ministers of the United Kingdom by age" label="longest-lived former prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="4420" end="4440" title="British Armed Forces" label="British Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="4485" end="4495" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546165" start="4561" end="4583" title="Great Offices of State" label="Great Offices of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168643" start="4679" end="4685" title="Copnor" label="Copnor"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="4687" end="4697" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="4808" end="4822" title="Irish Catholic" label="Irish Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="4865" end="4883" title="Great Irish Famine" label="Great Irish Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="4891" end="4894" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="4974" end="4984" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q461167" start="5175" end="5194" title="Chief Petty Officer" label="Chief Petty Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="5275" end="5282" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5567" end="5582" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193053" start="5607" end="5632" title="HMS Agincourt (1913)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Agincourt&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607721" start="5679" end="5689" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Coastguard" label="Coastguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q921326" start="5726" end="5733" title="Brixham" label="Brixham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="5737" end="5742" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453246" start="5956" end="5979" title="first Labour government" label="first Labour government"/>
<link wikidata="Q736526" start="6083" end="6092" title="Shilling (British coin)" label="shillings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797198" start="6413" end="6449" title="Mayfield School, Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth Northern Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034804" start="6653" end="6667" title="Inland Revenue" label="Inland Revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q213180" start="6671" end="6680" title="Maidstone" label="Maidstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="6684" end="6688" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="6839" end="6850" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="6874" end="6887" title="Civil Service" label="Civil Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034814" start="7395" end="7426" title="Inland Revenue Staff Federation" label="Inland Revenue Staff Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870827" start="7576" end="7590" title="Audrey Moulton" label="Audrey Moulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q470890" start="7709" end="7721" title="Harold Laski" label="Harold Laski"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091265" start="7763" end="7791" title="National Executive Committee of the Labour Party" label="National Executive Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="7815" end="7841" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8021" end="8033" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315289" start="8176" end="8195" title="reserved occupation" label="reserved occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778989" start="8232" end="8260" title="Royal Navy Volunteer Reserve" label="Royal Navy Volunteer Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="8388" end="8400" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374298" start="8428" end="8455" title="Royal Naval Hospital Haslar" label="Royal Naval Hospital Haslar"/>
<link wikidata="Q936263" start="8459" end="8466" title="Gosport" label="Gosport"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="8554" end="8563" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="8567" end="8576" title="Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278174" start="8717" end="8734" title="East Indies Fleet" label="East Indies Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q253555" start="8748" end="8762" title="escort carrier" label="escort carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268201" start="8763" end="8787" title="HMS Activity (D94)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Activity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q457271" start="8821" end="8831" title="lieutenant (navy)" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q262741" start="9082" end="9095" title="Cardiff South (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cardiff South"/>
<link wikidata="Q333919" start="9190" end="9203" title="George Thomas, 1st Viscount Tonypandy" label="George Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="9378" end="9385" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="9512" end="9524" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q622365" start="9532" end="9538" title="VE Day" label="VE Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="9784" end="9798" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q262741" start="9883" end="9896" title="Cardiff South (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cardiff South"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="9909" end="9930" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="1945 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="10035" end="10047" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798626" start="10052" end="10068" title="Arthur Evans (politician)" label="Sir Arthur Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763587" start="10369" end="10388" title="Anglo-American loan" label="Anglo-American loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383019" start="10417" end="10426" title="Keep Left (pamphlet)" label="Keep Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="10679" end="10683" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139038" start="10771" end="10823" title="Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Transport" label="Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722296" start="10830" end="10843" title="Alfred Barnes (Labour politician)" label="Alfred Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328304" start="10965" end="10979" title="zebra crossing" label="zebra crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864" start="11007" end="11022" title="Cat&amp;#x27;s eye (road)" label="cat&amp;#x27;s eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12408992" start="11312" end="11366" title="Parliamentary and Financial Secretary to the Admiralty" label="Parliamentary and Financial Secretary to the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="11418" end="11435" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="11537" end="11547" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="11646" end="11656" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722280" start="11744" end="11765" title="1951 United Kingdom general election" label="1951 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517397" start="11986" end="11998" title="Gaitskellite" label="Gaitskellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q25183583" start="12284" end="12291" title="1960 Labour Party deputy leadership election" label="in 1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q337380" start="12298" end="12312" title="Hugh Gaitskell" label="Hugh Gaitskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467480" start="12387" end="12405" title="1963 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="leadership contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="12424" end="12437" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="12536" end="12548" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q128976" start="12564" end="12581" title="Alec Douglas-Home" label="Alec Douglas-Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="12653" end="12669" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q220208" start="12692" end="12708" title="1964 United Kingdom general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="12878" end="12891" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="12997" end="13024" title="chancellor of the Exchequer" label="chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q333275" start="13175" end="13192" title="Reginald Maudling" label="Reginald Maudling"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="13438" end="13457" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575344" start="13520" end="13538" title="speculative attack" label="speculative attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q220788" start="13595" end="13606" title="devaluation" label="devaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q687591" start="14731" end="14748" title="capital gains tax" label="capital gains tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4078231" start="15270" end="15281" title="Rowland Baring, 3rd Earl of Cromer" label="Lord Cromer"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="15303" end="15318" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="15947" end="15964" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="15973" end="16000" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="16641" end="16654" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q385545" start="16835" end="16851" title="decimal currency" label="decimal currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q918430" start="17213" end="17234" title="1966 United Kingdom general election" label="1966 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032066" start="17619" end="17643" title="Selective Employment Tax" label="Selective Employment Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979160" start="17753" end="17777" title="National Union of Seamen" label="National Union of Seamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q332419" start="18456" end="18468" title="Michael Foot" label="Michael Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836767" start="18489" end="18518" title="Treasurer of the Labour Party" label="Treasurer of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="18577" end="18588" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="18641" end="18647" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="18652" end="18656" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="18991" end="18994" title="EEC" label="EEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718496" start="19535" end="19550" title="Alec Cairncross" label="Alec Cairncross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588803" start="19564" end="19591" title="Government Economic Service" label="Government Economic Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="20071" end="20084" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158815" start="20355" end="20369" title="Robert Sheldon" label="Robert Sheldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16294802" start="20754" end="20763" title="Stan Orme" label="Stan Orme"/>
<link wikidata="Q161081" start="20810" end="20819" title="deflation" label="deflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q332360" start="21261" end="21273" title="Denis Healey" label="Denis Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="21385" end="21401" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q323488" start="21699" end="21710" title="Roy Jenkins" label="Roy Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153790" start="21878" end="21910" title="Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1968" label="Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024095" start="22003" end="22015" title="Kenyan Asian" label="Kenyan Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q333362" start="22793" end="22804" title="Ian Gilmour" label="Ian Gilmour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278916" start="23100" end="23118" title="Race Relations Act 1968" label="Race Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q65052468" start="23268" end="23288" title="Race Relations Board" label="Race Relations Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="23768" end="23784" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638227" start="23825" end="23845" title="partition of Ireland" label="partition of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573630" start="23981" end="24010" title="1969 Northern Ireland riots" label="escalating sectarian violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017729" start="24039" end="24049" title="Ulster Protestants" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="24054" end="24062" title="Irish Catholics" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589274" start="24085" end="24115" title="Government of Northern Ireland (1921–1972)" label="Government of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q690413" start="24271" end="24297" title="Operation Banner" label="deploy British Army troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519515" start="24463" end="24473" title="B-Specials" label="B-Specials"/>
<link wikidata="Q944523" start="24504" end="24527" title="Ulster Defence Regiment" label="Ulster Defence Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="24861" end="24876" title="Provisional IRA" label="Provisional IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="24974" end="24986" title="The Troubles" label="The Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883936" start="25140" end="25154" title="Barbara Castle" label="Barbara Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q223729" start="25162" end="25173" title="White Paper" label="White Paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010436" start="25180" end="25198" title="In Place of Strife" label="In Place of Strife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247283" start="25550" end="25570" title="Winter of Discontent" label="Winter of Discontent"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="25666" end="25678" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q918442" start="25686" end="25707" title="1970 United Kingdom general election" label="1970 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460514" start="25775" end="25799" title="Shadow Foreign Secretary" label="Shadow Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q333193" start="25860" end="25874" title="Anthony Barber" label="Anthony Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="25953" end="25980" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q119524" start="26132" end="26148" title="February 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="26221" end="26238" title="Foreign Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="26274" end="26280" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069434" start="26297" end="26315" title="1974 Cypriot coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="a coup d&amp;#x27;etat"/>
<link wikidata="Q504081" start="26348" end="26368" title="Greek junta" label="Greek military junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q552189" start="26414" end="26427" title="Nikos Sampson" label="Nikos Sampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10292596" start="26506" end="26529" title="Cypriot intercommunal violence" label="inter-communal violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050999" start="26621" end="26642" title="Turkish invasion of Cyprus" label="launching an invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778594" start="26749" end="26773" title="Treaty of Guarantee (1960)" label="1960 Treaty of Guarantee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="26809" end="26811" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q116970" start="27150" end="27161" title="United Nations Buffer Zone in Cyprus" label="buffer zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q245831" start="27266" end="27285" title="Cyprus problem" label="remains partitioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="27404" end="27422" title="European Community" label="European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467422" start="27584" end="27595" title="Labour government 1974–79" label="the Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931610" start="27692" end="27726" title="1975 United Kingdom European Communities membership referendum" label="1975 European Community referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="27763" end="27774" title="Euroscepticism" label="eurosceptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="27902" end="27921" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="27925" end="27932" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="27983" end="27989" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257288" start="28034" end="28045" title="Denis Hills" label="Denis Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q48231" start="28105" end="28113" title="Idi Amin" label="Idi Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="28191" end="28196" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="28344" end="28353" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="28385" end="28401" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476357" start="28431" end="28456" title="HMS Endurance (1967)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Endurance&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="28612" end="28629" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992361" start="28735" end="28753" title="1982 invasion of the Falkland Islands" label="Argentine invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q301252" start="29694" end="29710" title="Anthony Crosland" label="Anthony Crosland"/>
<link wikidata="Q336534" start="29779" end="29790" title="Merlyn Rees" label="Merlyn Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q323488" start="29824" end="29835" title="Roy Jenkins" label="Roy Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q8882" start="29870" end="29906" title="President of the European Commission" label="President of the European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883936" start="29926" end="29940" title="Barbara Castle" label="Barbara Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233398" start="30036" end="30048" title="David Ennals" label="David Ennals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560230" start="30171" end="30195" title="1973–1975 recession" label="1973–75 global recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="30227" end="30236" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348950" start="30316" end="30345" title="1976 sterling crisis" label="faced with a financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q332360" start="30375" end="30387" title="Denis Healey" label="Denis Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="30399" end="30426" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="30501" end="30509" title="pound sterling" label="sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="30710" end="30719" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353397" start="30735" end="30764" title="Alternative Economic Strategy" label="Alternative Economic Strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="30819" end="30832" title="protectionism" label="protectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257587" start="31207" end="31242" title="Public Sector Borrowing Requirement" label="Public Sector Borrowing Requirement"/>
<link wikidata="Q578269" start="31250" end="31258" title="HM Treasury" label="Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="31881" end="31897" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q918508" start="31954" end="31975" title="October 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="October 1974 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437829" start="32112" end="32133" title="Scottish Labour Party (1976)" label="Scottish Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="32166" end="32185" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="32292" end="32305" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q333847" start="32313" end="32324" title="David Steel" label="David Steel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32339" end="32351" title="Lib–Lab pact#1977" label="Lib–Lab pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="32457" end="32480" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="32513" end="32524" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="32608" end="32618" title="devolution" label="devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982021" start="32787" end="32814" title="1979 Welsh devolution referendum" label="Welsh devolution referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395662" start="32860" end="32879" title="1979 Scottish devolution referendum" label="Scottish referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579001" start="33223" end="33244" title="1979 vote of no confidence in the Callaghan ministry" label="vote of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q918450" start="33341" end="33357" title="1979 United Kingdom general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550484" start="33574" end="33589" title="Social Contract (Britain)" label="social contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308177" start="33650" end="33664" title="wage restraint" label="wage restraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967090" start="33903" end="33928" title="National Enterprise Board" label="National Enterprise Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q664112" start="33989" end="34006" title="industrial policy" label="industrial policy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34225" end="34273" title="Labour government, 1974–1979#Major contributions" label="Labour government, 1974–1979#Major contributions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278917" start="34296" end="34319" title="Race Relations Act 1976" label="Race Relations Act 1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152654" start="34343" end="34373" title="Commission for Racial Equality" label="Commission for Racial Equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="34439" end="34451" title="nationalised" label="nationalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621563" start="34488" end="34508" title="British Shipbuilders" label="British Shipbuilders"/>
<link wikidata="Q918733" start="34546" end="34563" title="British Aerospace" label="British Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627864" start="34695" end="34709" title="Ruskin College" label="Ruskin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="34711" end="34717" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063241" start="34827" end="34844" title="maintained school" label="maintained school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979578" start="35034" end="35053" title="National curriculum" label="National curriculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160053" start="35147" end="35156" title="Peter Jay (diplomat)" label="Peter Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435978" start="35185" end="35224" title="British Ambassador to the United States" label="British Ambassador to the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923378" start="36236" end="36250" title="Vesta Victoria" label="Vesta Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960549" start="36269" end="36290" title="Waiting at the Church" label="Waiting at the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q521207" start="36318" end="36339" title="Trades Union Congress" label="Trades Union Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q735766" start="36426" end="36432" title="hubris" label="hubris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550484" start="36963" end="36977" title="Social Contract (Britain)" label="wage restraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247283" start="37328" end="37348" title="Winter of Discontent" label="Winter of Discontent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781360" start="37540" end="37561" title="Guadeloupe Conference" label="Guadeloupe Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="38040" end="38047" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="38641" end="38653" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="38670" end="38682" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="38744" end="38754" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="38772" end="38785" title="Daily Express" label="Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="38803" end="38822" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579001" start="38906" end="38941" title="1979 vote of no confidence in the Callaghan ministry" label="motion of no-confidence by one vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q918450" start="38985" end="39001" title="1979 United Kingdom general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="39051" end="39068" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467432" start="39104" end="39129" title="Labour Isn&amp;#x27;t Working" label="Labour Isn&amp;#x27;t Working"/>
<link wikidata="Q332360" start="40229" end="40241" title="Denis Healey" label="Denis Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q332419" start="40476" end="40488" title="Michael Foot" label="Michael Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467482" start="40520" end="40553" title="1980 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="November 1980 leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="40665" end="40676" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651306" start="40703" end="40718" title="AEI World Forum" label="AEI World Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q67477657" start="40806" end="40825" title="Father of the House (United Kingdom)" label="Father of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="40908" end="40938" title="Order of the Garter" label="Knight Companion of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q918472" start="40961" end="40982" title="1987 United Kingdom general election" label="1987 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="41129" end="41143" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="41168" end="41177" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="41234" end="41249" title="City of Cardiff" label="City of Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152204" start="41257" end="41282" title="South Glamorgan" label="County of South Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856200" start="41412" end="41425" title="Bank of Wales" label="Bank of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870827" start="41437" end="41443" title="Audrey Callaghan" label="Audrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349705" start="41476" end="41504" title="Great Ormond Street Hospital" label="Great Ormond Street Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="41565" end="41574" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q107190" start="41584" end="41593" title="Peter Pan" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81796" start="41628" end="41640" title="J. M. Barrie" label="J. M. Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169209" start="41824" end="41859" title="Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988" label="Copyright Designs &amp;amp; Patents Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="42334" end="42343" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="42404" end="42425" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="42874" end="42885" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q679045" start="42902" end="42918" title="Letters of last resort" label="The Human Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="43938" end="43948" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="44009" end="44021" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="44023" end="44040" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="44045" end="44055" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="44059" end="44076" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579602" start="44136" end="44166" title="Golden Jubilee of Elizabeth II" label="Golden Jubilee of Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q336162" start="44191" end="44213" title="Margaret Jay, Baroness Jay of Paddington" label="Margaret, Baroness Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="44247" end="44261" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="44339" end="44344" title="rugby football" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622727" start="44365" end="44378" title="Streatham-Croydon RFC" label="Streatham RFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870827" start="44444" end="44468" title="Audrey Callaghan" label="Audrey Elizabeth Moulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q336162" start="44627" end="44663" title="Margaret, Baroness Jay of Paddington" label="Margaret, Baroness Jay of Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160053" start="44683" end="44692" title="Peter Jay (diplomat)" label="Peter Jay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44703" end="44723" title="Michael Adler (doctor)" label="Professor Mike Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228669" start="44894" end="44901" title="Ringmer" label="Ringmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23293" start="44903" end="44914" title="East Sussex" label="East Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="45217" end="45224" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228669" start="45824" end="45831" title="Ringmer" label="Ringmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663548" start="45849" end="45864" title="lobar pneumonia" label="lobar pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="45866" end="45881" title="cardiac failure" label="cardiac failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="46059" end="46083" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="46165" end="46181" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="46266" end="46278" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q109119080" start="46377" end="46405" title="Peter Pan statue" label="&amp;quot;Peter Pan&amp;quot; statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349705" start="46441" end="46469" title="Great Ormond Street Hospital" label="Great Ormond Street Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="46517" end="46535" title="board of governors" label="board of governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="46542" end="46561" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449634" start="46590" end="46629" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q747856" start="46633" end="46651" title="Llandaff Cathedral" label="Llandaff Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="46655" end="46662" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q877530" start="46870" end="46881" title="Thatcherism" label="Thatcherism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="47304" end="47314" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q822384" start="47571" end="47588" title="Bernard Donoughue" label="Bernard Donoughue"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="47723" end="47736" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q93657" start="47774" end="47791" title="Kenneth O. Morgan" label="Kenneth O. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="47949" end="47966" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707775" start="48085" end="48094" title="Alan Sked" label="Alan Sked"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348950" start="48228" end="48248" title="1976 sterling crisis" label="1976 sterling crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460463" start="48251" end="48284" title="Shadow Cabinet of James Callaghan" label="Shadow Cabinet of James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q93657" start="55875" end="55892" title="Kenneth O. Morgan" label="Kenneth O. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q788375" start="55896" end="55911" title="Gresham College" label="Gresham College"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52279" wikidata="Q436712" url="?curid=52279" title="Ben Elton">
<text>Benjamin Charles Elton is a British comedian, actor, author, playwright, lyricist and director. He was a part of London&#x27;s alternative comedy movement of the 1980s and became a writer on the sitcoms &quot;The Young Ones&quot; and &quot;Blackadder&quot;, as well as continuing as a stand-up comedian on stage and television. His style in the 1980s was left-wing political satire. He has published many novels in dystopian, comedy, and crime genres, as well as written the musicals &quot;The Beautiful Game&quot; (2000), &quot;We Will Rock You&quot; (2002), &quot;Tonight&#x27;s the Night&quot; (2003), and &quot;Love Never Dies&quot; (2010).

==Early life and education==
Benjamin Charles Elton was born at University College Hospital in Fitzrovia, London, the son of Mary (née Foster), an English teacher from Cheshire, and physicist and educational researcher Professor Lewis Elton. He is a nephew of the historian Sir Geoffrey Elton and a third cousin of singer Olivia Newton-John. Elton&#x27;s father is from a German-Jewish family and Elton&#x27;s mother, who was raised in the Church of England, is of British background.

Elton grew up in Catford, South London, before moving with his family to Guildford, Surrey in 1968, where he became involved in amateur dramatics groups. Reflecting on those times at an event in Guildford in 2013, Elton said: 
Raised in a loving non-religious home, he is an atheist. Elton studied at Stillness Junior School and Godalming Grammar School in Surrey, before leaving home at age 16 to study theatre at South Warwickshire College in Stratford-upon-Avon, where he took and passed A-levels in English, History and Theatre Studies. In 1977 he went to study drama at the University of Manchester, where he met Rik Mayall and Ade Edmondson, and in 1980 he graduated with upper second-class honours.

== Work ==

===Television===
Upon university graduation in 1980, Elton joined the BBC and became their youngest ever scriptwriter.

His first television appearance came in 1981 as a stand-up performer on the BBC1 youth and music programme &quot;Oxford Road Show&quot;. His first TV success, at 23, came as co-writer of the television sitcom &quot;The Young Ones&quot;, in which he occasionally appeared.

In 1983/84 he wrote and appeared in Granada Television&#x27;s sketch show &quot;Alfresco&quot;, which was also notable for early appearances by Stephen Fry, Hugh Laurie, Emma Thompson and Robbie Coltrane. In 1985, Elton produced his first solo script for the BBC with his comedy-drama series &quot;Happy Families&quot;, starring Jennifer Saunders and Adrian Edmondson. Elton appeared in the fifth episode as a liberal prison governor. Shortly afterwards, he reunited Rik Mayall and Edmondson with their &quot;Young Ones&quot; co-star Nigel Planer for the showbiz send-up sitcom &quot;Filthy, Rich &amp; Catflap&quot;.

In 1985 Elton began his writing partnership with Richard Curtis. Together they wrote &quot;Blackadder II&quot;, &quot;Blackadder the Third&quot;, &quot;Blackadder Goes Forth&quot;, and a failed sitcom pilot for Madness. &quot;Blackadder&quot;, starring Rowan Atkinson, was a worldwide hit, winning four BAFTAs and an Emmy.

Elton and Curtis were inspired to write &quot;Blackadder Goes Forth&quot; upon finding World War I to be apt for a situation comedy. This series, which dealt with greater, darker themes than prior &quot;Blackadder&quot; episodes, was praised for Curtis&#x27;s and Elton&#x27;s scripts, in particular the final episode. Before writing the series, the pair read about the war and found that: 

Elton and Curtis also wrote Atkinson&#x27;s 1986 stage show &quot;The New Revue&quot;, and Mr. Bean&#x27;s &quot;exam&quot; episode.

Elton became a stand-up comedian primarily to showcase his own writing, but became one of Britain&#x27;s biggest live comedy acts. After a regular slot on &quot;Saturday Live&quot; – later moved and renamed &quot;Friday Night Live &quot; – which was seen as a UK version of the US&#x27;s &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;, he became the host of the programme.

In 1990 he starred in his own stand-up comedy and sketch series, &quot;Ben Elton: The Man from Auntie&quot;, which had a second series in 1994. (The title plays on &quot;The Man from UNCLE&quot;: &quot;Auntie&quot; is a nickname for the BBC.) In 1989 Elton won the Royal Television Society Writers&#x27; Award.

&quot;The Ben Elton Show&quot; (1998) followed a format similar to &quot;The Man from Auntie&quot; and featured Ronnie Corbett, a comedian of the old guard that the &quot;alternative comedians&quot; of the 1980s were the direct alternative to, as a regular guest. It was Elton&#x27;s last high-profile network programme in the UK as a stand-up comedian.

Elton wrote the six-part sitcom &quot;Blessed&quot;, starring Ardal O&#x27;Hanlon as a record producer, first broadcast on BBC1 in 2005. No further series was commissioned.

In April 2007, &quot;Get a Grip&quot;, a new show, began on ITV1. Featuring comic sketches similar to those on &quot;The Ben Elton Show&quot; and staged studio discussion between Elton and 23-year-old Alexa Chung, the show&#x27;s aim was to &quot;contrast Elton&#x27;s middle-aged viewpoint with Chung&#x27;s younger perspective&quot; (although Elton was responsible for the scripts).

In &quot;Third Way Magazine&quot;, Elton accused the BBC of allowing jokes about vicars but not imams. &quot;And I believe that part of it is due to the genuine fear that the authorities and the communities have about provoking the radical elements of Islam&quot;.

On 10 October 2010, Elton headlined the first episode of &quot;Dave&#x27;s One Night Stand&quot;.

Elton worked on &quot;Ben Elton Live From Planet Earth&quot;, a live one-hour comedy show which debuted on 8 February 2011 on the Nine Network in Australia. Live from Planet Earth was axed by the Nine Network on Wednesday 23 February 2011 after three episodes, despite having six commissioned. The show&#x27;s final airing rated 200,000 viewers.

In 2016 Elton wrote the sitcom &quot;Upstart Crow&quot;, parodying the writing and family life of William Shakespeare, and starring David Mitchell as Shakespeare. This programme ran for a second series in 2017, and a third series in 2018. A Christmas Special was aired on 21 December 2020.

In June 2023, Elton presented &quot;Ben Elton: The Great Railway Disaster&quot;, a Channel 4 documentary about rail privatisation.

====As writer and producer====
Elton wrote and produced &quot;The Thin Blue Line&quot;, a studio-based sitcom set in a police station, also starring Rowan Atkinson, which ran for two series in 1995 and 1996. A prime-time family show, its traditional format and characters won it the 1995 British Comedy Award and both the public and professional Jury Awards at Reims.

In 2012 a new sitcom for BBC1 was commissioned, written and produced by Elton starring David Haig. Filming for a full six-part series of the sitcom &quot;The Wright Way&quot; (formerly known as &quot;Slings and Arrows&quot;) was completed in late February 2013. It debuted in April 2013 to negative reviews.

Friday Night Live

Elton returned to live British television on Channel 4 on 21 October 2022 as &quot;Ringmaster&quot;/host of a revival of &quot;Friday Night Live&quot;, celebrating the 40th anniversary of the founding of Channel 4 and as part of their &quot;Truth and Dare&quot; season. Speaking to Adrian Chiles on BBC Radio 5 Live on broadcast day, Elton readily admitted that because of the fluid UK political situation, &quot;I honestly haven&#x27;t written the first five minutes yet!&quot;

=== Radio ===
Elton starred with Adrian Edmondson in a sitcom based on the song &quot;Teenage Kicks&quot; for BBC Radio 2. A television version of &quot;Teenage Kicks&quot; for ITV has been made; Elton appeared in the pilot but was replaced by Mark Arden when it went to series production.

=== Novels ===
* &quot;Stark&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Gridlock&quot; (1991)
* &quot;This Other Eden&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Popcorn&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Blast from the Past&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Inconceivable&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Dead Famous&quot; (2001)
* &quot;High Society&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Past Mortem&quot; (2004)
* &quot;The First Casualty&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Chart Throb&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Blind Faith&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Meltdown&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Two Brothers&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Time and Time Again&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Identity Crisis&quot; (2019)

=== Films ===
Elton appeared in amateur dramatic productions as a youth, notably as The Artful Dodger in the musical &quot;Oliver!&quot;

While in bit parts in his own TV series, he began professional film acting as CD in &quot;Stark&quot;, the Australian/BBC TV series adaptation of his novel, in 1993. This was directed by Nadia Tass and filmed in Australia.

Elton played Verges in Kenneth Branagh&#x27;s film adaptation of William Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Much Ado About Nothing&quot;, also in 1993.

==== Behind the camera ====
Elton wrote and directed the film adaptation of his novel &quot;Inconceivable&quot;, under the title &quot;Maybe Baby&quot; (2000) starring Hugh Laurie and Joely Richardson. It was a moderate UK success and distributed globally. The film was also nominated for a prize at Germany&#x27;s Emden Film Festival.

In 2015, Elton wrote a song for The Wiggles for the Wiggle Town DVD and CD: &quot;The Wonder of Wiggle Town&quot;.

In September 2016, filming began in Western Australia on &quot;Three Summers&quot;, a romantic comedy film written and directed by Elton, which was released in 2017.

Elton wrote &quot;All is True&quot;, released 2018, a speculative story of William Shakespeare&#x27;s years in Stratford-upon-Avon after his retirement from the theatre and move from London. Along with the filmcraft and acting, returning collaboration with Kenneth Branagh, &quot;All is True&quot; shows Elton giving a more serious and biographical perspective to some of the same characters who appear in &quot;Upstart Crow&quot;.

=== Musicals ===
Elton collaborated with Andrew Lloyd Webber on &quot;The Beautiful Game&quot; in 2000, writing the book and lyrics (Lloyd Webber wrote the music). &quot;The Beautiful Game&quot; won the London Critics Circle Award for best new musical.

He went on to write compilation shows featuring popular songs from the catalogues of pop/rock artists. The first was the musical &quot;We Will Rock You&quot; with music by Queen. Despite unfavourable early reaction, this was successful in the West End and won the 2003 Theatregoers&#x27; Choice Award for Best New Musical. It has since opened in the US, Australia, Russia, Spain, South Africa, Japan, Germany, Switzerland, Sweden, Canada, and The Netherlands. Elton also directed the 10th Anniversary Arena tour, in 2013. The musical ran for 12 years in London. The character of Pop was originally played by Elton&#x27;s &quot;The Young Ones&quot;, co-star, Nigel Planer.

His second compilation musical was &quot;Tonight&#x27;s the Night&quot;, based on the songs of Rod Stewart, which opened in London&#x27;s West End in November 2003.

Elton worked with Andrew Lloyd Webber on the musical &quot;Love Never Dies&quot;, which opened in London&#x27;s West End in 2010. It was the sequel to Lloyd Webber&#x27;s &quot;The Phantom of the Opera&quot; (1986).

Elton directed a new 20th anniversary tour of &quot;We Will Rock You&quot;, that opened in February 2022 and visited over 25 cities in the United Kingdom. He will also make his theatre debut as the Rebel Leader (previously known as Pop) in a production of the show in 2023 at the London Coliseum from 2 June to 27 August. The 3 main cast members from the touring production will also be starring.

Elton wrote and directed &quot;Twiggy The Musical&quot;, a jukebox musical based on the life of &quot;Twiggy,&quot; which had its world premiere at the Menier Chocolate Factory, London in September 2023 (originally titled &quot;Close-Up: The Twiggy Musical&quot;) and will tour the UK from September 2025.

=== Stage ===
Elton has written five West End plays.

* &quot;Gasping&quot; (1990) was first performed at the Theatre Royal Haymarket, London. It starred Hugh Laurie and featured the voice of Stephen Fry.
* &quot;Silly Cow&quot; (1991) again at the Theatre Royal Haymarket, London. It was written for and starred Dawn French.
* &quot;Popcorn&quot; (1996) was adapted for the stage and went on a UK tour. It also toured Australia in a production starring Marcus Graham and Nadine Garner in its Eastern-States seasons. &quot;Popcorn&quot; won the TMA Barclays Theatre Award for new play and the Olivier Award for comedy. The Paris production of &quot;Popcorn&quot; ran for a year and was nominated for seven Molière awards.
* &quot;Blast From the Past&quot; (1998) was also adapted for the stage and was produced at the West Yorkshire Playhouse.
* &quot;The Upstart Crow&quot;, like the TV series &quot;Upstart Crow&quot;, a comic version of William Shakespeare&#x27;s life and society, and sharing some of the same actors and characters, opened in London on 7 February 2020. Starring David Mitchell as Shakespeare and Gemma Whelan as Kate, the play was intended to run until 25 April 2020, but only ran up to mid-March, with the remainder cancelled as a result of restrictions put in place due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The play reopened in the West End at the Apollo Theatre for a ten-week season from 23 September until 3 December 2022.

=== Stand-up comedy ===
In 1981 Elton was hired by The Comedy Store in London as compère.

He made two albums of comedy, &quot;Motormouth&quot; (1987) and &quot;Motorvation&quot; (1988).

In 2005 Elton toured for the first time since 1997, touring the UK with &quot;Get a Grip&quot;. He toured Australia and New Zealand with the same show in 2006.

In September 2019, Elton embarked on a three-month UK stand-up tour, his first tour since 2005.

The New Zealand leg of the tour was interrupted in February 2020 by the COVID-19 pandemic. He resumed it over a year later once trans-Tasman quarantine-free travel was launched.

In 2022, his sell-out UK stand-up final show was held at the Palace Theatre Southend. It was filmed for broadcast on free to air, Channel 4. His stand up tour &quot;Authentic Stupidity&quot; is due to tour the UK and Ireland in 2024 and 2025.

== Recognition and awards ==
===Personal honours===
Elton received an honorary doctorate in 2004 from the University of Manchester.

In 2007 he was awarded an Honorary Rose for lifetime achievement at the Rose d&#x27;Or festival, and was also made a Companion of the Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts, in recognition of his work with students.

In September 2016, Elton was bestowed with a Doctor of Arts &quot;honoris causa&quot; by Edith Cowan University in Perth.

In June 2023 he was made a Member of the Order of Australia (AM), for &quot;significant service to the entertainment industry as a comedian, actor, writer and director&quot;.

===Awards for works===
Elton has won three BAFTAs for Best Comedy Series, for &quot;The Young Ones&quot;, &quot;Blackadder the Third&quot; and &quot;Blackadder Goes Forth&quot;. &quot;Popcorn&quot; and &quot;We Will Rock You&quot; each won an Olivier Award and &quot;The Beautiful Game&quot; was awarded the Best Musical at the Critics&#x27; Circle Awards. &quot;The Man From Auntie&quot; won him a Royal Television Society Writer&#x27;s Award and &quot;The Thin Blue Line&quot; won a British Comedy Award as well as Jury Award at Reims. The 2022 revival of Channel 4&#x27;s &quot; Friday Night Live &quot; won a Royal Television Society Award and BAFTA for Best Comedy Entertainment programme.

His books have won the Crime Writers Association Gold Dagger Award for Crime Fiction (&quot;Popcorn&quot;), the Swedish Kaliber Award (&quot;Popcorn&quot;), WH Smiths People&#x27;s Choice Fiction Award (&quot;High Society&quot;) and Prix Polar International Crime Writer Award (&quot;Amitiès Mortelles&quot; for &quot;Past Mortem&quot;, French edition).

==Personal life==
Elton first met Australian saxophone player Sophie Gare in 1986 while working in Melbourne. A year later in Edinburgh, a newly-single Elton rekindled their friendship and they became a couple. The two married in 1994 and have three children. They settled in North Fremantle, Western Australia, while maintaining a home in East Sussex, England. Elton holds dual British/Australian citizenship, the latter since 2004. In 2014 he speculated on a future move back to London when their children have completed their schooling.

Elton has been nominated three times for the television series &quot;Room 101&quot;, first by broadcaster Anne Robinson in 2001, secondly by comedian Mark Steel, and also by comedian Stewart Lee, who described Elton &quot;as ranking lower ethically than Osama bin Laden&quot;.

===Political views===
Elton champions left-wing political positions. Prior to the 1987 general election, Elton supported Red Wedge by participating in a comedy tour organised by the campaign.

Elton was a Labour Party supporter and was one of the biggest private financial donors to the party in 1998. Elton subsequently distanced himself from the party under Tony Blair, although in April 2015, he stated he was &quot;back with Labour&quot; for the general election.

Responding to criticism for writing a musical with Conservative Party supporter Andrew Lloyd Webber, Elton said, &quot;If I were to refuse to talk to Tories, I would narrow my social and professional scope considerably. If you judge all your relationships on a person&#x27;s voting intentions, I think you miss out on the varieties of life.&quot; Elton added, &quot;I would have loved a honeymoon period, but I&#x27;ve been irritating journos from the beginning. Originally I was knocked for being too left-wing, and now apparently I&#x27;ve sold out and I&#x27;m too right-wing, but all the time I&#x27;ve been being me, and that certainly isn&#x27;t the person I recognise in anything that&#x27;s written about me.&quot; He has denied being anti-establishment. He also said he was a socialist at a time when &quot;the media was on the whole slavishly worshipping of Thatcher&quot;. He said, &quot;I believe in the politics of Clement Attlee. I&#x27;m a Welfare State Labour voter.&quot;

Elton parodied himself in the sketch &quot;Benny Elton&quot; for &quot;Harry Enfield and Chums&quot; in 1994, using the style of Benny Hill to send up Elton&#x27;s &quot;right on&quot; socialist image as a politically correct spoilsport, chasing Page 3 models around a park to chastise them and tricking heterosexual couples into becoming homosexual.

==References==
==External links==
*theartsdesk Q&amp;A: Ben Elton (9 October 2010)
* Interview with Andrew Denton on ABC TV Australia
* BBC Comedy Guide – Ben Elton
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q436712" start="0" end="22" title="Ben Elton" label="Benjamin Charles Elton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736499" start="127" end="145" title="alternative comedy" label="alternative comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49022" start="209" end="223" title="The Young Ones (TV series)" label="The Young Ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q49019" start="240" end="250" title="Blackadder" label="Blackadder"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="355" end="364" title="Left-wing politics" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225114" start="365" end="381" title="political satire" label="political satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="415" end="423" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937792" start="438" end="443" title="Crime Fiction" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409697" start="490" end="508" title="The Beautiful Game (musical)" label="The Beautiful Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051695" start="529" end="545" title="We Will Rock You (musical)" label="We Will Rock You"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821404" start="566" end="590" title="Tonight&amp;#x27;s the Night (2003 musical)" label="Tonight&amp;#x27;s the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q155496" start="615" end="630" title="Love Never Dies (musical)" label="Love Never Dies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551343" start="710" end="737" title="University College Hospital" label="University College Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q121663" start="741" end="750" title="Fitzrovia" label="Fitzrovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="814" end="822" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q284098" start="875" end="886" title="Lewis Elton" label="Lewis Elton"/>
<link wikidata="Q89433" start="920" end="938" title="Geoffrey Elton" label="Sir Geoffrey Elton"/>
<link wikidata="Q185165" start="968" end="986" title="Olivia Newton-John" label="Olivia Newton-John"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="1018" end="1031" title="History of the Jews in Germany" label="German-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1086" end="1103" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q305029" start="1149" end="1156" title="Catford" label="Catford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394500" start="1158" end="1170" title="South London" label="South London"/>
<link wikidata="Q213465" start="1205" end="1214" title="Guildford" label="Guildford"/>
<link wikidata="Q455695" start="1260" end="1277" title="Amateur theatre" label="amateur dramatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="1407" end="1414" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576128" start="1461" end="1485" title="Godalming Grammar School" label="Godalming Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621933" start="1547" end="1573" title="Stratford-upon-Avon College" label="South Warwickshire College"/>
<link wikidata="Q189288" start="1577" end="1596" title="Stratford-upon-Avon" label="Stratford-upon-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q379609" start="1623" end="1631" title="GCE Advanced Level" label="A-levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q867530" start="1711" end="1735" title="Victoria University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q439095" start="1750" end="1760" title="Rik Mayall" label="Rik Mayall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160202" start="1765" end="1778" title="Ade Edmondson" label="Ade Edmondson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="1810" end="1836" title="upper second-class honours" label="upper second-class honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115441" start="2084" end="2100" title="Oxford Road Show" label="Oxford Road Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q49022" start="2186" end="2200" title="The Young Ones (TV series)" label="The Young Ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476957" start="2280" end="2298" title="Granada Television" label="Granada Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723905" start="2324" end="2332" title="Alfresco (TV series)" label="Alfresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="2388" end="2399" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49017" start="2401" end="2412" title="Hugh Laurie" label="Hugh Laurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q168724" start="2414" end="2427" title="Emma Thompson" label="Emma Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q296008" start="2432" end="2447" title="Robbie Coltrane" label="Robbie Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q746044" start="2542" end="2556" title="Happy Families (1985 TV series)" label="Happy Families"/>
<link wikidata="Q235415" start="2573" end="2590" title="Jennifer Saunders" label="Jennifer Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160202" start="2595" end="2611" title="Adrian Edmondson" label="Adrian Edmondson"/>
<link wikidata="Q439095" start="2711" end="2721" title="Rik Mayall" label="Rik Mayall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232106" start="2778" end="2790" title="Nigel Planer" label="Nigel Planer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449269" start="2828" end="2854" title="Filthy, Rich &amp;amp; Catflap" label="Filthy, Rich &amp;amp; Catflap"/>
<link wikidata="Q355300" start="2912" end="2926" title="Richard Curtis" label="Richard Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668056" start="2954" end="2967" title="Blackadder II" label="Blackadder II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887578" start="2981" end="3001" title="Blackadder the Third" label="Blackadder the Third"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740751" start="3015" end="3036" title="Blackadder Goes Forth" label="Blackadder Goes Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q745741" start="3074" end="3081" title="Madness (band)" label="Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q49019" start="3089" end="3099" title="Blackadder" label="Blackadder"/>
<link wikidata="Q23760" start="3116" end="3130" title="Rowan Atkinson" label="Rowan Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="3166" end="3171" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="3180" end="3184" title="Emmy" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740751" start="3233" end="3254" title="Blackadder Goes Forth" label="Blackadder Goes Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3274" end="3285" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583325" start="3487" end="3504" title="Goodbyeee" label="the final episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q484020" start="3670" end="3678" title="Mr. Bean" label="Mr. Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426631" start="3874" end="3887" title="Saturday Live (British TV programme)" label="Saturday Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="4007" end="4026" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4143" end="4173" title="Ben Elton: The Man from Auntie" label="Ben Elton: The Man from Auntie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264983" start="4242" end="4260" title="The Man from UNCLE" label="The Man from UNCLE"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385121" start="4390" end="4408" title="The Ben Elton Show" label="The Ben Elton Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q756377" start="4496" end="4510" title="Ronnie Corbett" label="Ronnie Corbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736499" start="4555" end="4576" title="alternative comedy" label="alternative comedians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926240" start="4777" end="4784" title="Blessed (TV series)" label="Blessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292714" start="4801" end="4820" title="Ardal O&amp;#x27;Hanlon" label="Ardal O&amp;#x27;Hanlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554290" start="4934" end="4944" title="Get A Grip (TV series)" label="Get a Grip"/>
<link wikidata="Q674608" start="4973" end="4977" title="ITV1" label="ITV1"/>
<link wikidata="Q236520" start="5114" end="5125" title="Alexa Chung" label="Alexa Chung"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785009" start="5308" end="5326" title="Third Way Magazine" label="Third Way Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193364" start="5380" end="5385" title="vicar" label="vicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q125482" start="5395" end="5399" title="imam" label="imam"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="5551" end="5556" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228187" start="5628" end="5655" title="Dave&amp;#x27;s One Night Stand" label="Dave&amp;#x27;s One Night Stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885601" start="5686" end="5718" title="Ben Elton Live From Planet Earth" label="Ben Elton Live From Planet Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q431102" start="5728" end="5732" title="Live television" label="live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="5794" end="5806" title="Nine Network" label="Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079780" start="6048" end="6060" title="Upstart Crow" label="Upstart Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="6109" end="6128" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q457134" start="6143" end="6157" title="David Mitchell (comedian)" label="David Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="6385" end="6394" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834376" start="6413" end="6431" title="rail privatisation" label="rail privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816205" start="6496" end="6514" title="The Thin Blue Line (British TV series)" label="The Thin Blue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985868" start="6890" end="6900" title="David Haig" label="David Haig"/>
<link wikidata="Q13775204" start="6957" end="6971" title="The Wright Way" label="The Wright Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406348" start="7413" end="7426" title="Adrian Chiles" label="Adrian Chiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q795588" start="7430" end="7446" title="BBC Radio 5 Live" label="BBC Radio 5 Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160202" start="7644" end="7660" title="Adrian Edmondson" label="Adrian Edmondson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400080" start="7697" end="7710" title="Teenage Kicks" label="Teenage Kicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="7721" end="7732" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694406" start="7764" end="7777" title="Teenage Kicks (TV series)" label="Teenage Kicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="7788" end="7791" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766588" start="7855" end="7865" title="Mark Arden" label="Mark Arden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601945" start="7925" end="7930" title="Stark (novel)" label="Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608665" start="7952" end="7960" title="Gridlock (novel)" label="Gridlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786221" start="7982" end="7997" title="This Other Eden (Elton novel)" label="This Other Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363552" start="8019" end="8026" title="Popcorn (novel)" label="Popcorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925388" start="8048" end="8067" title="Blast from the Past (novel)" label="Blast from the Past"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015192" start="8089" end="8102" title="Inconceivable (novel)" label="Inconceivable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898745" start="8124" end="8135" title="Dead Famous (novel)" label="Dead Famous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757007" start="8157" end="8169" title="High Society (novel)" label="High Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142911" start="8191" end="8202" title="Past Mortem" label="Past Mortem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734085" start="8224" end="8242" title="The First Casualty" label="The First Casualty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086705" start="8264" end="8275" title="Chart Throb" label="Chart Throb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926551" start="8297" end="8308" title="Blind Faith (novel)" label="Blind Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q131309732" start="8394" end="8413" title="Time and Time Again (novel)" label="Time and Time Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783187" start="8549" end="8566" title="The Artful Dodger" label="The Artful Dodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483458" start="8588" end="8595" title="Oliver!" label="Oliver!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601944" start="8693" end="8698" title="Stark (TV miniseries)" label="Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q532307" start="8790" end="8800" title="Nadia Tass" label="Nadia Tass"/>
<link wikidata="Q55294" start="8850" end="8865" title="Kenneth Branagh" label="Kenneth Branagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="8892" end="8911" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q550205" start="8925" end="8947" title="Much Ado About Nothing (1993 film)" label="Much Ado About Nothing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9105" end="9115" title="Maybe Baby (film)" label="Maybe Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q49017" start="9138" end="9149" title="Hugh Laurie" label="Hugh Laurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q234131" start="9154" end="9170" title="Joely Richardson" label="Joely Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409039" start="9339" end="9350" title="The Wiggles" label="The Wiggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34411664" start="9486" end="9499" title="Three Summers" label="Three Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q58313464" start="9608" end="9619" title="All is True (film)" label="All is True"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="9665" end="9684" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q189288" start="9701" end="9720" title="Stratford-upon-Avon" label="Stratford-upon-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q55294" start="9847" end="9862" title="Kenneth Branagh" label="Kenneth Branagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079780" start="10002" end="10014" title="Upstart Crow" label="Upstart Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="10064" end="10083" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409697" start="10093" end="10111" title="The Beautiful Game (musical)" label="The Beautiful Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051695" start="10412" end="10428" title="We Will Rock You (musical)" label="We Will Rock You"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="10449" end="10454" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="10520" end="10528" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="10687" end="10698" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="10724" end="10735" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q49022" start="10904" end="10918" title="The Young Ones (TV series)" label="The Young Ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232106" start="10935" end="10947" title="Nigel Planer" label="Nigel Planer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821404" start="10991" end="11015" title="Tonight&amp;#x27;s The Night (2003 musical)" label="Tonight&amp;#x27;s the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q182655" start="11045" end="11056" title="Rod Stewart" label="Rod Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="11134" end="11153" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q155496" start="11175" end="11190" title="Love Never Dies (musical)" label="Love Never Dies"/>
<link wikidata="Q382353" start="11293" end="11317" title="The Phantom of the Opera (1986 musical)" label="The Phantom of the Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051695" start="11385" end="11401" title="We Will Rock You (musical)" label="We Will Rock You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868965" start="11613" end="11628" title="London Coliseum" label="London Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q130548405" start="11762" end="11780" title="Twiggy The Musical" label="Twiggy The Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q229442" start="11833" end="11839" title="Twiggy" label="Twiggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817045" start="11883" end="11915" title="Menier Chocolate Factory" label="Menier Chocolate Factory, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q540426" start="12148" end="12171" title="Theatre Royal Haymarket" label="Theatre Royal Haymarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q49017" start="12192" end="12203" title="Hugh Laurie" label="Hugh Laurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="12230" end="12241" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q236309" start="12351" end="12362" title="Dawn French" label="Dawn French"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758193" start="12492" end="12505" title="Marcus Graham" label="Marcus Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031635" start="12510" end="12523" title="Nadine Garner" label="Nadine Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670654" start="12583" end="12586" title="TMA Awards" label="TMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q28470" start="12631" end="12644" title="Olivier Award" label="Olivier Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987042" start="12856" end="12880" title="West Yorkshire Playhouse" label="West Yorkshire Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q85808719" start="12890" end="12906" title="The Upstart Crow" label="The Upstart Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079780" start="12939" end="12951" title="Upstart Crow" label="Upstart Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="12978" end="12997" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q457134" start="13121" end="13135" title="David Mitchell (comedian)" label="David Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501158" start="13155" end="13167" title="Gemma Whelan" label="Gemma Whelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q84167106" start="13338" end="13355" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780361" start="13398" end="13412" title="Apollo Theatre" label="Apollo Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520352" start="13528" end="13544" title="The Comedy Store (London)" label="The Comedy Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q497240" start="13558" end="13565" title="Master of ceremonies" label="compère"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="13995" end="14012" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126200" start="14163" end="14186" title="Palace Theatre, Westcliff-on-Sea" label="Palace Theatre Southend"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="14232" end="14241" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="14452" end="14476" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q684965" start="14551" end="14574" title="Rose d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Rose d&amp;#x27;Or festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668871" start="14613" end="14652" title="Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts" label="Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="14742" end="14782" title="Honorary degree" label="Doctor of Arts &amp;quot;honoris causa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284960" start="14786" end="14808" title="Edith Cowan University" label="Edith Cowan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="14812" end="14817" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="14847" end="14879" title="Member of the Order of Australia" label="Member of the Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="15039" end="15044" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q28470" start="15239" end="15252" title="Laurence Olivier Awards" label="Olivier Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186885" start="15324" end="15351" title="Critics&amp;#x27; Circle Theatre Award" label="Critics&amp;#x27; Circle Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157223" start="15741" end="15758" title="Gold Dagger Award" label="Gold Dagger Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055450" start="16323" end="16338" title="North Fremantle" label="North Fremantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23293" start="16387" end="16398" title="East Sussex" label="East Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071022" start="16657" end="16665" title="Room 101 (British TV series)" label="Room 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q454347" start="16694" end="16707" title="Anne Robinson" label="Anne Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769824" start="16738" end="16748" title="Mark Steel" label="Mark Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615848" start="16771" end="16782" title="Stewart Lee" label="Stewart Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11900614" start="16904" end="16933" title="Left-wing populism" label="left-wing political positions"/>
<link wikidata="Q918472" start="16948" end="16969" title="1987 United Kingdom general election" label="1987 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305215" start="16987" end="16996" title="Red Wedge" label="Red Wedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="17071" end="17083" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="17226" end="17236" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="17316" end="17332" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="17386" end="17404" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="17415" end="17434" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="17903" end="17913" title="Right-wing politics" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="18120" end="18129" title="Socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="18203" end="18211" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="18263" end="18277" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155290" start="18290" end="18303" title="Welfare state in the United Kingdom" label="Welfare State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5668671" start="18396" end="18419" title="Harry Enfield and Chums" label="Harry Enfield and Chums"/>
<link wikidata="Q200228" start="18454" end="18464" title="Benny Hill" label="Benny Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674924" start="18571" end="18577" title="Page 3" label="Page 3"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52280" wikidata="Q1247411" url="?curid=52280" title="Perthshire">
<text>Perthshire (locally: ; ), officially the County of Perth, is a historic county and registration county in central Scotland. Geographically it extends from Strathmore in the east, to the Pass of Drumochter in the north, Rannoch Moor and Ben Lui in the west, and Aberfoyle in the south; it borders the counties of Inverness-shire and Aberdeenshire to the north, Angus to the east, Fife, Kinross-shire, Clackmannanshire, Stirlingshire and Dunbartonshire to the south and Argyllshire to the west.

Perthshire is known as the &quot;big county&quot;, or &quot;the Shire&quot;, due to its roundness and status as the fourth largest historic county in Scotland. It has a wide variety of landscapes, from the rich agricultural straths in the east, to the high mountains of the southern Highlands.

==History==
===Administrative history===
Perthshire&#x27;s origins as a shire (the area administered by a sheriff) are obscure, but it seems to have been created during the reign of David I (reigned 1124–1153).

The Sheriff of Perth had authority over several provinces, including Atholl, Breadalbane, Gowrie, Menteith and Strathearn. Over time, Scotland&#x27;s shires became more significant than the old provinces, with more administrative functions being given to the sheriffs. In 1667 Commissioners of Supply were established for each shire, which would serve as the main administrative body for the area until the creation of county councils in 1890. Following the Acts of Union in 1707, the English term &quot;county&quot; came to be used interchangeably with the older term &quot;shire&quot;.
Elected county councils were established in 1890 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889, taking most of the functions of the commissioners (which were eventually abolished in 1930). The burgh of Perth was deemed capable of managing its own affairs and so was excluded from the administrative area of the county council, although the county council still chose to base itself there. Perthshire County Council held its first official meeting on 22 May 1890 at Perth Sheriff Court, then also known as County Buildings, the courthouse (built 1819) which also served as the meeting place for the commissioners.

The 1889 Act also led to a review of boundaries, with exclaves being transferred to a county they actually bordered, and parishes which straddled more than one county being adjusted such that each parish was entirely in a single county. There were several such changes affecting the boundaries of Perthshire, notably including the exclaves of Culross and Tulliallan being transferred to Fife.

Reforms in 1930 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1929 saw the burgh of Perth brought within the administrative area of the county council, and merged the county councils of Perthshire and the neighbouring small county of Kinross-shire for most purposes. The two county councils continued to be elected as separate bodies, but operated together as the &quot;Perth and Kinross Joint County Council&quot;, serving the combined area of the two counties.
As part of the same reforms, the county council took over the functions of the abolished Perthshire Education Authority. The education authority had bought the former County and City Infirmary on York Place in Perth (completed 1838) in 1920 to serve as its headquarters; after 1930 it served as the headquarters of the joint county council, and was renamed County Offices.

Perthshire was abolished as an administrative area in 1975 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973. It was split between the Central and Tayside Regions:

*West Perthshire (the area west and south of Killin including Callander, Crianlarich and Aberfoyle) was included in the Stirling District of the Central Region.
*The parish of Muckhart was made part of Clackmannan District, also in the Central Region.
*Longforgan was included in the City of Dundee District, in the Tayside Region.
*The remainder of Perthshire was combined with Kinross-shire and the Angus parish of Kettins to form the Perth and Kinross District Council in Tayside.

The two-tier system introduced in 1975 was superseded by a system of unitary authorities in 1996. The districts of Tayside and Central Scotland all became unitary authorities, with Longforgan being transferred from Dundee to Perth and Kinross. The majority of historic Perthshire lies in Perth and Kinross. The exceptions are the southwestern part that is now in the Stirling council area and a few parishes that are now in Clackmannanshire. Perth and Kinross also contains some areas that were not historically in Perthshire, such as Kinross-shire. The lieutenancy areas in the area of historic Perthshire are mostly coterminous with the council areas, the exception being that the Stirling council area forms part of a larger Stirling and Falkirk lieutenancy. The boundaries of the historic county of Perthshire are still used for some limited official purposes connected with land registration, being a registration county.

===Coat of arms===
The coat of arms of the County of Perth appears to have been granted for use on the colours and standards of the volunteer and militia units of the county raised at the end of the eighteenth century. The Earl of Kinnoull, a native of Perthshire, and commanding officer of the Perthshire Gentlemen and Yeomanry Cavalry, was also Lord Lyon King of Arms at the time, and he presented the arms to the county in 1800. The grant document was discovered in the Lyon Office in 1890, and forwarded to the newly formed Perth County Council.

The shield is very similar to the Scottish royal arms, reflecting that Perthshire was the home county of the House of Dunkeld and contains the former royal capital, Scone. Further royal references are made on the canton, which shows Scone Palace surmounted by the Crown of Scotland. The crest is a Highland soldier, reflecting that the famous Black Watch were formed in the county. The supporters are an eagle and a warhorse, the former from the arms of the city of Perth.

===Burghs===
By the 1890s the county contained the following burghs, which were largely outside the county council&#x27;s jurisdiction:

*Royal Burgh of Perth (which was styled a city)
*Burgh of Auchterarder (formed 1894: reinstated as a royal burgh in 1951)
*Burgh of Aberfeldy (police burgh from 1887)
*Burgh of Abernethy (burgh of barony from 1458/9, police burgh from 1877)
*Burgh of Alyth (burgh of barony from 1488, police burgh from 1834)
*Burgh of Blairgowrie (burgh of barony 1634, police burgh 1833)
*Burgh of Rattray (police burgh 1873)
*Burgh of Callander (police burgh 1866)
*Burgh of Coupar Angus (burgh of barony 1607, police burgh 1852)
*Burgh of Crieff (burgh of barony 1674, burgh of regality 1687, police burgh 1864)
*Burgh of Doune (burgh of barony 1611, police burgh 1890)
*Burgh of Dunblane (burgh of regality of the Bishop of Dunblane 1442, police burgh 1870)

The Local Government (Scotland) Act 1929 divided burghs into two classes from 1930: large burghs, which were to gain extra powers from the county council, and small burghs which lost many of their responsibilities.

Of the twelve burghs in Perthshire, only Perth was made a large burgh. There were ten small burghs: Blairgowrie and Rattray being united into a single burgh. In 1947 Pitlochry was created a small burgh.
===Civil parishes===

In 1894 parish councils were established for the civil parishes, replacing the previous parochial boards. 
The parish councils were in turn replaced by district councils in 1930.

Following the boundary changes caused by the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889, the county contained the following civil parishes:

*Aberdaugie
*Aberfeldy
*Aberfoyle
*Abernethy
*Abernyte
*Alyth
*Ardoch
*Arngask
*Auchterarder
*Auchtergaven Moneydie
*Balquhidder
*Bankfoot
*Bendochy
*Blackford
*Blair Atholl
*Blairgowrie and Rattray
*Blairmacgregor
*Callander
*Caputh
*Cargill
*Clunie
*Collace
*Comrie
*Coupar Angus
*Crieff
*Dowally
*Dron
*Dull
*Dunbarney
*Dunblane and Lecropt
*Dunkeld and Dowally
*Dunning
*Errol
*Findo Gask
*Forgandenny
*Forteviot
*Fortingall
*Foss or Fossoway or Crook of Devon
*Fowlis Easter
*Fowlis Wester
*Glendevon
*Glen Shee
*Inchture
*Innerwick
*Killin
*Kilmadock
*Kilspindie
*Kincardine
*Kinclaven
*Kinfauns Kinfauns Castle
*Kinloch
*Kinnaird, Gowrie
*Kinnoull
*Kirkmichael
*Lethendy
*Little Dunkeld
*Logiealmond
*Logierait
*Longforgan
*Madderty
*Meigle
*Methven
*Moneydie and Auchtergaven
*Monzie or *Monzievaird and Strowan
*Moulin
*Muckhart
*Muthill
*Persie
*Perth
*Port of Menteith
*Blairgowrie and Rattray
*Redgorton
*Rhynd
*St Madoes
*St Martins
*Scone
*Stanley
*Strathfillian
*Strathloch
*Tenandry
*Tibbermore
*Trinity Gask
*Tullybelton
*Weem
===Districts===
In 1930 the &quot;landward&quot; area of the Local Government councils (the part outside of burgh boundaries) was divided into five districts, replacing the parish councils established in 1894:
*Central District
*Eastern District
*Highland District
*Perth District
*Western District

==Geography==

The county forms part of the Highland geographic area; it consists of predominantly mountainous and hilly land within the Grampian Mountains, interspersed with numerous lochs and glens. The highest point is Ben Lawers at 1,214 m (3,983 ft), making it the 10th highest peak in Scotland. Most towns are fairly small, with the larger ones being clustered in the flatter south-east of the county. In the far south along the borders with Clackmannanshhire and Kinross-shire lie the Ochil Hills, and in the south-east part of the Sidlaw Hills lie within the county, continuing on into Angus. Perthshire borders the Firth of Tay in the south-east, which provides access to the North Sea; along the north shore lies the Carse of Gowrie, an extremely flat area of land given over to agriculture. Within the Forth can be found the small island of Mugdrum.

===Rivers===
*River Ardle
*River Earn
*River Ericht
*River Farg
*River Forth
*River Garry
*River Isla
*River Tay
*River Teith
*River Tummel

===Lochs and Reservoirs===

*Cally Loch
*Carsebreck Loch
*Castlehill Reservoir
*Cocksburn Reservoir (&quot;shared with Stirlingshire&quot;)
*Dowally Loch
*Drumore Loch
*Dubh Lochan
*Dupplin Loch
*Fingask Loch
*Glas Finglas Reservoir
*Glenfarg Reservoir (&quot;shared with Kinross-shire&quot;)
*Glenquey Resrvoir
*Glensherup Reservoir
*Laird&#x27;s Loch
*Lake of Menteith
*Little Loch Skiach
*Loch Achray
*Loch an Daimh
*Loch an Duin
*Loch Ard
*Loch Beanie
*Loch Benachally
*Loch Bollachan
*Loch Broom
*Loch Chon
*Loch Con
*Loch Crannach
*Loch Creagh
*Loch Curran
*Loch Derculich
*Loch Dhu
*Loch Doine
*Loch Drunkie
*Loch Earn
*Loch Eigeach
*Loch Ericht (&quot;shared with Inverness-shire&quot;)
*Loch Errochty
*Loch Essan
*Loch Farleyer
*Loch Fender
*Loch Finnart
*Loch Freuchie
*Loch Garry
*Loch Glassie
*Loch Hoil
*Loch Iubhair
*Loch Katrine (&quot;shared with Dunbartonshire&quot;)
*Loch Kennard
*Loch Kinardochy
*Loch Laddon (&quot;shared with Argyllshire&quot;)
*Loch Laggan
*Loch Lednock Reservoir
*Loch Loch
*Loch Lubnaig
*Loch Lyon
*Loch Macanrie
*Loch Maragan
*Loch Mhairc
*Loch Monaghan
*Loch Monzievaird
*Loch na Bà
*Loch na Brae
*Loch nan Eun
*Loch of Belloch
*Loch of Butterstone
*Loch of Clunie
*Loch of Craiglush
*Loch of Drumellie
*Loch of Lowes
*Loch Ordie
*Loch Oss
*Loch Rannoch
*Loch Rusky
*Loch Scoly
*Loch Skiach
*Loch Tay
*Loch Tilt
*Loch Tinker
*Loch Tummel
*Loch Turret Reservoir
*Loch Valigan
*Loch Venachar
*Loch Voil
*Loch Watston
*Lochan a&#x27; Chait
*Lochan a&#x27; Mhàidseir
*Loch Balloch
*Lochan Caol Fada
*Lochan Coire na Mèinne
*Lochan Creag a&#x27; Mhadaidh
*Lochan Ghiubhais
*Lochan Lairig Laoigh
*Lochan Lòin nan Donnlaich
*Lochan Mhàim nan Carn
*Lochan Mon&#x27; an Fhiadhain
*Lochan na Beinne
*Lochan na Làirige
*Lochan nam Breac
*Lohan nan Cat
*Lochan Oisinneach
*Lochan Oisinneach Mòr
*Lochan Ruighe nan-Sligean
*Lochan Spling
*Lochan Sròn Smeur
*Lochan Uaine
*Lossburn Reservoir
*Lower Glendevon Reservoir
*Lower Rhynd
*Methven Loch
*Mill Dam
*Monk Myre
*Pitcairnie Loch
*Pitcarmick Loch
*Pond of Drummond
*Rae Loch
*Redmyre Loch
*Rotmell Loch
*Seamaw Loch
*Stronuich Reservoir
*Stormont Loch
*Upper Glendevon Reservoir (&quot;shared with Clackmannanshire&quot;)
*Upper Rhynd
*Waltersmuir Reservoir
*White Loch
*White Moss Loch
===Mountains===
*Ben Lawers
*Ben Vorlich
*Ben Mhor
*Ben Vrackie
*Beinn a&#x27; Ghlò
*Schiehallion

===Glens and straths===

*Glen Almond
*Glen Isla
*Glen Shee
*Glen Garry
*Glen Tilt
*Glen Bruar
*Glen Fincastle
*Glen Errochty
*Glen Rannoch
*Glen Lyon
*Glen Lochay
*Glen Dochart
*Strathmore
*Strath Ardle
*Strath Braan
*Strath Tay
*Strath Tummel
*Strath Fillan
*Strath Earn
==Settlements==



*Aberargie
*Aberdalgie
*Aberfeldy
*Aberfoyle
*Abermyte
*Abernethy
*Abernyte
*Aberuthven
*Achalader
*Achnafauld
*Acharn
*Airntully
*Aldclune
*Almondbank
*Alyth
*Amulree
*Ardeonaig
*Ardler
*Ardtalnaig
*Auchterarder
*Balbeggie
*Ballinluig
*Balquhidder
*Bankfoot
*Blackford
*Blair Atholl
*Blairgowrie
*Braco
*Bridge of Balgie
*Bridge of Earn
*Bridge of Tilt
*Burrelton
*Callander
*Cambuskenneth
*Campmuir
*Caputh
*Carpow
*Clunie
*Collace
*Cottown
*Coupar Angus
*Crianlarich
*Dunkeld and Birnam
*Comrie
*Craigie
*Crieff
*Dalguise
*Deanston
*Doune
*Dowally
*Dull
*Dunblane
*Dunkeld
*Dunning
*Edradynate
*Errol
*Fearnan
*Findo Gask
*Finegand
*Forgandenny
*Forteviot
*Fortingall
*Fowlis Easter
*Fowlis Wester
*Gartmore
*Glencarse
*Grandtully
*Grange
*Greenloaning
*Guildtown
*Harrietfield
*Huntingtower and Ruthvenfield
*Inchmagrannachan
*Inchture
*Inchyra
*Inveraman
*Invergowrie
*Invermay
*Kenmore
*Kettins
*Killiecrankie
*Killin
*Kilspindie
*Kinloch, Blairgowrie
*Kinloch, Coupar Angus
*Kinlochard
*Kinloch Rannoch
*Kinnaird, Atholl
*Kinnaird, Gowrie
*Kinorssie
*Kirkmichael
*Kirkton
*Lawers
*Leetown
*Lochearnhead
*Logierait
*Longforgan
*Luncarty
*Madderty
*Meigle
*Meikleour
*Methven
*Moneydie
*Monzievaird
*Murthly
*Muthill
*Old Blair
*Perth
*Piperdam
*Pitcairngreen
*Pitkeathly Wells
*Pitlochry
*Pool of Muckhart
*Powmill
*Rait
*Rattray
*Redgorton
*Rhynd
*St Fillans
*St Madoes
*Scone
*Spittal of Glenshee
*Spittalfield
*Stanley
*Strathtay
*Strathyre
*Thornhill
*Tibbermore
*Tullibardine
*Tyndrum
*Waterloo
*Weem
*Wolfhill
*Woodside


==Transport==

The Highland Main Line railway line connects Perth to Inverness, and in the far west the West Highland Line criss-crosses the Perthshire-Argyllshire boundary. Other lines in the south-east link Perth to the towns of Fife and Stirlingshire.

==Parliamentary constituencies==
Following the Act of Union, Perthshire returned members to the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom from 1708.

===1707–1885===
*The Royal Burgh of Perth originally formed part of the Perth burghs constituency along with burghs in Fife and Forfarshire. The Representation of the People (Scotland) Act 1832 made Perth a separate burgh constituency.
*The remainder of the county returned a single member as the parliamentary county of Perthshire. The parishes of Tulliallan, Culross, Muckhart, and the Perthshire portions of the parishes of Logie and Fossaway were annexed to constituency of Clackmannanshire and Kinross in 1832.

===1885–1918===
In 1885 seats in the House of Commons were redistributed: Perthshire received three seats.
*Perth remained a burgh constituency.
*Perthshire Eastern
*Perthshire Western

===1918–1975===
In 1918 there was a further redistribution. Perthshire was combined with Kinross-shire to form a parliamentary county, divided into two constituencies:

*Perth constituency consisted of the burgh of Perth, the former Eastern constituency and part of the Western constituency. In 1950 it was renamed Perth and East Perthshire. The area included in the constituency was defined in 1948 and 1970 as the burghs of Perth, Abernethy, Alyth, Blairgowrie and Rattray and Coupar Angus; and the Eastern and Perth districts of the county of Perth.
*Kinross and Western Perthshire: the constituency consisted of the entire County of Kinross, the burghs of Aberfeldy, Auchterarder, Callander, Crieff, Doune, Dunblane and Pitlochry; and the Central, Highland and Western districts of the county of Perth.

These boundaries continued in use until 1983, when new constituencies were formed based on the Local Government regions and districts created in 1975.

=== 1975–2005 ===
Perthshire was represented in House of Commons of the United Kingdom from 1975 to 2005.
=== 2005–present ===
Perthshire has two constituencies and two Members of Parliament.

* Ochil and South Perthshire
* Perth and North Perthshire

==Notable places==

*Ashintully Castle
*Balvaird Castle
*Birnam Wood and Dunsinane Hill, famous from Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Macbeth&quot;
*Blair Castle
*Cateran Trail
*Dirnanean House
*Drummond Castle
*Dunkeld Cathedral
*Edradour Distillery
*Gleneagles Hotel
*The Hermitage
*Kindrogan House
*Scone Palace
*Near Strathtay and Strathmore, where many four-poster stone formations can be found
==Notable people==

* Archbishop Patrick Adamson
* Duke of Atholl
* James Bannerman
* Anne Fraser Bon
* Edward Braddock
* Sir Archibald Campbell, 1st Baronet
* Baron Cameron of Balhousie
* James Croll
* Alan Cumming
* Sir Charles Douglas
* David Douglas
* Daniel Dow
* Duleep Singh
* Alexander Duff
* Thomas Duncan
* Adam Ferguson
* William Flockhart
* Duncan Forbes
* Niel Gow
* James Graham, 1st Marquess of Montrose
* Thomas Graham, 1st Baron Lynedoch
* Stephen Hendry
* Lady of Lawers
* Alexander Leslie, 1st Earl of Leven
* Alexander Mackenzie
* Dougie MacLean
* John Macleod
* Ewan McGregor
* Sir Charles Menzies
* Lord George Murray
* Sir George Murray
* Baron Reid
* J. K. Rowling
* James Small
* Major-General John Small
* William Small
* Rory Stewart
* Magdalene Stirling
* Robert Stirling
* George Thompson, recipient of the Victoria Cross
* John Sen Inches Thomson
* Dr William Marshall
==Schools==

*Ardvreck School
*The Community School of Auchterarder
*Blairgowrie High School
*Breadalbane Academy
*Craigclowan Preparatory School
*Dollar Academy
*Glenalmond College
*Inch view primary and nursery school
*Kilgraston School
*Morrison&#x27;s Academy
*Perth Academy
*Perth Grammar School
*Perth High School
*Pitlochry High School
*Rattray Primary School
*Strathallan School
*Strathearn Community Campus
==See also==

*Earl of Perth
*Glasgow Perthshire Charitable Society
*Highland Perthshire
*Perthshire Rugby Football Club
*Perth and Kinross
*Scottish Highlands
*Stirling
*Trossachs
*List of counties of Scotland 1890–1975
==References==


==External links==
*“Perthshire” from &quot;A Topographical Dictionary of Scotland&quot; by Samuel Lewis, London, 1846 (British History Online)
*Perth &amp; Kinross Council
*A Vision of Britain Through Time: A vision of Perth and Kinross</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1247411" start="0" end="10" title="Perthshire" label="Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553250" start="12" end="19" title="Scottish English" label="locally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247411" start="41" end="56" title="Perthshire" label="County of Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="63" end="78" title="Shires of Scotland" label="historic county"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309443" start="83" end="102" title="registration county" label="registration county"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="114" end="122" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622129" start="155" end="165" title="Strathmore, Angus and Perth &amp;amp; Kinross" label="Strathmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142417" start="186" end="204" title="Pass of Drumochter" label="Pass of Drumochter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773123" start="219" end="231" title="Rannoch Moor" label="Rannoch Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397729" start="236" end="243" title="Ben Lui" label="Ben Lui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746326" start="261" end="270" title="Aberfoyle, Scotland" label="Aberfoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247390" start="312" end="327" title="Inverness-shire" label="Inverness-shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q189912" start="332" end="345" title="Aberdeenshire" label="Aberdeenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q202177" start="360" end="365" title="Angus, Scotland" label="Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="379" end="383" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q784746" start="385" end="398" title="Kinross-shire" label="Kinross-shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207268" start="400" end="416" title="Clackmannanshire" label="Clackmannanshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229763" start="418" end="431" title="Stirlingshire" label="Stirlingshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q140090" start="436" end="450" title="Dunbartonshire" label="Dunbartonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q652539" start="468" end="479" title="Argyllshire" label="Argyllshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613789" start="617" end="652" title="List of Scottish counties by area" label="largest historic county in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169507" start="718" end="725" title="straths" label="straths"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="777" end="786" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="861" end="866" title="Shires of Scotland" label="shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494998" start="895" end="902" title="Sheriff principal" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q216787" start="971" end="978" title="David I of Scotland" label="David I"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401369" start="1005" end="1021" title="Sheriff of Perth" label="Sheriff of Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q108392704" start="1049" end="1058" title="Provinces of Scotland" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q331254" start="1070" end="1076" title="Atholl" label="Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963606" start="1078" end="1089" title="Breadalbane, Scotland" label="Breadalbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4147087" start="1091" end="1097" title="Gowrie" label="Gowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817526" start="1099" end="1107" title="Menteith" label="Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993016" start="1112" end="1122" title="Strathearn" label="Strathearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152837" start="1278" end="1301" title="Commissioners of Supply" label="Commissioners of Supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="1459" end="1472" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664029" start="1648" end="1684" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q203000" start="1792" end="1797" title="Perth, Scotland" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17570901" start="2055" end="2074" title="Perth Sheriff Court" label="Perth Sheriff Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="2258" end="2265" title="exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424554" start="2547" end="2554" title="Culross" label="Culross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852170" start="2559" end="2569" title="Tulliallan" label="Tulliallan"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="2591" end="2595" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664034" start="2624" end="2660" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1929" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q784746" start="2828" end="2841" title="Kinross-shire" label="Kinross-shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17570898" start="3414" end="3428" title="A. K. Bell Library" label="County Offices"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664037" start="3500" end="3536" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053979" start="3563" end="3570" title="Central Region, Scotland" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q633294" start="3575" end="3582" title="Tayside" label="Tayside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009402" start="3638" end="3644" title="Killin, Scotland" label="Killin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014066" start="3655" end="3664" title="Callander" label="Callander"/>
<link wikidata="Q965305" start="3666" end="3677" title="Crianlarich" label="Crianlarich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746326" start="3682" end="3691" title="Aberfoyle, Scotland" label="Aberfoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q46224" start="3769" end="3777" title="Muckhart" label="Muckhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009662" start="3846" end="3856" title="Longforgan" label="Longforgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q202177" start="3994" end="3999" title="Angus, Scotland" label="Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207679" start="4030" end="4047" title="Perth and Kinross" label="Perth and Kinross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009662" start="4259" end="4269" title="Longforgan" label="Longforgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207679" start="4366" end="4383" title="Perth and Kinross" label="Perth and Kinross"/>
<link wikidata="Q217838" start="4445" end="4466" title="Stirling (council area)" label="Stirling council area"/>
<link wikidata="Q207268" start="4502" end="4518" title="Clackmannanshire" label="Clackmannanshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q202435" start="4632" end="4648" title="Lieutenancy areas of Scotland" label="lieutenancy area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309443" start="4984" end="5003" title="registration county" label="registration county"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="5029" end="5041" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616553" start="5229" end="5245" title="Robert Hay-Drummond, 10th Earl of Kinnoull" label="Earl of Kinnoull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523599" start="5353" end="5375" title="Lord Lyon King of Arms" label="Lord Lyon King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q217529" start="5591" end="5610" title="royal arms of Scotland" label="Scottish royal arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590107" start="5666" end="5682" title="House of Dunkeld" label="House of Dunkeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q852883" start="5722" end="5727" title="Scone, Perth and Kinross" label="Scone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267314" start="5770" end="5776" title="canton (heraldry)" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269394" start="5790" end="5802" title="Scone Palace" label="Scone Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476173" start="5821" end="5838" title="Crown of Scotland" label="Crown of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q668732" start="5844" end="5849" title="crest (heraldry)" label="crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568897" start="5900" end="5911" title="Black Watch" label="Black Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="6092" end="6097" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209568" start="6311" end="6323" title="police burgh" label="police burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998629" start="6356" end="6371" title="burgh of barony" label="burgh of barony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664034" start="6919" end="6955" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1929" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489113" start="6999" end="7010" title="large burgh" label="large burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q319566" start="7684" end="7693" title="Aberfeldy, Scotland" label="Aberfeldy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746326" start="7695" end="7704" title="Aberfoyle, Stirling" label="Aberfoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q744726" start="7706" end="7715" title="Abernethy, Perth and Kinross" label="Abernethy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667159" start="7717" end="7725" title="Abernyte" label="Abernyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012038" start="7727" end="7732" title="Alyth" label="Alyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788222" start="7734" end="7740" title="Ardoch, Perth and Kinross" label="Ardoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q68814887" start="7742" end="7749" title="Arngask" label="Arngask"/>
<link wikidata="Q758623" start="7751" end="7763" title="Auchterarder" label="Auchterarder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899320" start="7778" end="7786" title="Moneydie" label="Moneydie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881530" start="7788" end="7799" title="Balquhidder" label="Balquhidder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013600" start="7801" end="7809" title="Bankfoot" label="Bankfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q880816" start="7821" end="7830" title="Blackford, Perth and Kinross" label="Blackford"/>
<link wikidata="Q881156" start="7832" end="7844" title="Blair Atholl" label="Blair Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q881185" start="7846" end="7869" title="Blairgowrie and Rattray" label="Blairgowrie and Rattray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014066" start="7887" end="7896" title="Callander" label="Callander"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037152" start="7898" end="7904" title="Caputh, Perth and Kinross" label="Caputh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776576" start="7915" end="7921" title="Clunie" label="Clunie"/>
<link wikidata="Q68815165" start="7923" end="7930" title="Collace" label="Collace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011363" start="7932" end="7938" title="Comrie, Perth and Kinross" label="Comrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011681" start="7940" end="7952" title="Coupar Angus" label="Coupar Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q639666" start="7954" end="7960" title="Crieff" label="Crieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302649" start="7962" end="7969" title="Dowally" label="Dowally"/>
<link wikidata="Q108855771" start="7971" end="7975" title="Dron, Perth and Kinross" label="Dron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250427" start="7977" end="7981" title="Dull, Perth and Kinross" label="Dull"/>
<link wikidata="Q614314" start="7994" end="8002" title="Dunblane" label="Dunblane"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242180" start="8007" end="8014" title="Lecropt" label="Lecropt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265921" start="8016" end="8023" title="Dunkeld" label="Dunkeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012257" start="8037" end="8044" title="Dunning, Perth and Kinross" label="Dunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395549" start="8046" end="8051" title="Errol, Perth and Kinross" label="Errol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450008" start="8053" end="8063" title="Findo Gask" label="Findo Gask"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123060" start="8065" end="8076" title="Forgandenny" label="Forgandenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776543" start="8078" end="8087" title="Forteviot" label="Forteviot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356464" start="8089" end="8099" title="Fortingall" label="Fortingall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307907" start="8121" end="8135" title="Crook of Devon" label="Crook of Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568035" start="8178" end="8187" title="Glen Shee" label="Glen Shee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009288" start="8189" end="8197" title="Inchture" label="Inchture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009402" start="8210" end="8216" title="Killin" label="Killin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407953" start="8218" end="8227" title="Kilmadock" label="Kilmadock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408207" start="8229" end="8239" title="Kilspindie" label="Kilspindie"/>
<link wikidata="Q68815858" start="8241" end="8251" title="Kincardine-in-Menteith" label="Kincardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410822" start="8273" end="8288" title="Kinfauns Castle" label="Kinfauns Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q73136079" start="8290" end="8297" title="Kinloch, Blairgowrie" label="Kinloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414018" start="8299" end="8315" title="Kinnaird, Gowrie" label="Kinnaird, Gowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414140" start="8317" end="8325" title="Kinnoull" label="Kinnoull"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775721" start="8327" end="8338" title="Kirkmichael, Perth and Kinross" label="Kirkmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265921" start="8357" end="8364" title="Dunkeld" label="Dunkeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776669" start="8379" end="8388" title="Logierait" label="Logierait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009662" start="8390" end="8400" title="Longforgan" label="Longforgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726614" start="8402" end="8410" title="Madderty" label="Madderty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018733" start="8412" end="8418" title="Meigle" label="Meigle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778610" start="8420" end="8427" title="Methven, Perth and Kinross" label="Methven"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899320" start="8429" end="8437" title="Moneydie" label="Moneydie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907005" start="8467" end="8478" title="Monzievaird" label="Monzievaird"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918986" start="8492" end="8498" title="Moulin, Scotland" label="Moulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46224" start="8500" end="8508" title="Muckhart" label="Muckhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017199" start="8510" end="8517" title="Muthill" label="Muthill"/>
<link wikidata="Q203000" start="8527" end="8532" title="Perth, Scotland" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231194" start="8534" end="8550" title="Port of Menteith" label="Port of Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q881185" start="8552" end="8575" title="Blairgowrie and Rattray" label="Blairgowrie and Rattray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305876" start="8577" end="8586" title="Redgorton" label="Redgorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321735" start="8588" end="8593" title="Rhynd" label="Rhynd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594086" start="8595" end="8604" title="St Madoes" label="St Madoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q852883" start="8618" end="8623" title="Scone, Scotland" label="Scone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599403" start="8625" end="8632" title="Stanley, Perthshire" label="Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7222383" start="8671" end="8681" title="Tibbermore" label="Tibbermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852262" start="8697" end="8708" title="Tullybelton" label="Tullybelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061318" start="8710" end="8714" title="Weem" label="Weem"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="9059" end="9067" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124736" start="9152" end="9170" title="Grampian Mountains" label="Grampian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q603956" start="9237" end="9247" title="Ben Lawers" label="Ben Lawers"/>
<link wikidata="Q45828" start="9507" end="9518" title="Ochil Hills" label="Ochil Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483311" start="9554" end="9566" title="Sidlaw Hills" label="Sidlaw Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765455" start="9639" end="9651" title="Firth of Tay" label="Firth of Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="9700" end="9709" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046865" start="9742" end="9757" title="Carse of Gowrie" label="Carse of Gowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731999" start="9867" end="9874" title="Mugdrum" label="Mugdrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q639570" start="9891" end="9902" title="River Ardle" label="River Ardle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277544" start="9904" end="9914" title="River Earn" label="River Earn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353655" start="9916" end="9928" title="River Ericht" label="River Ericht"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337412" start="9930" end="9940" title="River Farg" label="River Farg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421" start="9942" end="9953" title="River Forth" label="River Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494502" start="9955" end="9966" title="River Garry, Perthshire" label="River Garry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331094" start="9968" end="9978" title="River Isla, Perthshire" label="River Isla"/>
<link wikidata="Q19719" start="9980" end="9989" title="River Tay" label="River Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637976" start="9991" end="10002" title="River Teith" label="River Teith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259288" start="10004" end="10016" title="River Tummel" label="River Tummel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10047" end="10057" title="Cally Loch" label="Cally Loch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10059" end="10074" title="Carsebreck Loch" label="Carsebreck Loch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10076" end="10096" title="Castlehill Reservoir" label="Castlehill Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10098" end="10117" title="Cocksburn Reservoir" label="Cocksburn Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10159" end="10171" title="Dowally Loch" label="Dowally Loch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10173" end="10185" title="Drumore Loch" label="Drumore Loch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10187" end="10198" title="Dubh Lochan" label="Dubh Lochan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10200" end="10212" title="Dupplin Loch" label="Dupplin Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q24643252" start="10214" end="10226" title="Fingask Loch" label="Fingask Loch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10228" end="10250" title="Glas Finglas Reservoir" label="Glas Finglas Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10252" end="10270" title="Glenfarg Reservoir" label="Glenfarg Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10312" end="10329" title="Glenquey Resrvoir" label="Glenquey Resrvoir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10331" end="10351" title="Glensherup Reservoir" label="Glensherup Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10353" end="10370" title="Laird&amp;#x27;s Loch" label="Laird&amp;#x27;s Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801121" start="10372" end="10388" title="Lake of Menteith" label="Lake of Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10390" end="10408" title="Little Loch Skiach" label="Little Loch Skiach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818700" start="10410" end="10421" title="Loch Achray" label="Loch Achray"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10423" end="10436" title="Loch an Daimh" label="Loch an Daimh"/>
<link wikidata="Q65061929" start="10438" end="10450" title="Loch an Duin" label="Loch an Duin"/>
<link wikidata="Q952227" start="10452" end="10460" title="Loch Ard" label="Loch Ard"/>
<link wikidata="Q24638548" start="10462" end="10473" title="Loch Beanie" label="Loch Beanie"/>
<link wikidata="Q24656502" start="10475" end="10490" title="Loch Benachally" label="Loch Benachally"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10492" end="10506" title="Loch Bollachan" label="Loch Bollachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24654421" start="10508" end="10518" title="Loch Broom, Pitlochry" label="Loch Broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q952329" start="10520" end="10529" title="Loch Chon" label="Loch Chon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24651808" start="10531" end="10539" title="Loch Con" label="Loch Con"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10541" end="10554" title="Loch Crannach" label="Loch Crannach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10556" end="10567" title="Loch Creagh" label="Loch Creagh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10569" end="10580" title="Loch Curran" label="Loch Curran"/>
<link wikidata="Q24649287" start="10582" end="10596" title="Loch Derculich" label="Loch Derculich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10598" end="10606" title="Loch Dhu, Scotland" label="Loch Dhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q24652279" start="10608" end="10618" title="Loch Doine" label="Loch Doine"/>
<link wikidata="Q952253" start="10620" end="10632" title="Loch Drunkie" label="Loch Drunkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549069" start="10634" end="10643" title="Loch Earn" label="Loch Earn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10645" end="10657" title="Loch Eigeach" label="Loch Eigeach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851127" start="10659" end="10670" title="Loch Ericht" label="Loch Ericht"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664906" start="10714" end="10727" title="Loch Errochty" label="Loch Errochty"/>
<link wikidata="Q24643083" start="10729" end="10739" title="Loch Essan" label="Loch Essan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10741" end="10754" title="Loch Farleyer" label="Loch Farleyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q24643194" start="10756" end="10767" title="Loch Fender" label="Loch Fender"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10769" end="10781" title="Loch Finnart" label="Loch Finnart"/>
<link wikidata="Q24643560" start="10783" end="10796" title="Loch Freuchie" label="Loch Freuchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979172" start="10798" end="10808" title="Loch Garry" label="Loch Garry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10810" end="10822" title="Loch Glassie" label="Loch Glassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q24641559" start="10824" end="10833" title="Loch Hoil" label="Loch Hoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q24641718" start="10835" end="10847" title="Loch Iubhair" label="Loch Iubhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867269" start="10849" end="10861" title="Loch Katrine" label="Loch Katrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q24640041" start="10904" end="10916" title="Loch Kennard" label="Loch Kennard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10918" end="10933" title="Loch Kinardochy" label="Loch Kinardochy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10935" end="10946" title="Loch Laddon" label="Loch Laddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664933" start="10986" end="10997" title="Loch Laggan" label="Loch Laggan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10999" end="11021" title="Loch Lednock Reservoir" label="Loch Lednock Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q24640713" start="11023" end="11032" title="Loch Loch" label="Loch Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676049" start="11034" end="11046" title="Loch Lubnaig" label="Loch Lubnaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257705" start="11048" end="11057" title="Loch Lyon" label="Loch Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11059" end="11072" title="Loch Macanrie" label="Loch Macanrie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11074" end="11086" title="Loch Maragan" label="Loch Maragan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11088" end="11099" title="Loch Mhairc" label="Loch Mhairc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11101" end="11114" title="Loch Monaghan" label="Loch Monaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664982" start="11116" end="11132" title="Loch Monzievaird" label="Loch Monzievaird"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11134" end="11144" title="Loch na Bà" label="Loch na Bà"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11146" end="11158" title="Loch na Brae" label="Loch na Brae"/>
<link wikidata="Q24653474" start="11160" end="11172" title="Loch nan Eun" label="Loch nan Eun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11174" end="11189" title="Loch of Belloch" label="Loch of Belloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q24653038" start="11191" end="11210" title="Loch of Butterstone" label="Loch of Butterstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q24651744" start="11212" end="11226" title="Loch of Clunie" label="Loch of Clunie"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242588" start="11228" end="11245" title="Loch of Craiglush" label="Loch of Craiglush"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639433" start="11247" end="11264" title="Loch of Drumellie" label="Loch of Drumellie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11266" end="11279" title="Loch of Lowes" label="Loch of Lowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639839" start="11281" end="11291" title="Loch Ordie" label="Loch Ordie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11293" end="11301" title="Loch Oss" label="Loch Oss"/>
<link wikidata="Q943839" start="11303" end="11315" title="Loch Rannoch" label="Loch Rannoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665007" start="11317" end="11327" title="Loch Rusky" label="Loch Rusky"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279636" start="11329" end="11339" title="Loch Scoly" label="Loch Scoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q24638635" start="11341" end="11352" title="Loch Skiach" label="Loch Skiach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363409" start="11354" end="11362" title="Loch Tay" label="Loch Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q24637929" start="11364" end="11373" title="Loch Tilt" label="Loch Tilt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11375" end="11386" title="Loch Tinker" label="Loch Tinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867303" start="11388" end="11399" title="Loch Tummel" label="Loch Tummel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11401" end="11422" title="Loch Turret Reservoir" label="Loch Turret Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11424" end="11436" title="Loch Valigan" label="Loch Valigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q547772" start="11438" end="11451" title="Loch Venachar" label="Loch Venachar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856461" start="11453" end="11462" title="Loch Voil" label="Loch Voil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11464" end="11476" title="Loch Watston" label="Loch Watston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11478" end="11498" title="Lochan a&amp;#x27; Chait" label="Lochan a&amp;#x27; Chait"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11500" end="11524" title="Lochan a&amp;#x27; Mhàidseir" label="Lochan a&amp;#x27; Mhàidseir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11526" end="11538" title="Loch Balloch" label="Loch Balloch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11540" end="11556" title="Lochan Caol Fada" label="Lochan Caol Fada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11558" end="11580" title="Lochan Coire na Mèinne" label="Lochan Coire na Mèinne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11582" end="11611" title="Lochan Creag a&amp;#x27; Mhadaidh" label="Lochan Creag a&amp;#x27; Mhadaidh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11613" end="11629" title="Lochan Ghiubhais" label="Lochan Ghiubhais"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11631" end="11651" title="Lochan Lairig Laoigh" label="Lochan Lairig Laoigh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11653" end="11678" title="Lochan Lòin nan Donnlaich" label="Lochan Lòin nan Donnlaich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11680" end="11701" title="Lochan Mhàim nan Carn" label="Lochan Mhàim nan Carn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11703" end="11732" title="Lochan Mon&amp;#x27; an Fhiadhain" label="Lochan Mon&amp;#x27; an Fhiadhain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11734" end="11750" title="Lochan na Beinne" label="Lochan na Beinne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11752" end="11769" title="Lochan na Làirige" label="Lochan na Làirige"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11771" end="11787" title="Lochan nam Breac" label="Lochan nam Breac"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11789" end="11802" title="Lohan nan Cat" label="Lohan nan Cat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11804" end="11821" title="Lochan Oisinneach" label="Lochan Oisinneach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11823" end="11844" title="Lochan Oisinneach Mòr" label="Lochan Oisinneach Mòr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11846" end="11871" title="Lochan Ruighe nan-Sligean" label="Lochan Ruighe nan-Sligean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11873" end="11886" title="Lochan Spling" label="Lochan Spling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17609635" start="11888" end="11905" title="Lochan Sròn Smeur" label="Lochan Sròn Smeur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11907" end="11919" title="Lochan Uaine" label="Lochan Uaine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11921" end="11939" title="Lossburn Reservoir" label="Lossburn Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11941" end="11966" title="Lower Glendevon Reservoir" label="Lower Glendevon Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11968" end="11979" title="Lower Rhynd" label="Lower Rhynd"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11981" end="11993" title="Methven Loch" label="Methven Loch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11995" end="12003" title="Mill Dam, Perthshire" label="Mill Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q70987576" start="12005" end="12014" title="Monk Myre" label="Monk Myre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12016" end="12031" title="Pitcairnie Loch" label="Pitcairnie Loch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12033" end="12048" title="Pitcarmick Loch" label="Pitcarmick Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q24649392" start="12050" end="12066" title="Pond of Drummond" label="Pond of Drummond"/>
<link wikidata="Q65040344" start="12068" end="12076" title="Rae Loch" label="Rae Loch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12078" end="12090" title="Redmyre Loch" label="Redmyre Loch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12092" end="12104" title="Rotmell Loch" label="Rotmell Loch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12106" end="12117" title="Seamaw Loch" label="Seamaw Loch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12119" end="12138" title="Stronuich Reservoir" label="Stronuich Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q24656901" start="12140" end="12153" title="Stormont Loch" label="Stormont Loch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12155" end="12180" title="Upper Glendevon Reservoir" label="Upper Glendevon Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12225" end="12236" title="Upper Rhynd" label="Upper Rhynd"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12238" end="12259" title="Waltersmuir Reservoir" label="Waltersmuir Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12261" end="12271" title="White Loch" label="White Loch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12273" end="12288" title="White Moss Loch" label="White Moss Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q603956" start="12306" end="12316" title="Ben Lawers" label="Ben Lawers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886615" start="12318" end="12329" title="Ben Vorlich (Loch Earn)" label="Ben Vorlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395632" start="12331" end="12339" title="Ben More (Crianlarich)" label="Ben Mhor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658333" start="12341" end="12352" title="Ben Vrackie" label="Ben Vrackie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397088" start="12354" end="12372" title="Beinn a&amp;#x27; Ghlò" label="Beinn a&amp;#x27; Ghlò"/>
<link wikidata="Q948061" start="12374" end="12386" title="Schiehallion" label="Schiehallion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12414" end="12425" title="Glen Almond" label="Glen Almond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331094" start="12427" end="12436" title="Glen Isla" label="Glen Isla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568035" start="12438" end="12447" title="Glen Shee" label="Glen Shee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12449" end="12459" title="Glen Garry" label="Glen Garry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568071" start="12461" end="12470" title="Glen Tilt" label="Glen Tilt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12472" end="12482" title="Glen Bruar" label="Glen Bruar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12484" end="12498" title="Glen Fincastle" label="Glen Fincastle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12500" end="12513" title="Glen Errochty" label="Glen Errochty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12515" end="12527" title="Glen Rannoch" label="Glen Rannoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451934" start="12529" end="12538" title="Glen Lyon, Scotland" label="Glen Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567863" start="12540" end="12551" title="Glen Lochay" label="Glen Lochay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567691" start="12553" end="12565" title="Glen Dochart" label="Glen Dochart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622129" start="12567" end="12577" title="Strathmore, Angus and Perth &amp;amp; Kinross" label="Strathmore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12579" end="12591" title="Strath Ardle" label="Strath Ardle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12593" end="12605" title="Strath Braan" label="Strath Braan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12607" end="12617" title="Strath Tay" label="Strath Tay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12619" end="12632" title="Strath Tummel" label="Strath Tummel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622011" start="12634" end="12647" title="Strath Fillan" label="Strath Fillan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12649" end="12660" title="Strath Earn" label="Strath Earn"/>
<link wikidata="Q319299" start="12681" end="12690" title="Aberargie" label="Aberargie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821570" start="12692" end="12702" title="Aberdalgie" label="Aberdalgie"/>
<link wikidata="Q319566" start="12704" end="12713" title="Aberfeldy, Scotland" label="Aberfeldy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746326" start="12715" end="12724" title="Aberfoyle, Stirling" label="Aberfoyle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12726" end="12734" title="Abermyte" label="Abermyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q744726" start="12736" end="12745" title="Abernethy, Perth and Kinross" label="Abernethy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667159" start="12747" end="12755" title="Abernyte" label="Abernyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667216" start="12757" end="12767" title="Aberuthven" label="Aberuthven"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673431" start="12769" end="12778" title="Achalader" label="Achalader"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673836" start="12780" end="12790" title="Achnafauld" label="Achnafauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775756" start="12792" end="12798" title="Acharn, Perth and Kinross" label="Acharn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698838" start="12800" end="12809" title="Airntully" label="Airntully"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713458" start="12811" end="12819" title="Aldclune" label="Aldclune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014075" start="12821" end="12831" title="Almondbank" label="Almondbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012038" start="12833" end="12838" title="Alyth" label="Alyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776658" start="12840" end="12847" title="Amulree" label="Amulree"/>
<link wikidata="Q639063" start="12849" end="12858" title="Ardeonaig" label="Ardeonaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059283" start="12860" end="12866" title="Ardler, Perth and Kinross" label="Ardler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788305" start="12868" end="12878" title="Ardtalnaig" label="Ardtalnaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q758623" start="12880" end="12892" title="Auchterarder" label="Auchterarder"/>
<link wikidata="Q804675" start="12894" end="12903" title="Balbeggie" label="Balbeggie"/>
<link wikidata="Q805273" start="12905" end="12915" title="Ballinluig" label="Ballinluig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881530" start="12917" end="12928" title="Balquhidder" label="Balquhidder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013600" start="12930" end="12938" title="Bankfoot" label="Bankfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q880816" start="12940" end="12949" title="Blackford, Perth and Kinross" label="Blackford"/>
<link wikidata="Q881156" start="12951" end="12963" title="Blair Atholl" label="Blair Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q881185" start="12965" end="12976" title="Blairgowrie and Rattray" label="Blairgowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011140" start="12978" end="12983" title="Braco, Perth and Kinross" label="Braco"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194645" start="12985" end="13001" title="Bridge of Balgie" label="Bridge of Balgie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016971" start="13003" end="13017" title="Bridge of Earn" label="Bridge of Earn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966450" start="13019" end="13033" title="Bridge of Tilt" label="Bridge of Tilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q996675" start="13035" end="13044" title="Burrelton" label="Burrelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014066" start="13046" end="13055" title="Callander" label="Callander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738577" start="13057" end="13070" title="Cambuskenneth" label="Cambuskenneth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028426" start="13072" end="13080" title="Campmuir" label="Campmuir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037152" start="13082" end="13088" title="Caputh, Perth and Kinross" label="Caputh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045938" start="13090" end="13096" title="Carpow" label="Carpow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776576" start="13098" end="13104" title="Clunie" label="Clunie"/>
<link wikidata="Q68815165" start="13106" end="13113" title="Collace" label="Collace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175856" start="13115" end="13122" title="Cottown, Perth and Kinross" label="Cottown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011681" start="13124" end="13136" title="Coupar Angus" label="Coupar Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q965305" start="13138" end="13149" title="Crianlarich" label="Crianlarich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265921" start="13151" end="13158" title="Dunkeld" label="Dunkeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087058" start="13163" end="13169" title="Birnam, Perth and Kinross" label="Birnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011363" start="13171" end="13177" title="Comrie, Perth and Kinross" label="Comrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181684" start="13179" end="13186" title="Craigie (hamlet), Perth and Kinross" label="Craigie"/>
<link wikidata="Q639666" start="13188" end="13194" title="Crieff" label="Crieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210849" start="13196" end="13204" title="Dalguise" label="Dalguise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181179" start="13206" end="13214" title="Deanston" label="Deanston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014524" start="13216" end="13221" title="Doune" label="Doune"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302649" start="13223" end="13230" title="Dowally" label="Dowally"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250427" start="13232" end="13236" title="Dull, Perth and Kinross" label="Dull"/>
<link wikidata="Q614314" start="13238" end="13246" title="Dunblane" label="Dunblane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265921" start="13248" end="13255" title="Dunkeld" label="Dunkeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012257" start="13257" end="13264" title="Dunning, Perth and Kinross" label="Dunning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13266" end="13276" title="Edradynate" label="Edradynate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395549" start="13278" end="13283" title="Errol, Perth and Kinross" label="Errol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776535" start="13285" end="13292" title="Fearnan" label="Fearnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450008" start="13294" end="13304" title="Findo Gask" label="Findo Gask"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776558" start="13306" end="13314" title="Finegand" label="Finegand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123060" start="13316" end="13327" title="Forgandenny" label="Forgandenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776543" start="13329" end="13338" title="Forteviot" label="Forteviot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356464" start="13340" end="13350" title="Fortingall" label="Fortingall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13352" end="13365" title="Fowlis Easter" label="Fowlis Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440122" start="13367" end="13380" title="Fowlis Wester" label="Fowlis Wester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524422" start="13382" end="13390" title="Gartmore" label="Gartmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568237" start="13392" end="13401" title="Glencarse" label="Glencarse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595545" start="13403" end="13413" title="Grandtully" label="Grandtully"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13415" end="13421" title="Grange, Perth and Kinross" label="Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604307" start="13423" end="13435" title="Greenloaning" label="Greenloaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q108837860" start="13437" end="13446" title="Guildtown" label="Guildtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664401" start="13448" end="13460" title="Harrietfield" label="Harrietfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945563" start="13462" end="13491" title="Huntingtower and Ruthvenfield" label="Huntingtower and Ruthvenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q129565947" start="13493" end="13509" title="Inchmagrannachan" label="Inchmagrannachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009288" start="13511" end="13519" title="Inchture" label="Inchture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014544" start="13521" end="13528" title="Inchyra" label="Inchyra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13530" end="13539" title="Inveraman" label="Inveraman"/>
<link wikidata="Q653438" start="13541" end="13552" title="Invergowrie" label="Invergowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060144" start="13554" end="13562" title="Invermay" label="Invermay"/>
<link wikidata="Q459768" start="13564" end="13571" title="Kenmore, Perth and Kinross" label="Kenmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395491" start="13573" end="13580" title="Kettins" label="Kettins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002159" start="13582" end="13595" title="Killiecrankie" label="Killiecrankie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009402" start="13597" end="13603" title="Killin" label="Killin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408207" start="13605" end="13615" title="Kilspindie" label="Kilspindie"/>
<link wikidata="Q73136079" start="13617" end="13637" title="Kinloch, Blairgowrie" label="Kinloch, Blairgowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413966" start="13639" end="13660" title="Kinloch, Coupar Angus" label="Kinloch, Coupar Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194586" start="13662" end="13672" title="Kinlochard" label="Kinlochard"/>
<link wikidata="Q124640" start="13674" end="13689" title="Kinloch Rannoch" label="Kinloch Rannoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414015" start="13691" end="13707" title="Kinnaird, Atholl" label="Kinnaird, Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414018" start="13709" end="13725" title="Kinnaird, Gowrie" label="Kinnaird, Gowrie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13727" end="13736" title="Kinorssie" label="Kinorssie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775721" start="13738" end="13749" title="Kirkmichael, Perth and Kinross" label="Kirkmichael"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13751" end="13758" title="Kirkton, Perth and Kinross" label="Kirkton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776595" start="13760" end="13766" title="Lawers" label="Lawers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516516" start="13768" end="13775" title="Leetown, Perth and Kinross" label="Leetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665086" start="13777" end="13789" title="Lochearnhead" label="Lochearnhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776669" start="13791" end="13800" title="Logierait" label="Logierait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009662" start="13802" end="13812" title="Longforgan" label="Longforgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020257" start="13814" end="13822" title="Luncarty" label="Luncarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726614" start="13824" end="13832" title="Madderty" label="Madderty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018733" start="13834" end="13840" title="Meigle" label="Meigle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059288" start="13842" end="13851" title="Meikleour" label="Meikleour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778610" start="13853" end="13860" title="Methven, Perth and Kinross" label="Methven"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899320" start="13862" end="13870" title="Moneydie" label="Moneydie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907005" start="13872" end="13883" title="Monzievaird" label="Monzievaird"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939737" start="13885" end="13892" title="Murthly" label="Murthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017199" start="13894" end="13901" title="Muthill" label="Muthill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083482" start="13903" end="13912" title="Old Blair" label="Old Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q203000" start="13914" end="13919" title="Perth, Scotland" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13921" end="13929" title="Piperdam" label="Piperdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198664" start="13931" end="13944" title="Pitcairngreen" label="Pitcairngreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198974" start="13946" end="13962" title="Pitkeathly Wells" label="Pitkeathly Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011665" start="13964" end="13973" title="Pitlochry" label="Pitlochry"/>
<link wikidata="Q46224" start="13975" end="13991" title="Pool of Muckhart" label="Pool of Muckhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236921" start="13993" end="14000" title="Powmill" label="Powmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285192" start="14002" end="14006" title="Rait" label="Rait"/>
<link wikidata="Q881185" start="14008" end="14015" title="Blairgowrie and Rattray" label="Rattray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305876" start="14017" end="14026" title="Redgorton" label="Redgorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321735" start="14028" end="14033" title="Rhynd" label="Rhynd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776554" start="14035" end="14045" title="St Fillans" label="St Fillans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594086" start="14047" end="14056" title="St Madoes" label="St Madoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q852883" start="14058" end="14063" title="Scone, Scotland" label="Scone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776501" start="14065" end="14084" title="Spittal of Glenshee" label="Spittal of Glenshee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14086" end="14098" title="Spittalfield" label="Spittalfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599403" start="14100" end="14107" title="Stanley, Perthshire" label="Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622176" start="14109" end="14118" title="Strathtay" label="Strathtay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622184" start="14120" end="14129" title="Strathyre" label="Strathyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796432" start="14131" end="14140" title="Thornhill, Stirling" label="Thornhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7222383" start="14142" end="14152" title="Tibbermore" label="Tibbermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q48769618" start="14154" end="14166" title="Tullibardine" label="Tullibardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250464" start="14168" end="14175" title="Tyndrum" label="Tyndrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974194" start="14177" end="14185" title="Waterloo, Perth and Kinross" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061318" start="14187" end="14191" title="Weem" label="Weem"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030159" start="14193" end="14201" title="Wolfhill" label="Wolfhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q14371474" start="14203" end="14211" title="Woodside, Perth and Kinross" label="Woodside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617936" start="14233" end="14251" title="Highland Main Line" label="Highland Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q233283" start="14318" end="14336" title="West Highland Line" label="West Highland Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="14517" end="14529" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Act of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="14566" end="14582" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="14590" end="14622" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170828" start="14707" end="14719" title="Perth Burghs (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Perth burghs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437929" start="14780" end="14828" title="Representation of the People (Scotland) Act 1832" label="Representation of the People (Scotland) Act 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170933" start="14956" end="14966" title="Perthshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124900" start="15113" end="15141" title="Clackmannanshire and Kinross-shire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Clackmannanshire and Kinross"/>
<link wikidata="Q784746" start="15427" end="15440" title="Kinross-shire" label="Kinross-shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170803" start="15508" end="15513" title="Perth (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414228" start="15892" end="15922" title="Kinross and Western Perthshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Kinross and Western Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="16346" end="16384" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="16467" end="16488" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051029" start="16493" end="16519" title="Ochil and South Perthshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ochil and South Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050667" start="16522" end="16548" title="Perth and North Perthshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Perth and North Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805120" start="16571" end="16588" title="Ashintully Castle" label="Ashintully Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938333" start="16590" end="16605" title="Balvaird Castle" label="Balvaird Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087058" start="16607" end="16618" title="Birnam Wood" label="Birnam Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q68340" start="16623" end="16637" title="Dunsinane Hill" label="Dunsinane Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="16651" end="16662" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283" start="16676" end="16683" title="Macbeth" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q532627" start="16691" end="16703" title="Blair Castle" label="Blair Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051894" start="16705" end="16718" title="Cateran Trail" label="Cateran Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280908" start="16720" end="16735" title="Dirnanean House" label="Dirnanean House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309218" start="16737" end="16752" title="Drummond Castle" label="Drummond Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086395" start="16754" end="16771" title="Dunkeld Cathedral" label="Dunkeld Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q982705" start="16773" end="16792" title="Edradour" label="Edradour Distillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530960" start="16794" end="16810" title="Gleneagles Hotel" label="Gleneagles Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739475" start="16812" end="16825" title="The Hermitage (Scotland)" label="The Hermitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410658" start="16827" end="16842" title="Kindrogan House" label="Kindrogan House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269394" start="16844" end="16856" title="Scone Palace" label="Scone Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622176" start="16863" end="16872" title="Strathtay" label="Strathtay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622129" start="16877" end="16887" title="Strathmore, Angus and Perth &amp;amp; Kinross" label="Strathmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256522" start="16900" end="16911" title="four-poster" label="four-poster"/>
<link wikidata="Q762659" start="16964" end="16990" title="Patrick Adamson" label="Archbishop Patrick Adamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q331292" start="16993" end="17007" title="Duke of Atholl" label="Duke of Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129340" start="17010" end="17025" title="James Bannerman (theologian)" label="James Bannerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q47093158" start="17028" end="17043" title="Anne Fraser Bon" label="Anne Fraser Bon"/>
<link wikidata="Q113412" start="17046" end="17061" title="Edward Braddock" label="Edward Braddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q633084" start="17064" end="17099" title="Sir Archibald Campbell, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Archibald Campbell, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988341" start="17102" end="17128" title="Neil Cameron, Baron Cameron of Balhousie" label="Baron Cameron of Balhousie"/>
<link wikidata="Q183189" start="17131" end="17142" title="James Croll" label="James Croll"/>
<link wikidata="Q316629" start="17145" end="17157" title="Alan Cumming" label="Alan Cumming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526205" start="17160" end="17179" title="Charles Douglas (admiral)" label="Sir Charles Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q669028" start="17182" end="17195" title="David Douglas (botanist)" label="David Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216992" start="17198" end="17208" title="Daniel Dow" label="Daniel Dow"/>
<link wikidata="Q333140" start="17211" end="17223" title="Duleep Singh" label="Duleep Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758864" start="17226" end="17240" title="Alexander Duff (missionary)" label="Alexander Duff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789098" start="17243" end="17256" title="Thomas Duncan (painter)" label="Thomas Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183094" start="17259" end="17272" title="Adam Ferguson" label="Adam Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q107301346" start="17275" end="17292" title="William Flockhart" label="William Flockhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491812" start="17295" end="17308" title="Duncan Forbes (linguist)" label="Duncan Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531562" start="17311" end="17319" title="Niel Gow" label="Niel Gow"/>
<link wikidata="Q979180" start="17322" end="17360" title="James Graham, 1st Marquess of Montrose" label="James Graham, 1st Marquess of Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q336707" start="17363" end="17396" title="Thomas Graham, 1st Baron Lynedoch" label="Thomas Graham, 1st Baron Lynedoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q295201" start="17399" end="17413" title="Stephen Hendry" label="Stephen Hendry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470681" start="17416" end="17430" title="Lady of Lawers" label="Lady of Lawers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376604" start="17433" end="17468" title="Alexander Leslie, 1st Earl of Leven" label="Alexander Leslie, 1st Earl of Leven"/>
<link wikidata="Q128708" start="17471" end="17490" title="Alexander Mackenzie (politician)" label="Alexander Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251928" start="17493" end="17507" title="Dougie MacLean" label="Dougie MacLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q232024" start="17510" end="17522" title="John Macleod (physiologist)" label="John Macleod"/>
<link wikidata="Q165518" start="17525" end="17538" title="Ewan McGregor" label="Ewan McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080903" start="17541" end="17560" title="Charles Menzies (commandant)" label="Sir Charles Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q348025" start="17563" end="17581" title="Lord George Murray (general)" label="Lord George Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q333471" start="17584" end="17601" title="George Murray (British Army officer)" label="Sir George Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973898" start="17604" end="17614" title="John Reid (British Army officer)" label="Baron Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="17617" end="17630" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143287" start="17633" end="17644" title="James Small (Scottish laird)" label="James Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581085" start="17647" end="17671" title="John Small (British Army officer)" label="Major-General John Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q21997663" start="17674" end="17687" title="William Small (Assemblyman)" label="William Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q328892" start="17690" end="17702" title="Rory Stewart" label="Rory Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q109657817" start="17705" end="17723" title="Magdalene Stirling" label="Magdalene Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q366209" start="17726" end="17741" title="Robert Stirling" label="Robert Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545174" start="17744" end="17759" title="George Thompson (VC)" label="George Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="17778" end="17792" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q16029200" start="17795" end="17818" title="John Sen Inches Thomson" label="John Sen Inches Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17821" end="17840" title="Methven, Perth and Kinross#History and legacy" label="Dr William Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788323" start="17855" end="17870" title="Ardvreck School" label="Ardvreck School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154863" start="17872" end="17908" title="The Community School of Auchterarder" label="The Community School of Auchterarder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924212" start="17910" end="17933" title="Blairgowrie High School" label="Blairgowrie High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909320" start="17935" end="17954" title="Breadalbane Academy" label="Breadalbane Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993578" start="17956" end="17986" title="Craigclowan Preparatory School" label="Craigclowan Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289201" start="17988" end="18002" title="Dollar Academy" label="Dollar Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568133" start="18004" end="18022" title="Glenalmond College" label="Glenalmond College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18024" end="18060" title="Inch view primary and nursery school" label="Inch view primary and nursery school"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838972" start="18062" end="18079" title="Kilgraston School" label="Kilgraston School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913981" start="18081" end="18104" title="Morrison&amp;#x27;s Academy" label="Morrison&amp;#x27;s Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170807" start="18106" end="18119" title="Perth Academy" label="Perth Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170855" start="18121" end="18141" title="Perth Grammar School" label="Perth Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170858" start="18143" end="18160" title="Perth High School" label="Perth High School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18162" end="18183" title="Pitlochry High School" label="Pitlochry High School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18185" end="18207" title="Rattray Primary School" label="Rattray Primary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622023" start="18209" end="18227" title="Strathallan School" label="Strathallan School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622094" start="18229" end="18256" title="Strathearn Community Campus" label="Strathearn Community Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277382" start="18272" end="18285" title="Earl of Perth" label="Earl of Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839257" start="18287" end="18324" title="Glasgow Perthshire Charitable Society" label="Glasgow Perthshire Charitable Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18326" end="18345" title="Highland Perthshire" label="Highland Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170932" start="18347" end="18377" title="Perthshire RFC" label="Perthshire Rugby Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q207679" start="18379" end="18396" title="Perth and Kinross" label="Perth and Kinross"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="18398" end="18416" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q182923" start="18418" end="18426" title="Stirling" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117" start="18428" end="18437" title="Trossachs" label="Trossachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153615" start="18439" end="18477" title="List of counties of Scotland 1890–1975" label="List of counties of Scotland 1890–1975"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52281" wikidata="Q207268" url="?curid=52281" title="Clackmannanshire">
<text>Clackmannanshire (; ; ), or the County of Clackmannan, is a historic county, council area, registration county and lieutenancy area in Scotland, bordering the council areas of Stirling, Fife, and Perth and Kinross. To the south, it is separated from Falkirk by the Firth of Forth. In terms of historic counties it borders Perthshire, Stirlingshire and Fife.

The name consists of elements from three languages. The first element is from meaning &quot;Stone&quot;. Mannan is a derivative of the Brythonic name of the Manaw, the Iron Age tribe who inhabited the area. The final element is the English word shire. As Britain&#x27;s smallest historic county, it is often nicknamed &quot;The Wee County&quot;. When written, Clackmannanshire is commonly abbreviated to Clacks.

==History==
Clackmannanshire takes its name from the original county town of Clackmannan, which is named after a stone anciently associated with the pre-Christian deity Manau or Mannan. The stone now rests on a larger stone beside the surviving tower of Clackmannan Tolbooth and the Mercat Cross at the top of Main street, Clackmannan.

Clackmannanshire became known for the weaving mills powered by the Hillfoots burns. Other industries included brewing, glass manufacture, mining and ship building. Now capitalising on its central position and transport links, Clackmannanshire attracts service industries and tourism.

The motto of Clackmannanshire is &quot;Look Aboot Ye&quot; (&quot;Circumspice&quot; in Latin). In 2007 a re-branding exercise led to the area adopting the slogan &quot;More Than You Imagine&quot;.

===Administrative history===
Clackmannanshire&#x27;s origins as a shire (the area controlled by a sheriff) are unclear; it had certainly become a shire by 1305, with some suggestion that it may have already existed in the early 1200s.

The county town was originally Clackmannan, where the tolbooth was built in 1592 to serve as the sheriff court for the county. Commissioners of Supply were established in 1667 to act as the main administrative body for the shire. In 1822 the sheriff court and meeting place of the commissioners was moved from Clackmannan to Alloa, which had grown to become the more significant town. County Buildings was built in 1865 at the corner of Mar Street and Drysdale Street in Alloa to serve as the courthouse and meeting place for the commissioners.

Elected county councils were established in 1890 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889, taking most of the functions of the commissioners (which were eventually abolished in 1930). Clackmannanshire County Council held its first meeting on 22 May 1890 at the County Buildings in Alloa, which would serve as the county council&#x27;s headquarters until its abolition in 1975.

The 1889 act also led to a review of boundaries, with several exclaves being transferred to a county they actually bordered, and parishes which straddled more than one county being adjusted such that each parish was entirely in a single county. These changes saw Clackmannanshire cede Cambuskenneth to Stirlingshire, whilst it gained Alva from Stirlingshire and parts of Alloa parish which had been in Perthshire.

Clackmannanshire County Council was abolished in 1975 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973, which replaced Scotland&#x27;s counties, burghs and landward districts with a two-tier structure of upper-tier regions and lower-tier districts. Clackmannanshire became part of the Central region and a Clackmannan district was created covering the pre-1975 county plus the parish of Muckhart, which had been in Perthshire prior to 1975.

Further local government reforms in 1996 under the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 saw the regions and districts created in 1975 abolished and replaced with council areas providing all local government services. Clackmannan district became one of the new council areas, taking on the functions of the abolished Central Regional Council. The 1994 act originally named the new council area &quot;Clackmannan&quot;, but the shadow authority elected in 1995 requested a change of name to &quot;Clackmannanshire&quot;, which was agreed by the government before the new council area came into force on 1 April 1996.

==Governance==
===Political control===
The first election to Clackmannan District Council was held in 1974, initially operating as a shadow authority alongside the outgoing authorities until the new system came into force on 16 May 1975. A shadow authority was again elected in 1995 ahead of the change to council areas which came into force on 1 April 1996. Political control since 1975 has been as follows:

===Leadership===
The leaders of the council since 1996 have been:

===Composition===
Following the 2022 election and a subsequent change of allegiance in December 2022, the composition of the council was:

The next election is due in 2027.

===Premises===
Since 2014, the council has been based at Kilncraigs, on Greenside Street in Alloa.

After the 1975 local government reorganisation, the old headquarters of Clackmannanshire County Council at the County Buildings reverted to being solely a courthouse, and the old county council&#x27;s overflow offices in converted houses along nearby Marshill passed to the Central Regional Council. The Clackmannan District Council acquired a modern office building called The Whins on Whins Road to serve as its headquarters, and also took over the former Alloa Town Council building at Greenfield House on Mar Place.

Greenfield House had been built as a house in 1894 and had been bought by the old town council in 1952, with its gardens becoming a public park. In 1987 Greenfield House was extended, allowing it to become the district council&#x27;s headquarters, with The Whins subsequently being turned into the Alloa Business Centre. Greenfield House then served as the council&#x27;s headquarters until 2014.

In 2014 the council moved to Kilncraigs, which had been built in 1904 as the offices, factory and warehouse of John Paton, Son and Co, manufacturers of knitting yarn. After the factory closed the whole building had been converted to offices in 2004.

==Elections==

Since 2007 elections have been held every five years under the single transferable vote system, introduced by the Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004. Election results since 1995 have been as follows:

===Wards===
Since 2007, the council area has been divided into five multi-member wards:


==Communities==
The council area is divided into nine community council areas, eight of which have community councils as at 2023, being those marked with an asterisk below.
* Alloa*
* Alva*
* Clackmannan*
* Dollar*
* Menstrie*
* Muckhart*
* Sauchie and Fishcross*
* Tillicoultry, Coalsnaughton and Devonside*
* Tullibody, Cambus, and Glenochil
== Town twinning ==
Since 2006, Clackmannanshire has been twinned with Vendargues, in southern France, and with Espartinas, in Andalusia, Spain.

==Coat of arms==
Clackmannanshire&#x27;s coat of arms is blazoned:

&quot;Or, a saltire gules; upon a chief vert, between two gauntlets proper, a pale argent charged with a pallet sable.&quot;

The red saltire on gold is taken from the arms of the Clan Bruce. According to legend, Robert Bruce mislaid his gauntlets while visiting the county, and upon asking where he could find them was told to &quot;look aboot ye&quot; (hence the motto). The green chief represents the county&#x27;s agriculture, while the black and white pale is taken from the arms of the Clan Erskine whose chief the Earl of Mar lives at Alloa Tower. Sir Thomas Bruce 1st Baron of Clackmannan was a member of the House of Bruce and received lands in Clackmannan from his cousin Robert II.

==Wider politics==
In the 2014 Scottish independence referendum, Clackmannanshire was the first council area to declare its result. Though some predictions had seen the area as being favourable towards the &quot;Yes&quot; side, the &quot;No&quot; vote took 53.8% of the area&#x27;s vote. This was seen as an early sign that Scotland would vote against independence.

In the 2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum, Clackmannanshire voted by 58% to remain.

===Parliamentary constituencies===
* Pre-United Kingdom (Parliament of Scotland)
** Clackmannanshire (1600s to 1707)
* UK Parliament
** Clackmannanshire (1708 to 1832)
** Clackmannanshire and Kinross-shire (1832 to 1918)
** Clackmannan and Eastern Stirlingshire (1918 to 1983)
** Clackmannan (1983 to 1997)
** Ochil (1997 to 2005)
** Ochil and South Perthshire (2005 to 2024)
** Alloa and Grangemouth (2024 to present)
* Scottish Parliament
** Ochil (1999 to 2011)
** Clackmannanshire and Dunblane (2011 to present)

==Geography==
In terms of population, Clackmannanshire is the smallest council area in mainland Scotland. Its population was in , around half of whom live in the main town and administrative centre, Alloa.

The Ochil Hills dominate the northern third of the county, where Ben Cleuch, Clackmannanshire&#x27;s highest point, can be found. The northernmost salient of the county lies along the Upper Glendevon Reservoir. Strathdevon is immediately to the south of the steep escarpment formed by the Ochil Fault, along which the Hillfoots Villages are located. Strathdevon mostly comprises a lowland plain a few hundred metres either side of the River Devon, which joins the Forth near Cambus. There is also the Black Devon river that flows past the town of Clackmannan to join the Forth near Alloa. This confluence once had a small pier, for portage to Dunmore pier on the south shore, and anchorage of smaller sailing ships, while others of greater tonnage could be accepted at Dunmore pier on the opposite banks of the Forth. Roughly in the centre of the county lies the Gartmorn Dam County Park, and there are small patches of forest in the south-east of the county. Two unnamed peninsulas are formed by meanders in the river Forth along Clackmannanshire&#x27;s southern boundary; the easternmost of these has two small islands - Tullibody Inch and Alloa Inch - either side of it.

==Economy==
The main industries are agriculture, brewing, and formerly coal mining. In 2006, permission was given for a waterfront development of the Docks area of Alloa, which has been in decline since the 1960s. There is a large glass works at Alloa.

==Transport==
Alloa railway station reopened in May 2008; prior to this the county had no active railway stations. A new railway line was completed which connected Kincardine and Stirling, and thus reconnecting Alloa to the national rail network for the first time since 1968, was opened to the public. Scheduled passenger services operate only between Alloa and Stirling and onwards to Glasgow and Edinburgh; the line to Kincardine is normally used by freight trains only but some special excursion trains are run by charter operators. An opening ceremony was held on Thursday 15 May 2008, with the first fully functioning passenger service commencing in the new summer timetable on 19 May 2008. The service provides an hourly connection between Alloa, Stirling and Glasgow Queen Street.

The Clackmannanshire Bridge, a new road crossing of the Forth intended to ease congestion and pressure on the older Kincardine Bridge, opened in 2008 (technically the span of the new bridge is not within the county, instead falling just outside it and administratively divided between Falkirk and Fife).

Major roads in the area are the A91 between Bannockburn and St Andrews which is the main thoroughfare through the Hillfoots Villages, the A907 between Stirling and Dunfermline which passes through Alloa and Clackmannan, the A908 connecting Alloa and Tillicountry, and the A977 (fed by the A876) between Kincardine and Kinross which runs east of Clackmannan.

==Settlements==


; Other settlements

* Cambus
* Devonside
* Fishcross
* Forestmill
* Inglewood
* Kennet
* Muckhart &quot;(historically in Perthshire)&quot;
* Solsgirth

==Places of interest==
* Alloa Tower
* Auchinbaird Windmill
* Ben Cleuch
* Broomhall Castle
* Brucefield House
* Castle Campbell
* Clackmannan House
* Harviestoun Brewery
* Gartmorn Dam
* Gean House
* Menstrie Castle
* Tullibody Old Kirk

==References==
==External links==

* ClacksNet - Clackmannanshire&#x27;s Community Network
* Census 2001 Information (PDF)
* National Library of Scotland - Clackmannanshire Map ca. 1681
* Look Aboot Ye - Clackmannanshire Community News, Information and Forums
* ASH Consulting Group 1998. Clackmannanshire landscape character assessment. Scottish Natural Heritage Review No 96.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207268" start="0" end="16" title="Clackmannanshire" label="Clackmannanshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207268" start="32" end="53" title="Clackmannanshire" label="County of Clackmannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="60" end="75" title="Shires of Scotland" label="historic county"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="77" end="89" title="Council areas of Scotland" label="council area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309443" start="91" end="110" title="registration counties" label="registration county"/>
<link wikidata="Q202435" start="115" end="131" title="Lieutenancy areas of Scotland" label="lieutenancy area"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="135" end="143" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q217838" start="176" end="184" title="Stirling (council area)" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="186" end="190" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q207679" start="196" end="213" title="Perth and Kinross" label="Perth and Kinross"/>
<link wikidata="Q216802" start="250" end="257" title="Falkirk (council area)" label="Falkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="265" end="279" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247411" start="322" end="332" title="Perthshire" label="Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229763" start="334" end="347" title="Stirlingshire" label="Stirlingshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="352" end="356" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106575" start="494" end="503" title="Celtic mythology" label="Brythonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366803" start="516" end="521" title="Manaw Gododdin" label="Manaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q207268" start="763" end="770" title="Clackmannanshire" label="Clacks."/>
<link wikidata="Q1010098" start="849" end="860" title="Clackmannan" label="Clackmannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17777910" start="1026" end="1046" title="Clackmannan Tolbooth" label="Clackmannan Tolbooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618753" start="1176" end="1191" title="Hillfoots Villages" label="Hillfoots burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1481" end="1486" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="1658" end="1663" title="shires of Scotland" label="shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494998" start="1690" end="1697" title="Sheriff principal" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814110" start="1882" end="1890" title="tolbooth" label="tolbooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152837" start="1955" end="1978" title="Commissioners of Supply" label="Commissioners of Supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009331" start="2153" end="2158" title="Alloa" label="Alloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17777591" start="2213" end="2229" title="County Buildings, Alloa" label="County Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664029" start="2433" end="2469" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="2820" end="2827" title="exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738577" start="3043" end="3056" title="Cambuskenneth" label="Cambuskenneth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229763" start="3060" end="3073" title="Stirlingshire" label="Stirlingshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q448127" start="3092" end="3096" title="Alva, Clackmannanshire" label="Alva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247411" start="3160" end="3170" title="Perthshire" label="Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664037" start="3237" end="3273" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q383493" start="3409" end="3418" title="districts of Scotland" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053979" start="3456" end="3470" title="Central Region, Scotland" label="Central region"/>
<link wikidata="Q46224" start="3558" end="3566" title="Muckhart" label="Muckhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258386" start="3664" end="3705" title="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994" label="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176207" start="3780" end="3792" title="council area" label="council area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015449" start="4665" end="4687" title="leader of the council" label="leaders of the council"/>
<link wikidata="Q112109372" start="4743" end="4756" title="2022 Clackmannanshire Council election" label="2022 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145187" start="6015" end="6037" title="Patons and Baldwins" label="John Paton, Son and Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="6233" end="6257" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664013" start="6284" end="6320" title="Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004" label="Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="6454" end="6459" title="Wards of the United Kingdom" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612187" start="6517" end="6540" title="list of community council areas in Scotland" label="community council areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403338" start="6562" end="6579" title="community council" label="community council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009331" start="6638" end="6643" title="Alloa" label="Alloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q448127" start="6647" end="6651" title="Alva, Clackmannanshire" label="Alva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010098" start="6655" end="6666" title="Clackmannan" label="Clackmannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235672" start="6670" end="6676" title="Dollar, Clackmannanshire" label="Dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010052" start="6680" end="6688" title="Menstrie" label="Menstrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q46224" start="6692" end="6700" title="Muckhart" label="Muckhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427017" start="6704" end="6711" title="Sauchie" label="Sauchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454718" start="6716" end="6725" title="Fishcross" label="Fishcross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021170" start="6729" end="6741" title="Tillicoultry" label="Tillicoultry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138033" start="6743" end="6756" title="Coalsnaughton" label="Coalsnaughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206965" start="6761" end="6770" title="River Devon, Clackmannanshire" label="Devonside"/>
<link wikidata="Q971957" start="6774" end="6783" title="Tullibody" label="Tullibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025683" start="6785" end="6791" title="Cambus, Clackmannanshire" label="Cambus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148468" start="6878" end="6888" title="Vendargues" label="Vendargues"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="6902" end="6908" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628327" start="6919" end="6929" title="Espartinas" label="Espartinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="6934" end="6943" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="6945" end="6950" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="7010" end="7016" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q845196" start="7201" end="7211" title="Clan Bruce" label="Clan Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="7234" end="7246" title="Robert Bruce" label="Robert Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475346" start="7404" end="7409" title="chief (heraldry)" label="chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q593676" start="7478" end="7482" title="pale (heraldry)" label="pale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094935" start="7513" end="7525" title="Clan Erskine" label="Clan Erskine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277359" start="7542" end="7553" title="Earl of Mar" label="Earl of Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732984" start="7563" end="7574" title="Alloa Tower" label="Alloa Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787973" start="7576" end="7617" title="Sir Thomas Bruce 1st Baron of Clackmannan" label="Sir Thomas Bruce 1st Baron of Clackmannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q312592" start="7703" end="7712" title="Robert II of Scotland" label="Robert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="7741" end="7778" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="2014 Scottish independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="8089" end="8145" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="8230" end="8244" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="8246" end="8268" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16826980" start="8273" end="8289" title="Clackmannanshire (Parliament of Scotland constituency)" label="Clackmannanshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="8308" end="8321" title="UK Parliament" label="UK Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124895" start="8325" end="8341" title="Clackmannanshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Clackmannanshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124900" start="8360" end="8394" title="Clackmannanshire and Kinross-shire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Clackmannanshire and Kinross-shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124897" start="8413" end="8450" title="Clackmannan and Eastern Stirlingshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Clackmannan and Eastern Stirlingshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124892" start="8469" end="8480" title="Clackmannan (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Clackmannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076322" start="8499" end="8504" title="Ochil (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ochil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051029" start="8523" end="8549" title="Ochil and South Perthshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ochil and South Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q121407193" start="8568" end="8589" title="Alloa and Grangemouth (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Alloa and Grangemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="8610" end="8629" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013461" start="8633" end="8638" title="Ochil (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Ochil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094628" start="8657" end="8686" title="Clackmannanshire and Dunblane (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Clackmannanshire and Dunblane"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="8768" end="8789" title="List of Scottish council areas by population" label="smallest council area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009331" start="8905" end="8910" title="Alloa" label="Alloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q45828" start="8917" end="8928" title="Ochil Hills" label="Ochil Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885437" start="8978" end="8988" title="Ben Cleuch" label="Ben Cleuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622091" start="9124" end="9135" title="Strathdevon" label="Strathdevon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076323" start="9202" end="9213" title="Ochil Fault" label="Ochil Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618753" start="9231" end="9249" title="Hillfoots Villages" label="Hillfoots Villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206965" start="9348" end="9359" title="River Devon, Clackmannanshire" label="River Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421" start="9377" end="9382" title="River Forth" label="Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025683" start="9388" end="9394" title="Cambus, Clackmannanshire" label="Cambus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920641" start="9414" end="9425" title="Black Devon" label="Black Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010098" start="9460" end="9471" title="Clackmannan" label="Clackmannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q120638097" start="9545" end="9552" title="portage" label="portage"/>
<link wikidata="Q168432" start="9593" end="9599" title="anchor" label="anchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="9910" end="9917" title="meander" label="meander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852178" start="10036" end="10050" title="Tullibody Inch" label="Tullibody Inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732978" start="10055" end="10065" title="Alloa Inch" label="Alloa Inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="10124" end="10135" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q869095" start="10137" end="10144" title="brewing" label="brewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="10159" end="10170" title="coal mining" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058372" start="10319" end="10330" title="Northern Glass Cone, Alloa Glass Works" label="glass works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956124" start="10356" end="10377" title="Alloa railway station" label="Alloa railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617551" start="10463" end="10475" title="Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine rail link" label="railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011221" start="10506" end="10516" title="Kincardine-on-Forth" label="Kincardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124896" start="11136" end="11159" title="Clackmannanshire Bridge" label="Clackmannanshire Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410445" start="11248" end="11265" title="Kincardine Bridge" label="Kincardine Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q216802" start="11417" end="11424" title="Falkirk (council area)" label="Falkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="11429" end="11433" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q280477" start="11469" end="11472" title="A91 road" label="A91"/>
<link wikidata="Q806906" start="11481" end="11492" title="Bannockburn" label="Bannockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q207736" start="11497" end="11507" title="St Andrews" label="St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618753" start="11551" end="11569" title="Hillfoots Villages" label="Hillfoots Villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660978" start="11575" end="11579" title="A907 road" label="A907"/>
<link wikidata="Q182923" start="11588" end="11596" title="Stirling" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q211950" start="11601" end="11612" title="Dunfermline" label="Dunfermline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11661" end="11665" title="A908 road" label="A908"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649690" start="11709" end="11713" title="A977 road" label="A977"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153692" start="11726" end="11730" title="A876 road" label="A876"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011221" start="11740" end="11750" title="Kincardine, Fife" label="Kincardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q781885" start="11755" end="11762" title="Kinross" label="Kinross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025683" start="11837" end="11843" title="Cambus, Clackmannanshire" label="Cambus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454718" start="11858" end="11867" title="Fishcross" label="Fishcross"/>
<link wikidata="Q20027853" start="11870" end="11880" title="Forestmill" label="Forestmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389760" start="11895" end="11901" title="Kennet, Clackmannanshire" label="Kennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q46224" start="11904" end="11912" title="Muckhart" label="Muckhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247411" start="11936" end="11946" title="Perthshire" label="Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732984" start="11992" end="12003" title="Alloa Tower" label="Alloa Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q109237332" start="12006" end="12026" title="Auchinbaird Windmill" label="Auchinbaird Windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885437" start="12029" end="12039" title="Ben Cleuch" label="Ben Cleuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975316" start="12042" end="12058" title="Broomhall Castle" label="Broomhall Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978532" start="12061" end="12077" title="Brucefield House" label="Brucefield House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975734" start="12080" end="12095" title="Castle Campbell" label="Castle Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17777931" start="12098" end="12115" title="Clackmannan House" label="Clackmannan House"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103592" start="12118" end="12137" title="Harviestoun Brewery" label="Harviestoun Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q24643671" start="12140" end="12152" title="Gartmorn Dam" label="Gartmorn Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529450" start="12155" end="12165" title="Gean House" label="Gean House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817357" start="12168" end="12183" title="Menstrie Castle" label="Menstrie Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852181" start="12186" end="12204" title="Tullibody Old Kirk" label="Tullibody Old Kirk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52285" wikidata="Q390992" url="?curid=52285" title="Charles Lee (general)">
<text>Charles Lee ( – 2 October 1782) was a British-born American military officer who served as a general of the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War. He also served earlier in the British Army during the Seven Years War. He sold his commission after the Seven Years War and served for a time in the Polish army of King Stanislaus II Augustus.

Lee moved to North America in 1773 and bought an estate in western Virginia. When the fighting broke out in the American Revolutionary War in 1775, he volunteered to serve with rebel forces. Lee&#x27;s ambitions to become Commander in Chief of the Continental Army were thwarted by the appointment of George Washington to that post.

In 1776, forces under his command repulsed a British attempt to capture Charleston, which boosted his standing with the army and Congress. Later that year, he was captured by British cavalry under Banastre Tarleton; he was held by the British as a prisoner until exchanged in 1778. During the Battle of Monmouth later that year, Lee led an assault on the British that miscarried. He was subsequently court-martialed and his military service brought to an end. He died in Philadelphia in 1782.

==Early and personal life==

Lee was born on in Darnhall, Cheshire, England, Great Britain, the son of Major General John Lee and his wife Isabella Bunbury (daughter of Sir Henry Bunbury, 3rd Baronet). His mother&#x27;s family were landed gentry with national stature—his maternal grandfather had been an MP for Cheshire, and a cousin, Sir Thomas Charles Bunbury, was an MP for Suffolk. Five of Lee&#x27;s six older siblings had died – only his sister Sidney Lee, four years older, survived to adulthood. Sidney never married.

Like his mother, with whom he did not get along well, Lee would have a temperamental personality and poor physical health (suffering rheumatism and chronic attacks of gout), which caused him to travel often to medicinal spas. He received a private education from tutors, then was sent to a grammar school near Chester and a private academy in Switzerland before being sent to King Edward VI School, Bury St Edmunds, a free grammar school near the home of his uncle, Rev. William Bunbury. Lee became proficient in several languages, including Latin, Greek, and French. His father was colonel of the 55th Foot (later renumbered the 44th) when he purchased a commission on 9 April 1747, for Charles as an ensign in the same regiment.

Despite inheriting money upon his mother&#x27;s death, Lee became known for a peripatetic and extravagant lifestyle, which led to financial difficulties several times in his life, including after liquidating land grants in East Florida and St. John&#x27;s Island in the Gulf of St. Laurence in the late 1760s (which he received because of his service in the French and Indian War). By 1770, Lee had acquired the services of Giuseppe Minghini, who would remain his servant until the end of his life and received a bequest. Lee owned at least six slaves shortly before his death, and his will divided ownership of all his slaves (three mentioned by name) between Minghini and Elizabeth Dunne, Lee&#x27;s housekeeper. After paying his debts and a number of specific bequests, some involving horses and others money (usually to purchase mourning rings), Lee directed his executors (future congressman Alexander White and former Rev. Charles Mynn Thurston), to pay the remainder of his estate (worth about $700 according to the filed inventory) to his sister Sidney.

==Seven Years&#x27; War and after==
===North America===
After completing his schooling, Lee reported for duty with his regiment in Ireland. Shortly after his father&#x27;s death, on 2 May 1751, he received (or purchased) a lieutenant&#x27;s commission in the 44th. He was sent with the regiment to North America in 1754 for service in the French and Indian War under Major General Edward Braddock, in what was a front for the Seven Years War between Britain and France. He was with Braddock at his defeat at the Battle of the Monongahela in 1755. During this time in America, Lee married the daughter of a Mohawk 
chief. His wife (name unknown) gave birth to twins. Lee was known to the Mohawk, who were allies of the English, as &quot;Ounewaterika&quot; or &quot;Boiling Water&quot;.

On 11 June 1756, Lee purchased a Captain&#x27;s commission in the 44th for the sum of £900. The following year he took part in an expedition against the French fortress of Louisbourg, and on 1 July 1758, he was wounded in a failed assault on Fort Ticonderoga. He was sent to Long Island to recuperate. A surgeon whom he had earlier rebuked and thrashed attacked him. After recovering, Lee took part in the capture of Fort Niagara in 1759 and Montreal in 1760. This brought the war in the North American theater to an end by completing the Conquest of Canada.

===Portugal===
Lee went back to Europe, transferred to the 103rd Foot as a major, and served as a lieutenant colonel in the Portuguese army. He fought against the Spanish during their unsuccessful invasion of the country, and distinguished himself under John Burgoyne at the Battle of Vila Velha.

===Poland===
Lee returned to England in 1763 following the Peace of Paris, which ended the Seven Years&#x27; War. His regiment was disbanded and he was retired on half pay as a major. On 26 May 1772, although still inactive, he was promoted to lieutenant colonel.

In 1765, Lee served as an aide-de-camp under Stanislaus II, King of Poland. After many adventures he came home to England. Unable to secure promotion in the British Army, in 1769 he returned to Poland and then saw action in the Russo-Turkish War. In a duel in Italy, he lost two fingers, but in a second duel with the same Italian officer, he killed his opponent.

==Return to England and North America==

Returning to England again, he found that he was sympathetic to the North American colonists in their quarrel with Great Britain. He moved to the colonies in 1773 and in 1775 purchased an estate worth £3,000 in Berkeley County, near the home of his friend Horatio Gates, with whom he had served in the French and Indian War and who had moved back to the colony in 1772. This area is now part of West Virginia. He spent ten months travelling through the colonies and acquainting himself with patriots.

==American Revolution==
===Continental Army===

Although Lee was generally acknowledged at the Second Continental Congress to be the most capable candidate for the command of the Continental Army, the role was given to George Washington. Lee recognized the sense of giving the position to a native-born North American, but expected to be given the role of second-in-command. He was disappointed when that role went to Artemas Ward, whom Lee considered too inexperienced for the job. Lee was appointed major-general and third in line, but succeeded to second-in-command in 1776 when Ward resigned due to ill health.

===Southern command===

Lee also received various other titles: in 1776, he was named commander of the so-called Canadian Department, although he never got to serve in this capacity. He was appointed as the first commander of the Southern Department. He served in this post for six months, until he was recalled to the main army. During his time in the South, the British sent an expedition under Henry Clinton to recover Charleston, South Carolina. Lee oversaw the fortification of the city. Fort Sullivan was a fortification built out of palmetto logs, later named for commander Col. William Moultrie. Lee ordered the army to evacuate the fort because as he said it would only last thirty minutes and all soldiers would be killed. Governor John Rutledge forbade Moultrie to evacuate and the fort held. The spongy palmetto logs repelled the cannonball from the British ships. The assault on Sullivan&#x27;s Island was driven off, and Clinton abandoned his attempts to capture the city. Lee was acclaimed as the &quot;hero of Charleston&quot;, although according to some American accounts the credit for the defense was not his.

===New York and capture===

The British capture of Fort Washington and its near 3,000-strong garrison on 16 November 1776, prompted Lee&#x27;s first overt criticism of Washington. Believing the commander-in-chief&#x27;s hesitation to evacuate the fort to be responsible for the loss, Lee wrote to Joseph Reed lamenting Washington&#x27;s indecision, a criticism Washington read when he opened the letter believing it to be official business. As Washington retreated across New Jersey after the defeat at New York, he urged Lee, whose troops were north of New York, to join him. Although Lee&#x27;s orders were at first discretionary, and although there were good tactical reasons for delaying, his slow progress has been characterized as insubordinate. On 12 December 1776, Lee was captured by British troops at White&#x27;s Tavern in Basking Ridge, New Jersey, while writing a letter to General Horatio Gates complaining about Washington&#x27;s deficiency.

===Battle of Monmouth===
Lee was released on parole as part of a prisoner exchange in early April 1778 and, while on his way to York, Pennsylvania, was greeted enthusiastically by Washington at Valley Forge. Lee was ignorant of the changes that had occurred during his sixteen-month captivity; he was not aware of what Washington believed to be a conspiracy to install Gates as commander-in-chief or of the reformation of the Continental Army under the tutelage of Baron von Steuben. According to Elias Boudinot, the commissary who had negotiated the prisoner exchange, Lee claimed that &quot;he found the Army in a worse situation than he expected and that General Washington was not fit to command a sergeant&#x27;s guard.&quot; While in York, Lee lobbied Congress for promotion to lieutenant general, and went above Washington&#x27;s head to submit to it a plan for reorganizing the army in a way that was markedly different from that which Washington had worked long to implement.

Lee&#x27;s suggestion was for a militia army that avoided competing with a professional enemy in a pitched battle and relied instead on a defensive strategy which would wear down an opposing army with harassing, small-unit actions. After completing his parole, Lee returned to duty with the Continental Army as Washington&#x27;s second-in-command on 21 May. In June, as the British evacuated Philadelphia and marched through New Jersey en route to New York, Washington twice convened war councils to discuss the best course of action. In both, his generals largely agreed that Washington should avoid a major battle, Lee arguing that such a battle would be criminal, though a minority favored a limited engagement. At the second council, Lee argued the Continental Army was no match for the British Army, and favored allowing the British to proceed unimpeded and waiting until French military intervention following the Franco-American alliance could shift the balance in favor of the Americans.

Washington agreed with the minority of his generals who favored an aggressive but limited action. He allocated some 4,500 troops, approximately a third of his army, to a vanguard that could land a heavy blow on the British without risking his army in a general engagement. The main body would follow and provide support if circumstances warranted. He offered Lee command of the vanguard, but Lee turned the job down on the basis that the force was too small for a man of his rank and position. Washington gave the position to Major General the Marquis de Lafayette. In his haste to catch the British, Lafayette pushed the vanguard to exhaustion and outran his supplies, prompting Washington to send Lee, who had in the meantime changed his mind, to replace him.

Lee took over on 27 June at Englishtown. The British were at Monmouth Courthouse (modern-day Freehold), from Englishtown. Washington was with the main body of just over 7,800 troops and the bulk of the artillery at Manalapan Bridge, behind Lee. Believing action to be imminent, Washington conferred with the vanguard&#x27;s senior officers at Englishtown that afternoon but did not offer a battle plan. Lee believed he had full discretion on whether and how to attack and called his own war council after Washington left. He intended to advance as soon as he knew the British were on the move, in the hope of catching their rearguard when it was most vulnerable. In the absence of any intelligence about British intentions or the terrain, Lee believed it would be useless to form a precise plan of his own.

====Lee&#x27;s battle====

When news arrived at 05:00 on 28 June that the British were moving, Lee led the vanguard towards Monmouth Court House, where he discovered the British rearguard, which he estimated at 2,000 troops. He ordered Brigadier General Anthony Wayne with some 550 men to fix the rearguard in place while he led the remainder of the vanguard on a left hook with the intention of outflanking the British, but he neglected to inform his subordinates, Brigadier General Charles Scott and Brigadier General William Maxwell, of his plan. Lee&#x27;s confidence crept into reports back to Washington that implied &quot;the certainty of success.&quot;

As soon as the British commander, General Sir Henry Clinton, received news that his rearguard was being probed, he ordered his main combat division to march back towards Monmouth Court House. Lee became concerned that his right flank would be vulnerable and moved with Lafayette&#x27;s detachment to secure it. To his left, Scott and Maxwell were not in communication with Lee and not privy to his plan. They became concerned that the arriving British troops would isolate them, and decided to withdraw. To their left, Wayne&#x27;s isolated troops, having witnessed the British marching back, were also withdrawing. Lee witnessed one of Lafayette&#x27;s units pulling back after a failed attempt to silence some British artillery around the same time as one of his staff officers returned with the news that Scott had withdrawn. With his troops withdrawing without orders, it became clear to Lee that he was losing control of the vanguard, and with his immediate command now only 2,500 strong, he realized his plan to envelop the British rearguard was finished. His priority became the safety of his troops in the face of superior numbers, and he ordered a general retreat.

Lee had significant difficulties communicating with his subordinates and could exercise only limited command and control of the vanguard, but at unit level, the retreat was generally conducted with a discipline that did credit to Steuben&#x27;s training, and the Americans suffered few casualties. Lee believed he had conducted a model &quot;retrograde manoeuver in the face and under fire of an enemy&quot; and claimed his troops moved with &quot;order and precision.&quot; He had remained calm during the retreat but began to unravel at Ker&#x27;s house. When two of General Washington&#x27;s aides informed Lee that the main body was still some away and asked him what to report back, Lee replied &quot;that he really did not know what to say.&quot; Crucially, he failed to keep Washington informed of the retreat.

Without any recent news from Lee, Washington had no reason to be concerned as he approached the battlefield with the main body shortly after midday. In the space of some ten minutes, his confidence gave way to alarm as he encountered a straggler bearing the first news of Lee&#x27;s retreat and then whole units in retreat. None of the officers Washington met could tell him where they were supposed to be going or what they were supposed to be doing. As the commander-in-chief rode on ahead, he saw the vanguard in full retreat but no sign of the British. At around 12:45, Washington found Lee marshalling the last of his command across the middle morass, marshy ground southeast of a bridge over the Spotswood Middle Brook.

Expecting praise for a retreat he believed had been generally conducted in good order, Lee was uncharacteristically lost for words when Washington asked without pleasantries, &quot;I desire to know, sir, what is the reason – whence arises this disorder and confusion?&quot; When he regained his composure, Lee attempted to explain his actions. He blamed faulty intelligence and his officers, especially Scott, for pulling back without orders, leaving him no choice but to retreat in the face of a superior force, and reminded Washington that he had opposed the attack in the first place. Washington was not convinced; &quot;All this may be very true, sir,&quot; he replied, &quot;but you ought not to have undertaken it unless you intended to go through with it.&quot; Washington made it clear he was disappointed with Lee and rode off to organize the battle he felt his subordinate should have given. Lee followed at a distance, bewildered and believing he had been relieved of command.

With the main body still arriving and the British no more than away, Washington began to rally the vanguard to set up the very defenses Lee had been attempting to organize. He then offered Lee a choice: remain and command the rearguard, or fall back across the bridge and organize the main defenses on Perrine&#x27;s Hill. Lee opted for the former while Washington departed to take care of the latter. Lee fought the counter-attacking British in a rearguard action that lasted no more than thirty minutes, enough time for Washington to complete the deployment of the main body, and at 13:30, he was one of the last American officers to withdraw across the bridge. When Lee reached Perrine&#x27;s Hill, Washington sent him with part of the former vanguard to form a reserve at Englishtown. At 15:00, Steuben arrived at Englishtown and relieved Lee of command.

General Lee regarded John Skey Eustace as his adopted son and declared him as his heir, but the handsome Eustace decided to desert the unpredictable Lee.

====Court martial====
Even before the day was out, Lee was cast in the role of villain, and his vilification became an integral part of after-battle reports written by Washington&#x27;s officers. Lee continued in his post as second-in-command immediately after the battle, and it is likely that the issue would have simply subsided if he had let it go. On 30 June, after protesting his innocence to all who would listen, Lee wrote an insolent letter to Washington in which he blamed &quot;dirty earwigs&quot; for turning Washington against him, claimed his decision to retreat had saved the day, and pronounced Washington to be &quot;guilty of an act of cruel injustice&quot; towards him. Instead of the apology Lee was tactlessly seeking, Washington replied that the tone of Lee&#x27;s letter was &quot;highly improper&quot; and that he would initiate an official inquiry into Lee&#x27;s conduct. Lee&#x27;s response demanding a court martial was again insolent, and Washington ordered his arrest and set about obliging him.

The court convened on 4 July 1778, and three charges were laid before Lee: disobeying orders in not attacking on the morning of the battle, contrary to &quot;repeated instructions&quot;; conducting an &quot;unnecessary, disorderly, and shameful retreat&quot;; and disrespect towards the commander-in-chief. The trial concluded on 12 August 1778, and the accusations and counter-accusations continued to fly until the verdict was confirmed by Congress on 5 December 1778. Lee&#x27;s defense was articulate but fatally flawed by his efforts to turn it into a personal contest between himself and Washington. He denigrated the commander-in-chief&#x27;s role in the battle, calling Washington&#x27;s official account &quot;from beginning to end a most abominable damn&#x27;d lie&quot;, and disingenuously cast his own decision to retreat as a &quot;masterful manoeuvre&quot; designed to lure the British onto the main body. Washington remained aloof from the controversy, but his allies portrayed Lee as a traitor who had allowed the British to escape and linked him to the previous winter&#x27;s alleged conspiracy against Washington.

Although the first two charges proved to be dubious, Lee was undeniably guilty of disrespect, and Washington was too powerful to cross. As the historian John Shy noted, &quot;Under the circumstances, an acquittal on the first two charges would have been a vote of no-confidence in Washington.&quot; Lee was found guilty on all three counts, but the court deleted &quot;shameful&quot; from the second and noted the retreat was &quot;disorderly&quot; only &quot;in some few instances.&quot; Lee was suspended from the army for a year, a sentence so lenient that some interpreted it as a vindication of all but the charge of disrespect. Lee continued to argue his case and rage against Washington to anyone who would listen, prompting both Lieutenant Colonel John Laurens, one of Washington&#x27;s aides, and Steuben to challenge him to a duel. Only the duel with Laurens actually transpired on December 23, 1778, during which Lee was wounded in the side. Laurens, believing the wound was more serious than it seemed, went to help the general. However, Lee said it was fine and proposed to shoot a second time. The men&#x27;s seconds, Alexander Hamilton and Evan Edwards, opposed this idea and had the duel end there, despite Lee&#x27;s protests to fire again and Laurens&#x27;s agreeance. In 1780, Lee sent such a poorly received letter to Congress that it terminated his service with the army.

==Later life==
Lee retired to his Prato Rio property, where he bred horses and dogs. However, debts had again accumulated, and his advisors recommended liquidating the property. By the spring of 1780, in addition to more frequent gout attacks, Lee had acquired a chronic cough which with other symptoms might have indicated tuberculosis. He made a final tour of Baltimore, Williamsburg, and Fredericksburg, Virginia; Frederick, Maryland; and western Pennsylvania. While visiting Philadelphia to complete the property&#x27;s sale (that to Maryland buyers having fallen through), he was stricken with fever and died in an inn on 2 October 1782. Despite a provision of his will that denounced organized religion and specifically forbade burial near a church or religious meeting house, his remains were taken to the City Tavern for friends and dignitaries to pay their respects, then a military escort took his remains to Christ Church, where after a brief Anglican service, Lee was buried in the churchyard in an unmarked grave. Lee left his property to his sister, Sidney Lee, who died unmarried in 1788.

==Legacy==
Lee considered Native Americans as fitting the model of the noble savage, as did others of his time, including his friend Sir William Johnson, 1st Baronet. Describing them as &quot;hospitable, friendly and civil to an immense degree&quot;, Lee wrote letters home to his family and friends, urging them to educate themselves on the truth against the media&#x27;s false reports on the Natives: &quot;I can assure you that they are a much better sort of people than commonly represented&quot;.

Lee&#x27;s last home, Prato Rio, still exists, and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. A historical marker indicates General Lee&#x27;s service. Much of the adjoining property, which has many natural springs, has been federally owned since 1931, and is currently operated by the U.S. Geological Survey as the Leetown Science Center (formerly the National Fish Hatchery and Research Station), as well as the federal agency&#x27;s eastern regional office.

Fort Lee, New Jersey, on the west side of the Hudson River (across the water from Fort Washington, New York), was named for him during his life. Lee, Massachusetts; Lee, New Hampshire; and Leetown, West Virginia were also named for him.

Lee&#x27;s place in history was further tarnished in the 1850s when George H. Moore, the librarian at the New-York Historical Society, discovered a manuscript dated 29 March 1777, written by Lee while he was a British prisoner of war. It was addressed to the &quot;Royal Commissioners&quot;, i.e., Richard Howe, later 1st Earl Howe, and Richard&#x27;s brother, Sir William Howe, later 5th Viscount Howe, respectively the British naval and army commanders in North America at the time, and detailed a plan by which the British might defeat the rebellion. Moore&#x27;s discovery, presented in a paper titled &quot;The Treason of Charles Lee&quot; in 1858, influenced perceptions of Lee for decades. Lee&#x27;s infamy became orthodoxy in such 19th-century works as Washington Irving&#x27;s &quot;Life of George Washington&quot; (1855–1859), George Washington Parke Custis&#x27;s &quot;Recollections and Private Memoirs of Washington&quot; (1861) and George Bancroft&#x27;s &quot;History of the United States of America, from the Discovery of the American Continent&quot; (1854–1878). Although most modern scholars reject the idea that Lee was guilty of treason, it is given credence in some accounts, examples being Willard Sterne Randall&#x27;s account of the Battle of Monmouth in &quot;George Washington: A Life&quot; (1997), and Dominick Mazzagetti&#x27;s &quot;Charles Lee: Self Before Country&quot; (2013).

==In popular culture==
*Lee is treated unsympathetically in &quot;The Unvanquished&quot;, a 1942 novel by Howard Fast centered around George Washington and his military campaigns.
*Lee is featured as the secondary antagonist in the video game &quot;Assassin&#x27;s Creed III&quot;, serving as second-in-command of the Colonial Templar Order under Grand Master Haytham Kenway and the archenemy of protagonist Connor Kenway, who ultimately kills him in an inn in 1782. He is voiced by Neil Napier.
*Lee and his arrest following the retreat during the Battle of Monmouth is depicted in the animated television series &quot;Liberty&#x27;s Kids&quot;.
*Lee is a character in the first two seasons of the 2014 AMC television series &quot;&quot;, in which he is blackmailed into becoming a British intelligence operative by Major John André. He is portrayed by Brian T. Finney.
*Lee is a character in Diana Gabaldon&#x27;s novel &quot;Written in My Own Heart&#x27;s Blood&quot;, part of the &quot;Outlander&quot; series.
*Lee, portrayed in the original Broadway cast by Jon Rua, is a minor character in the 2015 Broadway musical &quot;Hamilton&quot;, appearing in the songs &quot;Stay Alive,&quot; and &quot;Ten Duel Commandments&quot; in which his duel with soldier John Laurens marks a turning point in the plot.

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* Axelrod, Alan. &quot;The Real History of the American Revolution&quot; Sterling Publishing, 2007.
* 
* 
* 
* — 1776 (book) 
* 
* Purcell, L. Edward. &quot;Who Was Who in the American Revolution&quot;. New York: Facts on File, 1993. .
* 

==External links==

* Washington&#x27;s Retreat through Jersey – Capture of General Lee
* MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE OF THE LATE CHARLES LEE. London 1792</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q390992" start="0" end="11" title="Charles Lee (general)" label="Charles Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="108" end="124" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="136" end="162" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="194" end="206" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q29828922" start="218" end="233" title="Great Britain in the Seven Years War" label="Seven Years War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379908" start="238" end="257" title="Purchase of commissions in the British Army" label="sold his commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q54019" start="328" end="355" title="Stanislaus II of Poland" label="King Stanislaus II Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="371" end="384" title="British America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="425" end="433" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="659" end="676" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4071933" start="745" end="774" title="Battle of Sullivan&amp;#x27;s Island" label="attempt to capture Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="821" end="829" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q332464" start="889" end="906" title="Banastre Tarleton" label="Banastre Tarleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638488" start="985" end="1003" title="Battle of Monmouth" label="Battle of Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="1092" end="1105" title="court-martial" label="court-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1163" end="1175" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224140" start="1234" end="1242" title="Darnhall" label="Darnhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="1244" end="1252" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="1263" end="1276" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="1289" end="1302" title="Major General" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527110" start="1355" end="1385" title="Sir Henry Bunbury, 3rd Baronet" label="Sir Henry Bunbury, 3rd Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="2057" end="2068" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411533" start="2090" end="2111" title="King Edward VI School, Stratford-upon-Avon" label="King Edward VI School"/>
<link wikidata="Q764754" start="2113" end="2128" title="Bury St Edmunds" label="Bury St Edmunds"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="2137" end="2151" title="grammar school" label="grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2256" end="2261" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2263" end="2268" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2274" end="2280" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638046" start="2312" end="2321" title="44th (East Essex) Regiment of Foot" label="55th Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379908" start="2358" end="2380" title="Sale of commissions" label="purchased a commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q14595679" start="2416" end="2422" title="Ensign (rank)" label="ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643271" start="3343" end="3358" title="Alexander White (Virginia politician)" label="Alexander White"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="3640" end="3647" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="3732" end="3742" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="3807" end="3820" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="3848" end="3869" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q113412" start="3890" end="3905" title="Edward Braddock" label="Edward Braddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q524828" start="4021" end="4046" title="Battle of the Monongahela" label="Battle of the Monongahela"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="4115" end="4121" title="Mohawk nation" label="Mohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062404" start="4419" end="4435" title="Louisbourg Expedition (1757)" label="in an expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q540062" start="4455" end="4477" title="fortress of Louisbourg" label="fortress of Louisbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q697897" start="4517" end="4533" title="Battle of Carillon" label="a failed assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438776" start="4537" end="4553" title="Fort Ticonderoga" label="Fort Ticonderoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="4570" end="4581" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888557" start="4701" end="4724" title="Battle of Fort Niagara" label="capture of Fort Niagara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4737" end="4753" title="Great Britain in the Seven Years War#Montreal" label="Montreal in 1760"/>
<link wikidata="Q429230" start="4834" end="4852" title="Conquest of Canada" label="Conquest of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546490" start="4914" end="4924" title="103rd Foot" label="103rd Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896145" start="4930" end="4935" title="Major (United Kingdom)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573405" start="5039" end="5075" title="Spanish invasion of Portugal (1762)" label="unsuccessful invasion of the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q436775" start="5109" end="5122" title="John Burgoyne" label="John Burgoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q335174" start="5130" end="5150" title="Battle of Vila Velha" label="Battle of Vila Velha"/>
<link wikidata="Q156211" start="5212" end="5226" title="Peace of Paris (1763)" label="Peace of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="5244" end="5265" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q144134" start="5316" end="5324" title="half pay" label="half pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="5444" end="5456" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q54019" start="5463" end="5476" title="Stanislaus II of Poland" label="Stanislaus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="5478" end="5492" title="King of Poland" label="King of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q123070" start="5646" end="5663" title="Russo-Turkish War (1768–1774)" label="Russo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q191503" start="5670" end="5674" title="duel" label="duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q490949" start="6035" end="6050" title="Berkeley County, West Virginia" label="Berkeley County"/>
<link wikidata="Q365124" start="6080" end="6093" title="Horatio Gates" label="Horatio Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="6219" end="6232" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="6421" end="6448" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Second Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="6505" end="6521" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="6545" end="6562" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q321887" start="6744" end="6756" title="Artemas Ward" label="Artemas Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191375" start="7172" end="7191" title="Departments of the Continental Army" label="Southern Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q450734" start="7339" end="7352" title="Henry Clinton (American War of Independence)" label="Henry Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="7364" end="7390" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088471" start="7482" end="7490" title="Sabal palmetto" label="palmetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4071933" start="7823" end="7856" title="Battle of Sullivan&amp;#x27;s Island" label="assault on Sullivan&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q883556" start="8369" end="8380" title="Joseph Reed (politician)" label="Joseph Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q646329" start="8906" end="8931" title="Basking Ridge, New Jersey" label="Basking Ridge, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q365124" start="8967" end="8980" title="Horatio Gates" label="Horatio Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357120" start="9075" end="9081" title="parole" label="parole"/>
<link wikidata="Q821105" start="9158" end="9176" title="York, Pennsylvania" label="York, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855211" start="9224" end="9236" title="Valley Forge" label="Valley Forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129490" start="9377" end="9387" title="Conway Cabal" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213525" start="9495" end="9512" title="Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben" label="Baron von Steuben"/>
<link wikidata="Q51753" start="9527" end="9541" title="Elias Boudinot" label="Elias Boudinot"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="9814" end="9832" title="lieutenant general" label="lieutenant general"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838107" start="10936" end="10960" title="Franco-American alliance" label="Franco-American alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q255546" start="11183" end="11191" title="vanguard" label="vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="11557" end="11577" title="Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette" label="Marquis de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084657" start="11804" end="11815" title="Englishtown, New Jersey" label="Englishtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q691237" start="11869" end="11877" title="Freehold Borough, New Jersey" label="Freehold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016629" start="11991" end="12007" title="Manalapan Township, New Jersey" label="Manalapan Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q574116" start="12838" end="12851" title="Anthony Wayne" label="Anthony Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q735235" start="13068" end="13081" title="Charles Scott (governor)" label="Charles Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015263" start="13104" end="13119" title="William Maxwell (Continental Army general)" label="William Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q450734" start="13292" end="13305" title="Henry Clinton (British Army officer, born 1730)" label="Henry Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15967503" start="17837" end="17854" title="John Skey Eustace" label="John Skey Eustace"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="18901" end="18914" title="court-martial" label="court martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181906" start="20887" end="20899" title="John Laurens" label="John Laurens"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="21263" end="21281" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238721" start="21559" end="21568" title="Prato Rio" label="Prato Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="21849" end="21861" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="22004" end="22016" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q979481" start="22444" end="22457" title="Christ Church, Philadelphia" label="Christ Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q829689" start="22701" end="22713" title="noble savage" label="noble savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q457369" start="22763" end="22795" title="Sir William Johnson, 1st Baronet" label="Sir William Johnson, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="23431" end="23453" title="U.S. Geological Survey" label="U.S. Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013261" start="23607" end="23627" title="Fort Lee, New Jersey" label="Fort Lee, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="23653" end="23665" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438808" start="23689" end="23714" title="Fort Washington (New York)" label="Fort Washington, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427080" start="23752" end="23770" title="Lee, Massachusetts" label="Lee, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416911" start="23772" end="23790" title="Lee, New Hampshire" label="Lee, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516520" start="23796" end="23818" title="Leetown, West Virginia" label="Leetown, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540468" start="23913" end="23928" title="George Henry Moore (author)" label="George H. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059456" start="23951" end="23978" title="New-York Historical Society" label="New-York Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q332616" start="24143" end="24176" title="Richard Howe, 1st Earl Howe" label="Richard Howe, later 1st Earl Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q333422" start="24210" end="24247" title="William Howe, 5th Viscount Howe" label="William Howe, later 5th Viscount Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q181667" start="24607" end="24624" title="Washington Irving" label="Washington Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508559" start="24683" end="24713" title="George Washington Parke Custis" label="George Washington Parke Custis"/>
<link wikidata="Q741482" start="24792" end="24807" title="George Bancroft" label="George Bancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003491" start="25058" end="25080" title="Willard Sterne Randall" label="Willard Sterne Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q380202" start="25362" end="25373" title="Howard Fast" label="Howard Fast"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="25390" end="25407" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q40166" start="25505" end="25530" title="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed III" label="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed III"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="25583" end="25596" title="Knights Templar" label="Templar Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q622601" start="25603" end="25615" title="Grand master (order)" label="Grand Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599910" start="25616" end="25630" title="Haytham Kenway" label="Haytham Kenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687082" start="25664" end="25677" title="Connor Kenway" label="Connor Kenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638488" start="25805" end="25823" title="Battle of Monmouth" label="Battle of Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237787" start="25876" end="25895" title="Liberty&amp;#x27;s Kids" label="Liberty&amp;#x27;s Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q294660" start="25960" end="25963" title="AMC (TV channel)" label="AMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q605719" start="26079" end="26089" title="John André" label="John André"/>
<link wikidata="Q272492" start="26150" end="26164" title="Diana Gabaldon" label="Diana Gabaldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17184122" start="26184" end="26220" title="Written in My Own Heart&amp;#x27;s Blood" label="Written in My Own Heart&amp;#x27;s Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153036" start="26240" end="26268" title="Outlander (book series)" label="&amp;quot;Outlander&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q26210755" start="26319" end="26326" title="Jon Rua" label="Jon Rua"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="26361" end="26377" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q19320959" start="26378" end="26398" title="Hamilton (musical)" label="&amp;quot;Hamilton&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q25613540" start="26457" end="26478" title="Ten Duel Commandments" label="Ten Duel Commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181906" start="26516" end="26528" title="John Laurens" label="John Laurens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553147" start="26715" end="26726" title="1776 (book)" label="1776 (book)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52291" wikidata="Q28173677" url="?curid=52291" title="Herod">
<text>Herod may refer to:

==Members of the Herodian dynasty==
Members of the Herodian dynasty, named after Herod the Great, in chronological order:

* Herod the Great (born c. 74 BC, ruled 37–4 BC or 1 BC), client king of Judea who expanded the Second Temple in Jerusalem and in the New Testament orders the Massacre of the Innocents
* Herod II or Herod Philip I (c. 27 BC–33 AD), father of the Salome in Mark 6:21-29, did not rule over any territory
* Herod Archelaus (23 BC–c. AD 18, ruled 4 BC–AD 6), ethnarch of Samaria, Judea, and Idumea
* Herod Antipas (born 21 BC, ruled 4 BC–AD 39), tetrarch of Galilee and Peraea and in the New Testament orders the death of John the Baptist and mocks Jesus
* Philip the Tetrarch, sometimes wrongly named as Herod Philip II, (born c. 20 BC, ruled 4 BC–AD 34), tetrarch of Iturea, Trachonitis, and Batanaea
* Herod Agrippa (born c. 11 BC, ruled AD 41–44), client king of Judaea, called &quot;King Herod&quot; or &quot;Herod&quot; in Acts 12 of the New Testament
* Herod of Chalcis (died AD 48), also known as Herod II or Herod V, king of Chalcis (r. AD 41–48)
* Herod Agrippa II (born AD 27, ruled 48–c. 92), ruled Chalcis and described in Acts 25 of the New Testament as &quot;King Agrippa&quot; before whom Paul the Apostle defended himself

==US places==
* Averitt-Herod House, historic house in Hartsville, Tennessee
* Herod, Illinois, United States
* Herods Run, a stream in West Virginia

==Other==
* Herod (band), a heavy metal band from the United States
* Herod (horse), a thoroughbred racehorse
* &quot;Hérode et Mariamne&quot;, a tragedy by Voltaire
* Like Herod, a song by Scottish post-rock band Mogwai

==See also==
* Herodian dynasty
* Harrod (disambiguation)
* Herodes Atticus (AD 101–177), a Greek aristocrat not related to the Herodian Dynasty who served as a Roman senator and proponent of Sophism
* Herred, an administrative area in Denmark and Norway
* Herodian (disambiguation)
* Herrod (disambiguation)
* Orodes (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28173677" start="0" end="5" title="Herod" label="Herod"/>
<link wikidata="Q878279" start="72" end="88" title="Herodian dynasty" label="Herodian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q51672" start="146" end="161" title="Herod the Great" label="Herod the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q543853" start="331" end="339" title="Herod II" label="Herod II"/>
<link wikidata="Q244345" start="448" end="463" title="Herod Archelaus" label="Herod Archelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192950" start="540" end="553" title="Herod Antipas" label="Herod Antipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q345647" start="697" end="716" title="Philip the Tetrarch" label="Philip the Tetrarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q298636" start="845" end="858" title="Herod Agrippa" label="Herod Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q554603" start="1000" end="1016" title="Herod of Chalcis" label="Herod of Chalcis"/>
<link wikidata="Q313419" start="1098" end="1114" title="Herod Agrippa II" label="Herod Agrippa II"/>
<link wikidata="Q28126074" start="1296" end="1315" title="Averitt-Herod House" label="Averitt-Herod House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742965" start="1359" end="1374" title="Herod, Illinois" label="Herod, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q19986644" start="1392" end="1402" title="Herods Run" label="Herods Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q15053721" start="1443" end="1455" title="Herod (band)" label="Herod (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742973" start="1501" end="1514" title="Herod (horse)" label="Herod (horse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5964337" start="1549" end="1567" title="Hérode et Mariamne" label="Hérode et Mariamne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547078" start="1599" end="1609" title="Like Herod" label="Like Herod"/>
<link wikidata="Q878279" start="1668" end="1684" title="Herodian dynasty" label="Herodian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529315" start="1687" end="1710" title="Harrod (disambiguation)" label="Harrod (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q311879" start="1713" end="1728" title="Herodes Atticus" label="Herodes Atticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="1855" end="1861" title="Herred" label="Herred"/>
<link wikidata="Q92788022" start="1910" end="1935" title="Herodian (disambiguation)" label="Herodian (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16870747" start="1938" end="1961" title="Herrod (disambiguation)" label="Herrod (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q422266" start="1964" end="1987" title="Orodes (disambiguation)" label="Orodes (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52293" wikidata="Q83357" url="?curid=52293" title="Origami">
<text>) is the Japanese art of paper folding. In modern usage, the word &quot;origami&quot; is often used as an inclusive term for all folding practices, regardless of their culture of origin. The goal is to transform a flat square sheet of paper into a finished sculpture through folding and sculpting techniques. Modern origami practitioners generally discourage the use of cuts, glue, or markings on the paper. Origami folders often use the Japanese word &quot;&quot; to refer to designs which use cuts.

In the detailed Japanese classification, origami is divided into stylized ceremonial origami (儀礼折り紙, &quot;girei origami&quot;) and recreational origami (遊戯折り紙, &quot;yūgi origami&quot;), and only recreational origami is generally recognized as origami. In Japan, ceremonial origami is generally called &quot;origata&quot; (:ja:折形) to distinguish it from recreational origami. The term &quot;origata&quot; is one of the old terms for origami.

The small number of basic origami folds can be combined in a variety of ways to make intricate designs. The best-known origami model is the Japanese paper crane. In general, these designs begin with a square sheet of paper whose sides may be of different colors, prints, or patterns. Traditional Japanese origami, which has been practiced since the Edo period (1603–1868), has often been less strict about these conventions, sometimes cutting the paper or using nonsquare shapes to start with. The principles of origami are also used in stents, packaging, and other engineering applications.

== Etymology ==
The word &quot;origami&quot; is a compound of two smaller words: &quot;ori&quot; (root verb &quot;oru&quot;), meaning to fold, and &quot;kami&quot;, meaning paper. Until recently, not all forms of paper folding were grouped under the word origami. Before that, paper folding for play was known by a variety of names, including &quot;orikata&quot; or &quot;origata&quot; (折形), &quot;orisue&quot; (折据), &quot;orimono&quot; (折物), &quot;tatamigami&quot; (畳紙) and others.

==History==
Distinct paperfolding traditions arose in Europe, China, and Japan which have been well-documented by historians. These seem to have been mostly separate traditions, until the 20th century.

===Ceremonial origami (origata)===
By the 7th century, paper had been introduced to Japan from China via the Korean Peninsula, and the Japanese developed &quot;washi&quot; by improving the method of making paper in the Heian period. The papermaking technique developed in Japan around 805 to 809 was called &quot;nagashi-suki (流し漉き)&quot;, a method of adding mucilage to the process of the conventional &quot;tame-suki (溜め漉き)&quot; technique to form a stronger layer of paper fibers. With the development of Japanese papermaking technology and the widespread use of paper, folded paper began to be used for decorations and tools for religious ceremonies such as &quot;gohei&quot;, &quot;ōnusa&quot; (:ja:大麻 (神道)) and &quot;shide&quot; at Shinto shrines. Religious decorations made of paper and the way gifts were wrapped in folded paper gradually became stylized and established as ceremonial origami. During the Heian period, the Imperial court established a code of etiquette for wrapping money and goods used in ceremonies with folded paper, and a code of etiquette for wrapping gifts.
In the Muromachi period from the 1300s to the 1400s, various forms of decorum were developed by the Ogasawara clan and Ise clans (:ja:伊勢氏), completing the prototype of Japanese folded-paper decorum that continues to this day. The Ise clan presided over the decorum of the inside of the palace of the Ashikaga Shogunate, and in particular, Ise Sadachika (:ja:伊勢貞親) during the reign of the eighth Shogun, Ashikaga Yoshimasa (足利義政), greatly influenced the development of the decorum of the daimyo and samurai classes, leading to the development of various stylized forms of ceremonial origami. The shapes of ceremonial origami created in this period were geometric, and the shapes of &quot;noshi&quot; to be attached to gifts at feasts and weddings, and origami that imitated butterflies to be displayed on sake vessels, were quite different from those of later generations of recreational origami whose shapes captured the characteristics of real objects and living things. The &quot;noshi&quot; wrapping, and the folding of female and male butterflies, which are still used for weddings and celebrations, are a continuation and development of a tradition that began in the Muromachi period. A reference in a poem by Ihara Saikaku from 1680 describes the origami butterflies used during Shinto weddings to represent the bride and groom.

===Recreational origami===
====1500s－1800s====
It is not certain when play-made paper models, now commonly known as origami, began in Japan. However, the &quot;kozuka&quot; of a Japanese sword made by Gotō Eijō (後藤栄乗) between the end of the 1500s and the beginning of the 1600s was decorated with a picture of a crane made of origami, and it is believed that origami for play existed by the Sengoku period or the early Edo period. 

In 1747, during the Edo period, a book titled &quot;Ranma zushiki&quot; (欄間図式) was published, which contained various designs of the &quot;ranma&quot; (:ja:欄間), a decoration of Japanese architecture. This included origami of various designs, including paper models of cranes, which are still well known today. It is thought that by this time, many people were familiar with origami for play, which modern people recognize as origami. During this period, origami was commonly called &quot;orikata&quot; (折形) or &quot;orisue&quot; (折据) and was often used as a pattern on kimonos and decorations.
&quot;Hiden senbazuru orikata (:ja:秘傳千羽鶴折形)&quot;, published in 1797, is the oldest known technical book on origami for play. The book contains 49 origami pieces created by a Buddhist monk named Gidō (:ja:義道) in Ise Province, whose works were named and accompanied by &quot;kyōka&quot; (狂歌, comic &quot;tanka&quot;) by author Akisato Ritō (秋里籬島). These pieces were far more technically advanced than their predecessors, suggesting that origami culture had become more sophisticated. Gido continued to produce origami after the publication of his book, leaving at least 158 highly skilled masterpieces for posterity. In 1976, Kuwana City in Mie Prefecture, Gido&#x27;s hometown, designated 49 of the methods described in the &quot;Hiden senbazuru orikata&quot; as Intangible Cultural Properties of Kuwana City. Kuwana City has also certified qualified persons who are able to correctly produce these works and have in-depth knowledge of the art. Kuwana City has published some of the origami production methods on YouTube.

From the late Edo period to the Bakumatu period, origami that imitated the six legendary Japanese poets, &quot;rokkasen&quot; (六歌仙) listed in the &quot;Kokin Wakashū&quot; (古今和歌集) compiled in the 900s and the characters in &quot;Chūshingura&quot; became popular, but today they are rarely used as subjects for origami.

In Europe, there was a well-developed genre of napkin folding, which flourished during the 17th and 18th centuries. After this period, this genre declined and was mostly forgotten; historian Joan Sallas attributes this to the introduction of porcelain, which replaced complex napkin folds as a dinner-table status symbol among nobility. However, some of the techniques and bases associated with this tradition continued to be a part of European culture; folding was a significant part of Friedrich Fröbel&#x27;s &quot;Kindergarten&quot; method, and the designs published in connection with his curriculum are stylistically similar to the napkin fold repertoire. Another example of early origami in Europe is the &quot;pajarita,&quot; a stylized bird whose origins date from at least the nineteenth century.

====Since 1800s====
When Japan opened its borders in the 1860s, as part of a modernization strategy, they imported Fröbel&#x27;s Kindergarten system—and with it, German ideas about paperfolding. This included the ban on cuts, and the starting shape of a bicolored square. These ideas, and some of the European folding repertoire, were integrated into the Japanese tradition. Before this, traditional Japanese sources use a variety of starting shapes, often had cuts, and if they had color or markings, these were added after the model was folded. In Japan, the first kindergarten was established in 1875, and origami was promoted as part of early childhood education. The kindergarten&#x27;s 1877 regulations listed 25 activities, including origami subjects. &quot;Shōkokumin&quot; (小国民), a magazine for boys, frequently published articles on origami. &quot;Origami Zusetsu&quot; (折紙図説), published in 1908, clearly distinguished ceremonial origami from recreational origami. These books and magazines carried both the traditional Japanese style of origami and the style inspired by Fröbel.

In the early 1900s, Akira Yoshizawa, Kosho Uchiyama, and others began creating and recording original origami works. Akira Yoshizawa in particular was responsible for a number of innovations, such as wet-folding and the Yoshizawa–Randlett diagramming system, and his work inspired a renaissance of the art form. 

In 1974, origami was offered in the USSR as an additional activity for elementary school children.

During the 1980s a number of folders started systematically studying the mathematical properties of folded forms, which led to a rapid increase in the complexity of origami models.

Starting in the late 20th century, there has been a renewed interest in understanding the behavior of folding matter, both artistically and scientifically. The &quot;new origami,&quot; which distinguishes it from old craft practices, has had a rapid evolution due to the contribution of computational mathematics and the development of techniques such as &quot;box-pleating&quot;, &quot;tessellations&quot; and &quot;wet-folding&quot;. Artists like Robert J. Lang, Erik Demaine, Sipho Mabona, Giang Dinh, Paul Jackson, and others, are frequently cited for advancing new applications of the art. The computational facet and the interchanges through social networks, where new techniques and designs are introduced, have raised the profile of origami in the 21st century.

==Techniques and materials==

===Techniques===
Many origami books begin with a description of basic origami techniques which are used to construct the models. This includes simple diagrams of basic folds like valley and mountain folds, pleats, reverse folds, squash folds, and sinks. There are also standard named bases which are used in a wide variety of models, for instance the bird base is an intermediate stage in the construction of the flapping bird. Additional bases are the preliminary base (square base), fish base, waterbomb base, and the frog base.

===Origami paper===
Almost any laminar (flat) material can be used for folding; the only requirement is that it should hold a crease.

Origami paper, often referred to as &quot;kami&quot; (Japanese for paper), is sold in prepackaged squares of various sizes ranging from 2.5 cm (1 in) to 25 cm (10 in) or more. It is commonly colored on one side and white on the other; however, dual coloured and patterned versions exist and can be used effectively for color-changed models. Origami paper weighs slightly less than copy paper, making it suitable for a wider range of models.

Normal copy paper with weights of 70–90 g/m2 (19–24 lb) can be used for simple folds, such as the crane and waterbomb. Heavier weight papers of
100 g/m2 (approx. 25 lb) or more can be wet-folded. This technique allows for a more rounded sculpting of the model, which becomes rigid and sturdy when it is dry.

Foil-backed paper, as its name implies, is a sheet of thin foil glued to a sheet of thin paper. Related to this is tissue foil, which is made by gluing a thin piece of tissue paper to kitchen aluminium foil. A second piece of tissue can be glued onto the reverse side to produce a tissue/foil/tissue sandwich. Foil-backed paper is available commercially, but not tissue foil; it must be handmade. Both types of foil materials are suitable for complex models.

 is the traditional origami paper used in Japan. Washi is generally tougher than ordinary paper made from wood pulp, and is used in many traditional arts. Washi is commonly made using fibres from the bark of the gampi tree, the mitsumata shrub (&quot;Edgeworthia papyrifera&quot;), or the paper mulberry but can also be made using bamboo, hemp, rice, and wheat.

Artisan papers such as unryu, lokta, hanji, gampi, kozo, saa, and abaca have long fibers and are often extremely strong. As these papers are floppy to start with, they are often backcoated or resized with methylcellulose or wheat paste before folding. Also, these papers are extremely thin and compressible, allowing for thin, narrowed limbs as in the case of insect models.

Paper money from various countries is also popular to create origami with; this is known variously as Dollar Origami, Orikane, and Money Origami.

===Tools===

It is common to fold using a flat surface, but some folders like doing it in the air with no tools, especially when displaying the folding. Some folders believe that no tool should be used when folding. However a couple of tools can help especially with the more complex models. For instance a bone folder allows sharp creases to be made in the paper easily, paper clips can act as extra pairs of fingers, and tweezers can be used to make small folds. When making complex models from origami crease patterns, it can help to use a ruler and ballpoint embosser to score the creases. Completed models can be sprayed so that they keep their shape better, and a spray is needed when wet folding.

==Types==

===Action origami===

In addition to the more common still-life origami, there are also moving object designs; origami can move. Action origami includes origami that flies, requires inflation to complete, or, when complete, uses the kinetic energy of a person&#x27;s hands, applied at a certain region on the model, to move another flap or limb. Some argue that, strictly speaking, only the latter is really &quot;recognized&quot; as action origami. Action origami, first appearing with the traditional Japanese flapping bird, is quite common. One example is Robert Lang&#x27;s instrumentalists; when the figures&#x27; heads are pulled away from their bodies, their hands will move, resembling the playing of music.

===Modular origami===
Modular origami consists of putting a number of identical pieces together to form a complete model. Often the individual pieces are simple, but the final assembly may be more difficult. Many modular origami models are decorative folding balls such as kusudama, which differ from classical origami in that the pieces may be held together using thread or glue.

Chinese paper folding, a cousin of origami, includes a similar style called golden venture folding where large numbers of pieces are put together to create elaborate models. This style is most commonly known as &quot;3D origami&quot;. However, that name did not appear until Joie Staff published a series of books titled &quot;3D Origami&quot;, &quot;More 3D Origami&quot;, and &quot;More and More 3D Origami&quot;. This style originated from some Chinese refugees while they were detained in America and is also called Golden Venture folding from the ship they came on.

===Wet-folding===

Wet-folding is an origami technique for producing models with gentle curves rather than geometric straight folds and flat surfaces. The paper is dampened so it can be moulded easily, and the final model keeps its shape when it dries. It can be used, for instance, to produce very natural looking animal models. Size, an adhesive that is crisp and hard when dry, but dissolves in water when wet and becoming soft and flexible, is often applied to the paper either at the pulp stage while the paper is being formed, or on the surface of a ready sheet of paper. The latter method is called external sizing and most commonly uses Methylcellulose, or MC, paste, or various plant starches.

===Pureland origami===
Pureland origami adds the restrictions that only simple mountain/valley folds may be used, and all folds must have straightforward locations. It was developed by John Smith in the 1970s to help inexperienced folders or those with limited motor skills. Some designers also like the challenge of creating within the very strict constraints.

===Origami tessellations===

Origami tessellation is a branch that has grown in popularity after 2000. A tessellation is a collection of figures filling a plane with no gaps or overlaps. In origami tessellations, pleats are used to connect molecules such as twist folds together in a repeating fashion. During the 1960s, Shuzo Fujimoto was the first to explore twist fold tessellations in any systematic way, coming up with dozens of patterns and establishing the genre in the origami mainstream. Around the same time period, Ron Resch patented some tessellation patterns as part of his explorations into kinetic sculpture and developable surfaces, although his work was not known by the origami community until the 1980s. Chris Palmer is an artist who has extensively explored tessellations after seeing the Zilij patterns in the Alhambra, and has found ways to create detailed origami tessellations out of silk. Robert Lang and Alex Bateman are two designers who use computer programs to create origami tessellations. The first international convention devoted to origami tessellations was hosted in Brasília (Brazil) in 2006, and the first instruction book on tessellation folding patterns was published by Eric Gjerde in 2008. Since then, the field has grown very quickly. Tessellation artists include Polly Verity (Scotland); Joel Cooper, Christine Edison, Ray Schamp and Goran Konjevod from the US; Roberto Gretter (Italy); Christiane Bettens (Switzerland); Carlos Natan López (Mexico); and Jorge C. Lucero (Brazil).

===Kirigami===
Kirigami is a Japanese term for paper cutting. Cutting was often used in traditional Japanese origami, but modern innovations in technique have made the use of cuts unnecessary. Most origami designers no longer consider models with cuts to be origami, instead using the term Kirigami to describe them. This change in attitude occurred during the 1960s and 70s, so early origami books often use cuts, but for the most part they have disappeared from the modern origami repertoire, and most modern books do not even mention cutting.

=== Strip folding ===
Strip folding is a combination of paper folding and paper weaving. A common example of strip folding is called the Lucky Star, also called Chinese lucky star, dream star, wishing star, or simply origami star. Another common fold is the Moravian star which is made by strip folding in a 3-dimensional design to include 16 spikes.

=== Teabag folding ===

Teabag folding is credited to Dutch artist Tiny van der Plas, who developed the technique in 1992 as a papercraft art for embellishing greeting cards. It uses small square pieces of paper (e.g., a tea bag wrapper) bearing symmetrical designs that are folded in such a way that they interlock and produce a three-dimensional version of the underlying design. The basic kite fold is used to produce rosettes that are a 3 dimensional version of the 2D design.

The basic rosette design requires eight matching squares to be folded into the &#x27;kite&#x27; design. Mathematics teachers find the designs very useful as a practical way of demonstrating some basic properties of symmetry.

==Mathematics and technical origami==

===Mathematics and practical applications===

The practice and study of origami encapsulates several subjects of mathematical interest. For instance, the problem of &quot;flat-foldability&quot; (whether a crease pattern can be folded into a 2-dimensional model) has been a topic of considerable mathematical study.

A number of technological advances have come from insights obtained through paper folding. For example, techniques have been developed for the deployment of car airbags and stent implants from a folded position.

The problem of rigid origami (&quot;if we replaced the paper with sheet metal and had hinges in place of the crease lines, could we still fold the model?&quot;) has great practical importance. For example, the Miura map fold is a rigid fold that has been used to deploy large solar panel arrays for space satellites.

Origami can be used to construct various geometrical designs not possible with compass and straightedge constructions. For instance paper folding may be used for angle trisection and doubling the cube.

===Technical origami===
Technical origami, known in Japanese as , is an origami design approach in which the model is conceived as an engineered crease pattern, rather than developed through trial-and-error. With advances in origami mathematics, the basic structure of a new origami model can be theoretically plotted out on paper before any actual folding even occurs. This method of origami design was developed by Robert Lang, Meguro Toshiyuki and others, and allows for the creation of extremely complex multi-limbed models such as many-legged centipedes, human figures with a full complement of fingers and toes, and the like.

The crease pattern is a layout of the creases required to form the structure of the model. Paradoxically enough, when origami designers come up with a crease pattern for a new design, the majority of the smaller creases are relatively unimportant and added only towards the completion of the model. What is more important is the allocation of regions of the paper and how these are mapped to the structure of the object being designed. By opening up a folded model, you can observe the structures that comprise it; the study of these structures led to a number of crease-pattern-oriented design approaches

The pattern of allocations is referred to as the &#x27;circle-packing&#x27; or &#x27;polygon-packing&#x27;. Using optimization algorithms, a circle-packing figure can be computed for any uniaxial base of arbitrary complexity. Once this figure is computed, the creases which are then used to obtain the base structure can be added. This is not a unique mathematical process, hence it is possible for two designs to have the same circle-packing, and yet different crease pattern structures.

As a circle encloses the maximum amount of area for a given perimeter, circle packing allows for maximum efficiency in terms of paper usage. However, other polygonal shapes can be used to solve the packing problem as well. The use of polygonal shapes other than circles is often motivated by the desire to find easily locatable creases (such as multiples of 22.5 degrees) and hence an easier folding sequence as well. One popular offshoot of the circle packing method is box-pleating, where squares are used instead of circles. As a result, the crease pattern that arises from this method contains only 45 and 90 degree angles, which often makes for a more direct folding sequence.

===Origami-related computer programs===
A number of computer aids to origami such as TreeMaker and Oripa, have been devised. TreeMaker allows new origami bases to be designed for special purposes and Oripa tries to calculate the folded shape from the crease pattern.

==Ethics and copyright==
Copyright in origami designs and the use of models has become an increasingly important issue in the origami community, as the internet has made the sale and distribution of pirated designs very easy. It is considered good etiquette to always credit the original artist and the folder when displaying origami models. It has been claimed that all commercial rights to designs and models are typically reserved by origami artists; however, the degree to which this can be enforced has been disputed. Under such a view, a person who folds a model using a legally obtained design could publicly display the model unless such rights were specifically reserved, whereas folding a design for money or commercial use of a photo for instance would require consent. The Origami Authors and Creators group was set up to represent the copyright interests of origami artists and facilitate permissions requests.

However, a court in Japan has asserted that the folding method of an origami model &quot;comprises an idea and not a creative expression, and thus is not protected under the copyright law&quot;. Further, the court stated that &quot;the method to folding origami is in the public domain; one cannot avoid using the same folding creases or the same arrows to show the direction in which to fold the paper&quot;. Therefore, it is legal to redraw the folding instructions of a model of another author even if the redrawn instructions share similarities to the original ones, as long as those similarities are &quot;functional in nature&quot;. The redrawn instructions may be published (and even sold) without necessity of any permission from the original author.

== Origami in various meanings ==

From a global perspective, the term &#x27;origami&#x27; refers to the folding of paper to shape objects for entertainment purposes, but it has historically been used in various ways in Japan.
For example, the term &#x27;origami&#x27; also refers to the certificate of authenticity that accompanies a Japanese sword or tea utensil. The people of the Hon&#x27;ami clan, who were the authority on Japanese sword appraisal from the Muromachi period to the Edo period, responded to the requests of the shogun, daimyo and samurai by appraising Japanese swords, determining when and by which school the sword was made, whether the inscription on the &quot;nakago&quot; was genuine or not, and what the price was, and then issuing origami with the results written on it. This has led to the Japanese word &#x27;origami tsuki&#x27; (折り紙付き) meaning &#x27;origami is attached&#x27; meaning that the quality of the object or the ability of the person is sufficiently high.

The term &#x27;origami&#x27; also referred to a specific style of old documents in Japan. The paper folded vertically is called &#x27;tategami&#x27; (竪紙), while the paper folded horizontally is called &#x27;origami&#x27;, and origami has a lower status than tategami. This style of letter began to be used at the end of the Heian period, and in the Kamakura period it was used as a complaint, and origami came to refer to the complaint itself. Furthermore, during the Muromachi period, origami was often used as a command document or a catalog of gifts, and it came to refer to the catalog of gifts itself.

==Gallery==
These pictures show examples of various types of origami.

==See also==
* Chinese paper folding
* Fold-forming
* Furoshiki
* Japanese art
* List of origamists
* Origamic architecture
* Paper craft
* Paper fortune teller
* Paper plane
* Pop-up book
==References==
==Further reading==

* Kunihiko Kasahara (1988). &quot;Origami Omnibus: Paper Folding for Everybody&quot;. Tokyo: Japan Publications, Inc. 
*:: A book for a more advanced origamian; this book presents many more complicated ideas and theories, as well as related topics in geometry and culture, along with model diagrams.
* Kunihiko Kasahara and Toshie Takahama (1987). &quot;Origami for the Connoisseur&quot;. Tokyo: Japan Publications, Inc. 
* Satoshi Kamiya (2005). &quot;Works by Satoshi Kamiya, 1995–2003&quot;. Tokyo: Origami House
*:: An extremely complex book for the elite origamian, most models take 100+ steps to complete. Includes his famous Divine Dragon Bahamut and Ancient Dragons. Instructions are in Japanese and English.
* Kunihiko Kasahara (2001). &quot;Extreme Origami&quot;. 
* Michael LaFosse. &quot;Origamido : Masterworks of Paper Folding&quot; 
* Nick Robinson (2004). &quot;Encyclopedia of Origami&quot;. Quarto. . A book full of stimulating designs.
==External links==
* GiladOrigami.com, contains many book reviews
* Origami USA, many resources, especially for folders in the USA
* British Origami Society, many resources, especially for folders in the UK
* &quot;Between the Folds&quot;, documentary film about origami and origami artists
* 
* Engineering with Origami, YouTube video by Veritasium about uses of origami for structural engineering</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11802861" start="18" end="21" title="paper art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505649" start="25" end="38" title="Paper folding (disambiguation)" label="paper folding"/>
<link wikidata="" start="826" end="832" title=":ja:折形" label=":ja:折形"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392471" start="972" end="985" title="Origami techniques" label="origami folds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118171" start="1095" end="1106" title="paper crane" label="paper crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q164" start="1147" end="1153" title="square (geometry)" label="square"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="1295" end="1305" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325542" start="1483" end="1488" title="stent" label="stent"/>
<link wikidata="Q207822" start="1491" end="1500" title="packaging" label="packaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q846299" start="2386" end="2391" title="washi" label="washi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="2445" end="2457" title="Heian period" label="Heian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q424275" start="2585" end="2593" title="mucilage" label="mucilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011372" start="2894" end="2899" title="gohei" label="gohei"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2926" end="2937" title=":ja:大麻 (神道)" label=":ja:大麻 (神道)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657982" start="2949" end="2954" title="Shide (Shinto)" label="shide"/>
<link wikidata="Q845945" start="2964" end="2978" title="Shinto shrines" label="Shinto shrines"/>
<link wikidata="Q334845" start="3322" end="3338" title="Muromachi period" label="Muromachi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975340" start="3415" end="3429" title="Ogasawara clan" label="Ogasawara clan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3445" end="3452" title=":ja:伊勢氏" label=":ja:伊勢氏"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154406" start="3615" end="3633" title="Ashikaga Shogunate" label="Ashikaga Shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3669" end="3677" title=":ja:伊勢貞親" label=":ja:伊勢貞親"/>
<link wikidata="Q447034" start="3718" end="3736" title="Ashikaga Yoshimasa" label="Ashikaga Yoshimasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="3802" end="3808" title="daimyo" label="daimyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="3813" end="3820" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511688" start="4002" end="4007" title="noshi" label="noshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q170219" start="4119" end="4123" title="sake" label="sake"/>
<link wikidata="Q352561" start="4530" end="4543" title="Ihara Saikaku" label="Ihara Saikaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="4600" end="4615" title="Shinto" label="Shinto weddings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4811" end="4817" title="Japanese sword mountings#Components" label="kozuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768697" start="4829" end="4843" title="Japanese sword" label="Japanese sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q204023" start="5042" end="5056" title="Sengoku period" label="Sengoku period"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="5104" end="5114" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943259" start="5223" end="5228" title="Transom (architecture)" label="ranma"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5236" end="5242" title=":ja:欄間" label=":ja:欄間"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422874" start="5261" end="5282" title="Japanese architecture" label="Japanese architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q483444" start="5653" end="5660" title="kimonos" label="kimonos"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5709" end="5720" title=":ja:秘傳千羽鶴折形" label=":ja:秘傳千羽鶴折形"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5879" end="5885" title=":ja:義道一円" label=":ja:義道"/>
<link wikidata="Q864166" start="5890" end="5902" title="Ise Province" label="Ise Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201017" start="5952" end="5957" title="kyōka" label="kyōka"/>
<link wikidata="Q258331" start="5981" end="5986" title="tanka" label="tanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q496472" start="6303" end="6314" title="Kuwana, Mie" label="Kuwana City"/>
<link wikidata="Q128196" start="6318" end="6332" title="Mie Prefecture" label="Mie Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q496472" start="6475" end="6486" title="Kuwana, Mie" label="Kuwana City"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="6691" end="6698" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q804558" start="6733" end="6748" title="Bakumatsu" label="Bakumatu period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336997" start="6812" end="6820" title="rokkasen" label="rokkasen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047167" start="6853" end="6866" title="Kokin Wakashū" label="Kokin Wakashū"/>
<link wikidata="Q683379" start="6930" end="6941" title="Chūshingura" label="Chūshingura"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141647" start="7068" end="7082" title="napkin folding" label="napkin folding"/>
<link wikidata="Q76679" start="7509" end="7525" title="Friedrich Fröbel" label="Friedrich Fröbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q209200" start="8940" end="8955" title="Akira Yoshizawa" label="Akira Yoshizawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621698" start="8957" end="8971" title="Kosho Uchiyama" label="Kosho Uchiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q63364" start="9120" end="9131" title="wet-folding" label="wet-folding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392471" start="9140" end="9177" title="Yoshizawa–Randlett system" label="Yoshizawa–Randlett diagramming system"/>
<link wikidata="Q642995" start="9965" end="9979" title="Robert J. Lang" label="Robert J. Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531564" start="9981" end="9993" title="Erik Demaine" label="Erik Demaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709034" start="9995" end="10007" title="Sipho Mabona" label="Sipho Mabona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392471" start="10387" end="10405" title="Yoshizawa–Randlett system" label="origami techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q24706283" start="11466" end="11470" title="Grams per square metre" label="g/m2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118171" start="11524" end="11529" title="Paper crane" label="crane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11591" end="11593" title="Grammage#Basis weight" label="lb"/>
<link wikidata="Q63364" start="11610" end="11620" title="wet-folded" label="wet-folded"/>
<link wikidata="Q447349" start="11927" end="11941" title="aluminium foil" label="aluminium foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q389185" start="12484" end="12498" title="paper mulberry" label="paper mulberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="12526" end="12532" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="12534" end="12538" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839590" start="12736" end="12746" title="backcoating" label="backcoated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080291" start="12750" end="12757" title="sizing" label="resized"/>
<link wikidata="Q416312" start="12763" end="12778" title="methylcellulose" label="methylcellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q358081" start="13388" end="13399" title="bone folder" label="bone folder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8353" start="13453" end="13463" title="paper clip" label="paper clip"/>
<link wikidata="Q192504" start="13504" end="13511" title="tweezer" label="tweezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347104" start="13586" end="13600" title="crease pattern" label="crease pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q104555" start="13624" end="13629" title="ruler" label="ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624092" start="13644" end="13652" title="Embossing (paper)" label="embosser"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="14030" end="14044" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q642995" start="14356" end="14367" title="Robert J. Lang" label="Robert Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249623" start="14754" end="14772" title="decorative folding" label="decorative folding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191157" start="14787" end="14795" title="kusudama" label="kusudama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100858" start="14896" end="14917" title="Chinese paper folding" label="Chinese paper folding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579946" start="15416" end="15430" title="Golden Venture" label="Golden Venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q214856" start="16640" end="16652" title="tessellation" label="tessellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16735135" start="17061" end="17070" title="Ron Resch" label="Ron Resch"/>
<link wikidata="Q189046" start="17344" end="17349" title="Zellige" label="Zilij"/>
<link wikidata="Q47476" start="17366" end="17374" title="Alhambra" label="Alhambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q642995" start="17449" end="17460" title="Robert J. Lang" label="Robert Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921408" start="17465" end="17477" title="Alex Bateman" label="Alex Bateman"/>
<link wikidata="Q878121" start="18864" end="18877" title="Moravian star" label="Moravian star"/>
<link wikidata="Q863250" start="19179" end="19186" title="tea bag" label="tea bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q42861" start="19350" end="19354" title="kite" label="kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277215" start="19379" end="19387" title="Rosette (design)" label="rosettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34929" start="19399" end="19412" title="3 dimensions" label="3 dimensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q123345399" start="19428" end="19430" title="2 dimensions" label="2D"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="19544" end="19555" title="Mathematics" label="Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485" start="19655" end="19663" title="symmetry" label="symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="19818" end="19830" title="mathematics" label="mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299105" start="19876" end="19892" title="flat-foldability" label="flat-foldability"/>
<link wikidata="Q99905" start="20182" end="20188" title="airbag" label="airbag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325542" start="20194" end="20199" title="stent" label="stent"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087012" start="20249" end="20262" title="rigid origami" label="rigid origami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642174" start="20444" end="20458" title="Miura map fold" label="Miura map fold"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="20539" end="20549" title="satellites" label="satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q115368" start="20631" end="20669" title="compass and straightedge constructions" label="compass and straightedge constructions"/>
<link wikidata="Q733081" start="20714" end="20730" title="angle trisection" label="angle trisection"/>
<link wikidata="Q213673" start="20735" end="20752" title="doubling the cube" label="doubling the cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347104" start="20900" end="20914" title="crease pattern" label="crease pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219080" start="20946" end="20961" title="trial-and-error" label="trial-and-error"/>
<link wikidata="Q642995" start="21172" end="21183" title="Robert J. Lang" label="Robert Lang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21185" end="21201" title="Meguro Toshiyuki" label="Meguro Toshiyuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347104" start="21392" end="21406" title="crease pattern" label="crease pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768697" start="25456" end="25470" title="Japanese sword" label="Japanese sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q334845" start="25584" end="25600" title="Muromachi period" label="Muromachi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="25608" end="25618" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="25653" end="25659" title="shogun" label="shogun"/>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="25661" end="25667" title="daimyo" label="daimyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="25672" end="25679" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25741" end="25747" title="Japanese sword#Classification by school" label="school"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="26442" end="26454" title="Heian period" label="Heian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q236205" start="26467" end="26482" title="Kamakura period" label="Kamakura period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100858" start="26812" end="26833" title="Chinese paper folding" label="Chinese paper folding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464251" start="26836" end="26848" title="Fold-forming" label="Fold-forming"/>
<link wikidata="Q369376" start="26851" end="26860" title="Furoshiki" label="Furoshiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q603399" start="26863" end="26875" title="Japanese art" label="Japanese art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243150" start="26878" end="26896" title="List of origamists" label="List of origamists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565806" start="26899" end="26920" title="Origamic architecture" label="Origamic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11802861" start="26923" end="26934" title="Paper craft" label="Paper craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431851" start="26937" end="26957" title="Paper fortune teller" label="Paper fortune teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q73767" start="26960" end="26971" title="Paper plane" label="Paper plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q759769" start="26974" end="26985" title="Pop-up book" label="Pop-up book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522532" start="27024" end="27041" title="Kunihiko Kasahara" label="Kunihiko Kasahara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27346" end="27361" title="Toshie Takahama" label="Toshie Takahama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387553" start="27446" end="27460" title="Satoshi Kamiya" label="Satoshi Kamiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522532" start="27741" end="27758" title="Kunihiko Kasahara" label="Kunihiko Kasahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="28299" end="28306" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q16221926" start="28316" end="28326" title="Veritasium" label="Veritasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q633538" start="28353" end="28375" title="structural engineering" label="structural engineering"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52302" wikidata="Q199618" url="?curid=52302" title="Monticello">
<text>Monticello ( ) was the primary plantation of Thomas Jefferson, a Founding Father, author of the Declaration of Independence, and the third president of the United States. Jefferson began designing Monticello after inheriting land from his father at the age of 14. Located just outside Charlottesville, Virginia, in the Piedmont region, the plantation was originally , with Jefferson using the forced labor of enslaved black people for extensive cultivation of tobacco and mixed crops, later shifting from tobacco cultivation to wheat in response to changing markets. Due to its architectural and historic significance, the property has been designated a National Historic Landmark. In 1987, Monticello and the nearby University of Virginia, also designed by Jefferson, were together designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The United States nickel has featured a depiction of Monticello on its reverse since 1938 (except for 2004-05).

Jefferson designed the main house using neoclassical design principles pioneered by Italian Renaissance architect Andrea Palladio and reworking the design through much of his presidency to include design elements popular in late 18th-century Europe and integrating numerous ideas of his own. Situated on the summit of an peak in the Southwest Mountains south of the Rivanna Gap, the name Monticello derives from Italian meaning &quot;little mountain&quot;. Along a prominent lane adjacent to the house, Mulberry Row, the plantation came to include numerous outbuildings for specialized functions, e.g., a nailery; quarters for slaves who worked in the home; gardens for flowers, produce, and Jefferson&#x27;s experiments in plant breeding—along with tobacco fields and mixed crops. Cabins for slaves who worked in the fields were farther from the mansion.

At Jefferson&#x27;s direction, he was buried on the grounds, in an area now designated as the Monticello Cemetery. The cemetery is owned by the Monticello Association, a society of his descendants through Martha Wayles Skelton Jefferson. After Jefferson&#x27;s death, his daughter Martha Jefferson Randolph, apart from the small family graveyard, sold Monticello for $7,500. In 1834, it was bought by Uriah P. Levy, a commodore in the U.S. Navy, for $2,500, (~$ in ) who admired Jefferson and spent his own money to preserve the property. His nephew Jefferson Monroe Levy took over the property in 1879; he also invested considerable money to restore and preserve it. In 1923, Monroe Levy sold it for $500,000 (~$ in ) to the Thomas Jefferson Foundation (TJF), which operates it as a house museum and educational institution.

==Design and building==
Jefferson&#x27;s home was built to serve as a plantation house, which ultimately took on the architectural form of a villa. Work began on what historians would subsequently refer to as &quot;the first Monticello&quot; in 1768, on a plantation of . Jefferson moved into the South Pavilion (an outbuilding) in 1770, where his new wife Martha Wayles Skelton joined him in 1772. Jefferson continued work on his original design, but how much was completed is of some dispute. In constructing and later reconstructing his home, Jefferson used a combination of free workers, indentured servants, and enslaved people.

After his wife&#x27;s death in 1782, Jefferson left Monticello in 1784 to serve as Minister of the United States to France. During his several years in Europe, he had an opportunity to see some of the classical buildings with which he had become acquainted from his reading, as well as to discover the &quot;modern&quot; trends in French architecture that were then fashionable in Paris. His decision to remodel his own home may date from this period. In 1794, following his tenure as the first U.S. Secretary of State (1790–1793), Jefferson began rebuilding his house based on the ideas he had acquired in Europe. The remodeling continued throughout most of his presidency (1801–1809). Although generally completed by 1809, Jefferson continued work on Monticello until his death in 1826.

Jefferson added a center hallway and a parallel set of rooms to the structure, more than doubling its area. He removed the second full-height story from the original house and replaced it with a mezzanine bedroom floor. The interior is centered on two large rooms, which served as an entrance-hall-museum, where Jefferson displayed his scientific interests, and a music-sitting room. The most dramatic element of the new design was an octagonal dome, which he placed above the west front of the building in place of a second-story portico. The room inside the dome was described by a visitor as &quot;a noble and beautiful apartment,&quot; but it was rarely used—perhaps because it was hot in summer and cold in winter, or because it could be reached only by climbing a steep and very narrow flight of stairs. The dome room has now been restored to its appearance during Jefferson&#x27;s lifetime, with &quot;Mars yellow&quot; walls and a painted green and black checkered floor.

Summertime temperatures are high in the region, with indoor temperatures of around . Jefferson himself is known to have been interested in Roman and Renaissance texts about ancient temperature-control techniques such as ground-cooled air and heated floors. Monticello&#x27;s large central hall and aligned windows were designed to allow a cooling air-current to pass through the house, and the octagonal cupola draws hot air up and out. In the late twentieth century, moderate air conditioning, designed to avoid the harm to the house and its contents that would be caused by major modifications and large temperature differentials, was installed in the house, a tourist attraction.

Before Jefferson&#x27;s death, Monticello had begun to show signs of disrepair. The attention Jefferson&#x27;s university project in Charlottesville demanded, and family problems, diverted his focus. The most important reason for the mansion&#x27;s deterioration was his accumulating debts. In the last few years of Jefferson&#x27;s life, much went without repair in Monticello. A witness, Samuel Whitcomb Jr., who visited Jefferson in 1824, thought it run down. He said, &quot;His house is rather old and going to decay; appearances about his yard and hill are rather slovenly. It commands an extensive prospect but it being a misty cloudy day, I could see but little of the surrounding scenery.&quot;

==Preservation==
After Jefferson died on July 4, 1826, his only official surviving daughter, Martha Jefferson Randolph, inherited Monticello. The estate was encumbered with debt and Martha Randolph had financial problems in her own family because of her husband&#x27;s mental illness. In 1831, she sold Monticello to James Turner Barclay, a local apothecary, for $7,500 (~$ in ). Barclay sold it in 1834 to Uriah P. Levy for $2,500, (~$ in ) the first Jewish commodore (equivalent to today&#x27;s rear admiral) in the United States Navy. A fifth-generation American whose family first settled in Savannah, Georgia, Levy greatly admired Jefferson and used private funds to repair, restore and preserve the house. The Confederate government seized the house as enemy property at the outset of the American Civil War and sold it to Confederate officer Benjamin Franklin Ficklin. Levy&#x27;s estate recovered the property after the war.

Levy&#x27;s heirs argued over his estate, but their lawsuits were settled in 1879, when Uriah Levy&#x27;s nephew, Jefferson Monroe Levy, a prominent New York lawyer, real estate speculator, and stock speculator (and later member of Congress), bought out the other heirs for $10,050, (~$ in ) and took control of Monticello. Like his uncle, Jefferson Levy commissioned repairs, restoration and preservation of the grounds and house, which had been deteriorating seriously while the lawsuits wound their way through the courts in New York and Virginia. Together, the Levys preserved Monticello for nearly 100 years.

In 1923, a private non-profit organization, the Thomas Jefferson Foundation, purchased the house from Jefferson Levy for $500,000 (~$ in ) with funds raised by Theodore Fred Kuper and others. They managed additional restoration under architects including Fiske Kimball and Milton L. Grigg. Since that time, other restoration has been performed at Monticello.

The Jefferson Foundation operates Monticello and its grounds as a house museum and educational institution. Visitors can wander the grounds, as well as tour rooms in the cellar and ground floor. More expensive tour pass options include sunset hours, as well as tours of the second floor and the third floor, including the iconic dome.

Monticello is a National Historic Landmark. It is the only private home in the United States to be designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Included in that designation are the original grounds and buildings of Jefferson&#x27;s University of Virginia. From 1989 to 1992, a team of architects from the Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS) created a collection of measured drawings of Monticello. These drawings are held by the Library of Congress.

Among Jefferson&#x27;s other designs are Poplar Forest, his private retreat near Lynchburg (which he intended for his daughter Maria, who died at age 25), the &quot;academic village&quot; of the University of Virginia, and the Virginia State Capitol in Richmond.

==Decoration and furnishings==
Much of Monticello&#x27;s interior decoration reflects the personal ideas and ideals of Jefferson.
The original main entrance is through the portico on the east front. The ceiling of this portico incorporates a wind plate connected to a weather vane, showing the direction of the wind. A large clock face on the external east-facing wall has only an hour hand since Jefferson thought this was accurate enough for those he enslaved. The clock reflects the time shown on the &quot;Great Clock&quot;, designed by Jefferson, in the entrance hall. The entrance hall contains recreations of items collected by Lewis and Clark on the cross-country expedition commissioned by Jefferson to explore the Louisiana Purchase. Jefferson had the floorcloth painted a &quot;true grass green&quot; upon the recommendation of artist Gilbert Stuart, so that Jefferson&#x27;s &quot;essay in architecture&quot; could invite the spirit of the outdoors into the house.

The south wing includes Jefferson&#x27;s private suite of rooms. The library holds many books from his third library collection. His first library was burned in an accidental plantation fire, and he &#x27;ceded&#x27; (or sold) his second library in 1815 to the United States Congress to replace the books lost in the 1814 burning of Washington during the War of 1812. This second library formed the nucleus of the Library of Congress.

As &quot;larger than life&quot; as Monticello seems, the house has approximately of living space. Jefferson considered much furniture to be a waste of space, so the dining room table was erected only at mealtimes, and beds were built into alcoves cut into thick walls that contain storage space. Jefferson&#x27;s bed opens to two sides: to his cabinet (study) and to his bedroom (dressing room).

In 2017, a room identified as Sally Hemings&#x27; quarters at Monticello, adjacent to Jefferson&#x27;s bedroom, was discovered in an archeological excavation. It will be restored and refurbished. This is part of the Mountaintop Project, which includes restorations in order to give a fuller account of the lives of both enslaved and free families at Monticello.

The west front gives the impression of a villa of modest proportions, with a lower floor disguised in the hillside.

The north wing includes two guest bedrooms and the dining room. It has a dumbwaiter incorporated into the fireplace, as well as dumbwaiters (shelved tables on casters) and a pivoting serving door with shelves.

== Food and cuisine ==
Monticello is known as the birthplace of macaroni and cheese in the United States. While it is a myth that Monticello is its American birthplace, it is true that it was made popular there. Jefferson&#x27;s enslaved cook James Hemings, brother of Sally Hemings, Jefferson&#x27;s enslaved mistress, perfected the dish and made it similar to the way it is prepared today.

==Quarters for slaves on Mulberry Row==

Jefferson located one set of his quarters for enslaved people on Mulberry Row, a road of slave, service, and industrial structures. Mulberry Row was situated south of Monticello, with the quarters facing the Jefferson mansion. These cabins were occupied by the black slaves who worked in the mansion or in Jefferson&#x27;s manufacturing ventures, and not by those who labored in the fields. At one point, &quot;Jefferson sketched out plans for a row of substantial, dignified neoclassical houses&quot; for Mulberry Row, for enslaved blacks and white workers, &quot;having in mind an integrated row of residences.&quot;

Archaeology of the site shows that the rooms of the cabins were much larger in the 1770s than in the 1790s. Researchers disagree as to whether this indicates that more enslaved people were crowded into smaller spaces, or that fewer people lived in the smaller spaces. Earlier quarters for enslaved people had a two-room plan, one family per room, with a single, shared doorway to the outside. But from the 1790s on, all rooms/families had independent doorways. Most of the cabins are free-standing, single-room structures.

By the time of Jefferson&#x27;s death, some enslaved families had labored and lived for four generations at Monticello. Thomas Jefferson recorded his strategy for child labor in his Farm Book. Until the age of 10, children served as nurses. When the plantation grew tobacco, children were at a good height to remove and kill tobacco worms from the crops. Once he began growing wheat, fewer people were needed to maintain the crops, so Jefferson established manual trades. He stated that children &quot;go into the ground or learn trades&quot;. When girls were 16, they began spinning and weaving textiles. Boys made nails from age 10 to 16. In 1794, Jefferson had a dozen boys working at the nailery. While working at the nailery, boys received more food (during this period, cornmeal and salted fish were common rations for the enslaved) and may have received new clothes if they did a good job. After the nailery, boys became blacksmiths, coopers, carpenters, or house servants.

Six families and their descendants were featured in the exhibit, &quot;Slavery at Jefferson&#x27;s Monticello: Paradox of Liberty&quot; (January to October 2012) at the Smithsonian&#x27;s National Museum of American History, which also examined Jefferson as an enslaver. Developed as a collaboration between the National Museum of African American History and Culture and Monticello, it is the first exhibit on the national mall to address such issues.

In February 2012, Monticello opened a new outdoor exhibit on its grounds: &quot;Landscape of Slavery: Mulberry Row at Monticello,&quot; to convey more about the lives of the hundreds of slaves who lived and worked at the plantation.

==Outbuildings and plantation==

The main house was augmented by small outlying pavilions to the north and south. A row of outbuildings (dairy, a washhouse, store houses, a small nail factory, a joinery, etc.) and quarters for slaves (log cabins), known as Mulberry Row, lay nearby to the south. A stone weaver&#x27;s cottage survives, as does the tall chimney of the joinery, and the foundations of other buildings. A cabin on Mulberry Row was, for a time, the home of Sally Hemings, Jefferson&#x27;s sister-in-law and a slave woman who worked in the household. Hemings is widely believed to have had a 38-year relationship with the widower Jefferson and to have borne six children by him, four of whom survived to adulthood. The genealogist Helen F.M. Leary concluded that &quot;the chain of evidence securely fastens Sally Hemings&#x27;s children to their father, Thomas Jefferson.&quot; Later Hemings lived in a room in the &quot;south dependency&quot; below the main house.

On the slope below Mulberry Row, African slaves maintained an extensive vegetable garden for the main house. In addition to growing flowers for display and producing crops for eating, Jefferson used the gardens of Monticello for experimenting with different species. The house was the center of a plantation of tended by some 150 slaves. There are also two houses included in the whole.

===Programming===
In recent decades, the TJF has created programs to more fully interpret the lives of slaves at Monticello. Beginning in 1993, researchers interviewed descendants of Monticello slaves for the &quot;Getting Word Project&quot;, a collection of oral history that provided much new insight into the lives of slaves at Monticello and their descendants. (Among findings were that no slaves adopted Jefferson as a surname, but many had their own surnames as early as the 18th century.)

Some of Mulberry Row has been designated as archeological sites, where excavations and analysis are revealing much about the life of slaves at the plantation. In the winter of 2000–2001, the African slave burial ground at Monticello was discovered. In the fall of 2001, the Thomas Jefferson Foundation held a commemoration of the burial ground, in which the names of known slaves of Monticello were read aloud. Additional archeological work is providing information about African American burial practices.

In 2003, Monticello welcomed a reunion of descendants of Jefferson from both the Wayles&#x27;s and Hemings&#x27;s sides of the family. It was organized by the descendants, who have created a new group called the Monticello Community. Additional and larger reunions have since been held.

===Land purchase===
In 2004, the trustees of TJF acquired Mountaintop Farm (also known locally as Patterson&#x27;s or Brown&#x27;s Mountain), the only property that overlooks Monticello. Jefferson had called the taller mountain Montalto. To prevent development of new homes on the site, the trustees spent $15 million to purchase the property. Jefferson had owned it as part of his plantation, but it was sold off after his death. In the 20th century, its farmhouses were divided into apartments for many University of Virginia students. TJF officials had long considered the property an eyesore, and planned to acquire it when it became available.

==Architecture==

In 1784, Thomas Jefferson left America to travel and explore the streets of France, which influenced his taste in architecture. He was mainly influenced by the neoclassical style commonly seen in French architecture, which is the reason Monticello is designed in a classical revival style.

Jefferson had also been interested in the Pantheon, even though he was never able to make the trip to Rome to see it in person. Not only did the temple&#x27;s facade influence Monticello, but also the Rotunda, which is a library found at the University of Virginia. Both buildings have a temple like front replicating the Pantheon facade with large structural columns. This building front is also similar to the Palladian. The back side of the buildings also pays tribute to the Roman temple. Jefferson did this by including a dome shape behind the temple front. After Jefferson resigned from Washington&#x27;s cabinet, he chose to remodel portions of Monticello. This time he was greatly influenced by the Hôtel de Salm in Paris.
The house is similar in appearance to Chiswick House, a Neoclassical house inspired by the architect Andrea Palladio built in 1726–1729 in London.

==Representation in other media==
Monticello was featured in Bob Vila&#x27;s A&amp;E Network production, &quot;Guide to Historic Homes of America,&quot; in a tour which included Honeymoon Cottage and the Dome Room, which is open to the public during a limited number of tours each year.

==Replicas==
In 2014, Prestley Blake constructed a replica of Monticello in Somers, Connecticut. It can be seen on Route 186 also known as Hall Hill Road.

The entrance pavilion of the Naval Academy Jewish Chapel at Annapolis is modeled on Monticello.

Chamberlin Hall at Wilbraham &amp; Monson Academy in Wilbraham, Massachusetts, built in 1962 and modeled on Monticello, serves as the location of the Academy&#x27;s Middle School.

Completed in August 2015, Dallas Baptist University built one of the largest replicas of Monticello, including its entry halls and a dome room. Approximately , it is the home of the Gary Cook School of Leadership, as well as the University Chancellor&#x27;s offices.

Saint Paul&#x27;s Baptist Church located at the corner of East Belt Boulevard and Hull Street Road in Richmond is modeled after Monticello. Originally built by Weatherford Memorial Baptist Church, the building was donated to St Paul&#x27;s when Weatherford Memorial disbanded in the early 2000s.

Pi Kappa Alpha&#x27;s Memorial Headquarters, opened in 1988, is located in the TPC Southwind development in Memphis, Tennessee and was inspired by the architecture of Monticello.

Perrot Library (1931), Old Greenwich, Connecticut, was inspired by Jeffersonian architecture and Monticello.

The exterior of University of the Cumberlands&#x27; Ward and Regina Correll Science Complex is also a replica of Thomas Jefferson&#x27;s Monticello mansion. The $1 million expansion of the Science Complex was started in May 2007 and classes began in January 2009.

==Legacy==

Monticello&#x27;s image has appeared on U.S. currency and postage stamps. An image of the west front of Monticello by Felix Schlag has been featured on the reverse of the nickel minted since 1938 (with a brief interruption in 2004 and 2005, when designs of the Westward Journey series appeared instead). It was also used as the title for the 2015 play &quot;Jefferson&#x27;s Garden&quot;, which centered on his life.

Monticello also appeared on the reverse of the two-dollar bill from 1928 to 1966, when the bill was discontinued. The bill was reintroduced in 1976 and retains Jefferson&#x27;s portrait on the obverse but replaced Monticello on the reverse with an engraved modified reproduction of John Trumbull&#x27;s 1818 painting &quot;Declaration of Independence&quot;. The gift shop tour ticket booths at Monticello hands out two-dollar bills as change.

The 1994 commemorative Thomas Jefferson 250th Anniversary silver dollar features Monticello on the reverse.

==Gallery==


==See also==
*Bibliography of Thomas Jefferson
*Jeffersonian architecture
*List of residences of presidents of the United States
*List of burial places of presidents and vice presidents of the United States
*History of early modern period domes
*People from Monticello
*Presidential memorials in the United States
*Thomas Jefferson Center for Historic Plants

==References==
==Further reading==
*Adams, William Howard, &quot;Jefferson&#x27;s Monticello&quot; (Abbeville Press, 1983)
*Burstein, Andrew, &quot;Jefferson&#x27;s Secrets: Death and Desire in Monticello&quot; (Basic Books, 2005)
*Hatch, Peter J., &quot;A Rich Spot of Earth: Thomas Jefferson&#x27;s Revolutionary Garden at Monticello&quot; (Yale University Press, 2012)
*Hayes, Kevin J., &quot;The Road to Monticello: The Life and Mind of Thomas Jefferson&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2008)
*Jackson, Donald, &quot;Thomas Jefferson and the Stony Mountains: Exploring the West from Monticello&quot; (University of Illinois Press, 1981)
*Kranish, Michael, &quot;Flight from Monticello: Thomas Jefferson at War&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2010)
*McCullough, David (intro.), &quot;Thomas Jefferson&#x27;s Monticello: An Intimate Portrait&quot; (The Monacelli Press, 1997) – photos by Robert C. Lautman
*McLaughlin, Jack, &quot;Jefferson and Monticello: The Biography of a Builder&quot; (Henry Holt &amp; Co., 1988)
*Stein, Susan R., &quot;The Worlds of Thomas Jefferson at Monticello&quot; (Harry N. Abrams, 1993)

==External links==

*The Monticello Explorer, an interactive multimedia look at the house
*Monticello Association, private lineage society of Jefferson descendants
*&quot;Thomas Jefferson Lived Here.&quot; &quot;Popular Mechanics&quot;, August 1954, pp. 97–103/212.
*&quot;Life Portrait of Thomas Jefferson&quot;, from C-SPAN&#x27;s &quot;American Presidents: Life Portraits&quot;, broadcast from Monticello, April 2, 1999
*Monticello, State Route 53 vicinity, Charlottesville vicinity, Albemarle, VA at the Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS)
*Thomas Jefferson Foundation at Monticello in Google Cultural Institute
*Guide to the Monticello Architectural Records 1923-1976</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q199618" start="0" end="10" title="Monticello" label="Monticello"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="31" end="41" title="Plantation complexes in the Southern United States" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="45" end="61" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="65" end="80" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="96" end="123" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="139" end="169" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q123766" start="285" end="310" title="Charlottesville, Virginia" label="Charlottesville, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q426977" start="319" end="327" title="Piedmont (United States)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="393" end="405" title="forced labor" label="forced labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="409" end="430" title="Slavery in the United States" label="enslaved black people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="460" end="467" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="654" end="680" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="717" end="739" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="796" end="802" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="803" end="822" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q238498" start="828" end="848" title="Nickel (United States coin)" label="United States nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="960" end="970" title="Plantation complexes in the Southern United States" label="main house"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="977" end="989" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="1021" end="1040" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q177692" start="1051" end="1066" title="Andrea Palladio" label="Andrea Palladio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571326" start="1270" end="1289" title="Southwest Mountains" label="Southwest Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905949" start="1938" end="1960" title="Monticello Association" label="Monticello Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q238001" start="1999" end="2030" title="Martha Wayles Skelton Jefferson" label="Martha Wayles Skelton Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q255159" start="2075" end="2100" title="Martha Jefferson Randolph" label="Martha Jefferson Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552296" start="2195" end="2208" title="Uriah P. Levy" label="Uriah P. Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676959" start="2344" end="2365" title="Jefferson Monroe Levy" label="Jefferson Monroe Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17651201" start="2520" end="2547" title="Thomas Jefferson Foundation" label="Thomas Jefferson Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655611" start="2691" end="2707" title="plantation house" label="plantation house"/>
<link wikidata="Q3950" start="2762" end="2767" title="villa" label="villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q238001" start="2978" end="2999" title="Martha Wayles Skelton Jefferson" label="Martha Wayles Skelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="3751" end="3774" title="United States Secretary of State" label="U.S. Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q958148" start="4241" end="4250" title="Mezzanine (architecture)" label="mezzanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12493" start="4491" end="4495" title="dome" label="dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q943" start="4960" end="4966" title="yellow" label="yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="5822" end="5859" title="University of Virginia" label="university project in Charlottesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q17058539" start="6101" end="6120" title="Samuel Whitcomb Jr." label="Samuel Whitcomb Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q255159" start="6508" end="6533" title="Martha Jefferson Randolph" label="Martha Jefferson Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="6684" end="6698" title="mental illness" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q56379621" start="6732" end="6752" title="James Turner Barclay" label="James Turner Barclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131236" start="6762" end="6772" title="apothecary" label="apothecary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552296" start="6822" end="6835" title="Uriah P. Levy" label="Uriah P. Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q844242" start="6874" end="6883" title="commodore (United States)" label="commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="7011" end="7028" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="7131" end="7142" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="7210" end="7228" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888633" start="7264" end="7289" title="Benjamin Franklin Ficklin" label="Benjamin Franklin Ficklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186896" start="7303" end="7309" title="Estate (law)" label="estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676959" start="7463" end="7484" title="Jefferson Monroe Levy" label="Jefferson Monroe Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966429" start="7515" end="7537" title="real estate speculator" label="real estate speculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q17651201" start="8012" end="8039" title="Thomas Jefferson Foundation" label="Thomas Jefferson Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q973327" start="8219" end="8232" title="Fiske Kimball" label="Fiske Kimball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861281" start="8237" end="8252" title="Milton L. Grigg" label="Milton L. Grigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087181" start="8390" end="8402" title="house museum" label="house museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="8676" end="8702" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="8772" end="8798" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="8888" end="8910" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q913956" start="8961" end="8995" title="Historic American Buildings Survey" label="Historic American Buildings Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="9091" end="9110" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306253" start="9154" end="9167" title="Poplar Forest" label="Poplar Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q844012" start="9194" end="9203" title="Lynchburg, Virginia" label="Lynchburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537798" start="9340" end="9362" title="Virginia State Capitol" label="Virginia State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q185600" start="9549" end="9556" title="portico" label="portico"/>
<link wikidata="Q524738" start="9645" end="9657" title="weather vane" label="weather vane"/>
<link wikidata="Q376" start="9702" end="9707" title="clock" label="clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="10012" end="10027" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q41402" start="10223" end="10237" title="Gilbert Stuart" label="Gilbert Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075" start="10464" end="10471" title="library" label="library"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="10616" end="10638" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q897786" start="10677" end="10698" title="burning of Washington" label="burning of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="10710" end="10721" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="10769" end="10788" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q661199" start="10956" end="10967" title="dining room" label="dining room"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067091" start="11030" end="11037" title="alcove (architecture)" label="alcoves"/>
<link wikidata="Q257464" start="11218" end="11231" title="Sally Hemings" label="Sally Hemings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313763" start="11741" end="11751" title="Dumbwaiter (elevator)" label="dumbwaiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q378341" start="11943" end="11962" title="macaroni and cheese" label="macaroni and cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135835" start="12122" end="12135" title="James Hemings" label="James Hemings"/>
<link wikidata="Q257464" start="12148" end="12161" title="Sally Hemings" label="Sally Hemings"/>
<link wikidata="Q116909984" start="12346" end="12374" title="Slave quarters in the United States" label="quarters for enslaved people"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="12933" end="12944" title="Archaeology" label="Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="13620" end="13631" title="Child labour" label="child labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366539" start="13782" end="13795" title="Tobacco Worm" label="tobacco worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286140" start="14233" end="14241" title="cornmeal" label="cornmeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q838052" start="14246" end="14257" title="salted fish" label="salted fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="14608" end="14619" title="Smithsonian" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="14627" end="14662" title="National Museum of American History" label="National Museum of American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073495" start="14751" end="14806" title="National Museum of African American History and Culture" label="National Museum of African American History and Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q695207" start="15362" end="15372" title="log cabins" label="log cabins"/>
<link wikidata="Q257464" start="15597" end="15610" title="Sally Hemings" label="Sally Hemings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522486" start="16310" end="16331" title="gardens of Monticello" label="gardens of Monticello"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="17036" end="17049" title="archeological" label="archeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="17464" end="17480" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="18293" end="18315" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="18465" end="18481" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="18616" end="18628" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="18789" end="18797" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="18989" end="19011" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229917" start="19454" end="19467" title="Hôtel de Salm" label="Hôtel de Salm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074877" start="19516" end="19530" title="Chiswick House" label="Chiswick House"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="19617" end="19623" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q888302" start="19687" end="19695" title="Bob Vila" label="Bob Vila"/>
<link wikidata="Q277561" start="19703" end="19718" title="A&amp;amp;E Network" label="A&amp;amp;E Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387779" start="19936" end="19950" title="S. Prestley Blake" label="Prestley Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q608360" start="19990" end="20009" title="Somers, Connecticut" label="Somers, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981685" start="20099" end="20126" title="Naval Academy Jewish Chapel" label="Naval Academy Jewish Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="20130" end="20139" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000134" start="20186" end="20216" title="Wilbraham &amp;amp; Monson Academy" label="Wilbraham &amp;amp; Monson Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q912750" start="20220" end="20244" title="Wilbraham, Massachusetts" label="Wilbraham, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211272" start="20374" end="20399" title="Dallas Baptist University" label="Dallas Baptist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="20718" end="20726" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238185" start="20913" end="20927" title="Pi Kappa Alpha" label="Pi Kappa Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7671120" start="20992" end="21005" title="TPC Southwind" label="TPC Southwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="21021" end="21039" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q984521" start="21116" end="21142" title="Old Greenwich, Connecticut" label="Old Greenwich, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896695" start="21219" end="21248" title="University of the Cumberlands" label="University of the Cumberlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q73458" start="21598" end="21610" title="Felix Schlag" label="Felix Schlag"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725526" start="21636" end="21643" title="Obverse and reverse" label="reverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q238498" start="21651" end="21657" title="Nickel (United States coin)" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141049" start="21658" end="21664" title="United States Mint" label="minted"/>
<link wikidata="Q238498" start="21741" end="21757" title="Westward Journey Nickels" label="Westward Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363419" start="21838" end="21861" title="Jefferson&amp;#x27;s Garden" label="Jefferson&amp;#x27;s Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189454" start="21945" end="21960" title="United States two-dollar bill" label="two-dollar bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747582" start="22016" end="22020" title="Federal Reserve Note" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q369263" start="22180" end="22193" title="John Trumbull" label="John Trumbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173195" start="22221" end="22248" title="Declaration of Independence (Trumbull)" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067461" start="22365" end="22413" title="Thomas Jefferson 250th Anniversary silver dollar" label="Thomas Jefferson 250th Anniversary silver dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903400" start="22479" end="22511" title="Bibliography of Thomas Jefferson" label="Bibliography of Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175722" start="22513" end="22538" title="Jeffersonian architecture" label="Jeffersonian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q185726" start="22540" end="22593" title="List of residences of presidents of the United States" label="List of residences of presidents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q48769850" start="22595" end="22671" title="List of burial places of presidents and vice presidents of the United States" label="List of burial places of presidents and vice presidents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895312" start="22673" end="22709" title="History of early modern period domes" label="History of early modern period domes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22711" end="22733" title=":Category:People from Monticello" label="People from Monticello"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108855" start="22735" end="22778" title="Presidential memorials in the United States" label="Presidential memorials in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q116265710" start="22780" end="22823" title="Thomas Jefferson Center for Historic Plants" label="Thomas Jefferson Center for Historic Plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q374610" start="23577" end="23594" title="David McCullough" label="McCullough, David"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342622" start="23714" end="23731" title="Robert C. Lautman" label="Robert C. Lautman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="24264" end="24270" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24284" end="24319" title="American Presidents: Life Portraits" label="American Presidents: Life Portraits"/>
<link wikidata="Q913956" start="24453" end="24487" title="Historic American Buildings Survey" label="Historic American Buildings Survey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52303" wikidata="Q309256" url="?curid=52303" title="Day of the Dead">
<text>The Day of the Dead () is a holiday traditionally celebrated on November 1 and 2, though other days, such as October 31 or November 6, may be included depending on the locality. The multi-day holiday involves family and friends gathering to pay respects and remember friends and family members who have died. These celebrations can take a humorous tone, as celebrants remember amusing events and anecdotes about the departed. It is widely observed in Mexico, where it largely developed, and is also observed in other places, especially by people of Mexican heritage. The observance falls during the Christian period of Allhallowtide. Some argue that there are Indigenous Mexican or ancient Aztec influences that account for the custom, though others see it as a local expression of the Allhallowtide season that was brought to the region by the Spanish; the Day of the Dead has become a way to remember those forebears of Mexican culture. The Day of the Dead is largely seen as having a festive characteristic. 

Traditions connected with the holiday include honoring the deceased using calaveras and marigold flowers known as , building home altars called with the favorite foods and beverages of the departed, and visiting graves with these items as gifts for the deceased. The celebration is not solely focused on the dead, as it is also common to give gifts to friends such as candy sugar skulls, to share traditional pan de muerto with family and friends, and to write light-hearted and often irreverent verses in the form of mock epitaphs dedicated to living friends and acquaintances, a literary form known as .

In 2008, the tradition was inscribed in the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO.

==Origins, history, and similarities to other festivities==
Mexican academics are divided on whether the festivity has genuine indigenous pre-Hispanic roots or whether it is a 20th-century rebranded version of a Spanish tradition developed during the presidency of Lázaro Cárdenas to encourage Mexican nationalism through an &quot;Aztec&quot; identity. The festivity has become a national symbol in recent decades and it is taught in the nation&#x27;s school system asserting a native origin. In 2008, the tradition was inscribed in the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO.

Views differ on whether the festivity has indigenous pre-Hispanic roots, whether it is a more modern adaptation of an existing European tradition, or a combination of both as a manifestation of syncretism. The beginning of the Christian observance of Allhallowtide, including All Saints&#x27; Day and its vigil, as well as All Souls&#x27; Day, is observed on the same days in places like Spain and Southern Europe, and elsewhere in Christendom. Critics of the Native American origin claim that even though pre-Columbian Mexico had traditions that honored the dead, current depictions of the festivity have more in common with European traditions of Danse macabre and their allegories of life and death personified in the human skeleton to remind of the ephemeral nature of life. Over the past decades, however, Mexican academia has increasingly questioned the validity of this assumption, even going as far as calling it a politically motivated fabrication. Historian Elsa Malvido, researcher for the Mexican Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia (INAH, or National Institute of Anthropology and History) and founder of the institute&#x27;s Taller de Estudios sobre la Muerte (Workshop of Studies on Death), was the first to do so in the context of her wider research into Mexican attitudes to death and disease across the centuries. Malvido completely discards a native or even syncretic origin arguing that the tradition can be fully traced to Medieval Europe. She highlights the existence of similar traditions on the same day, not just in Spain, but in the rest of Catholic Southern Europe and Latin America such as altars for the dead, sweets in the shape of skulls and bread in the shape of bones.

Agustin Sanchez Gonzalez has a similar view in his article published in the INAH&#x27;s bi-monthly journal &quot;Arqueología Mexicana&quot;. Gonzalez states that, even though the &quot;indigenous&quot; narrative became hegemonic, the spirit of the festivity has far more in common with European traditions of Danse macabre and their allegories of life and death personified in the human skeleton to remind us the ephemeral nature of life. He also highlights that in the 19th-century press there was little mention of the Day of the Dead in the sense that we know it today. All there was were long processions to cemeteries, sometimes ending with drunkenness. Elsa Malvido also points to the recent origin of the tradition of &quot;velar&quot; or staying up all night with the dead. It resulted from the Reform Laws under the presidency of Benito Juarez which forced family pantheons out of Churches and into civil cemeteries, requiring rich families to have servants guard family possessions displayed at altars.

The historian Ricardo Pérez Montfort has further demonstrated how the ideology known as became more and more closely linked to post-revolutionary official projects whereas Hispanismo was identified with conservative political stances. This exclusive nationalism began to displace all other cultural perspectives, to the point that in the 1930s the Aztec god Quetzalcoatl was officially promoted by the government as a substitute for the Spanish Three Kings tradition, with a person dressed up as the deity offering gifts to poor children.
In this context, the Day of the Dead began to be officially isolated from the Catholic Church by the leftist government of Lázaro Cárdenas motivated both by &quot;indigenismo&quot; and left-leaning anti-clericalism. Malvido herself goes as far as calling the festivity a &quot;Cardenist invention&quot; whereby the Catholic elements are removed and emphasis is laid on indigenous iconography, the focus on death and what Malvido considers to be the cultural invention according to which Mexicans venerate death. Gonzalez explains that Mexican nationalism developed diverse cultural expressions with a seal of tradition but which are essentially social constructs which eventually developed ancestral tones. One of these would be the Catholic Día de Muertos which, during the 20th century, appropriated the elements of an ancient pagan rite.

One key element of the re-developed festivity which appears during this time is &quot;La Calavera Catrina&quot; by Mexican lithographer José Guadalupe Posada. According to Gonzalez, while Posada is portrayed in current times as the &quot;restorer&quot; of Mexico&#x27;s pre-Hispanic tradition, he was never interested in Native American culture or history. Posada was predominantly interested in drawing scary images which are far closer to those of the European renaissance or the horrors painted by Francisco de Goya in the Spanish War of Independence against Napoleon than to the Mexica tzompantli. The recent trans-Atlantic connection can also be observed in the pervasive use of couplet in allegories of death and the play &quot;Don Juan Tenorio&quot; by 19th-century Spanish writer José Zorrilla which is represented on this date both in Spain and in Mexico since the early 19th century due to its ghostly apparitions and cemetery scenes.

Opposing views assert that despite the obvious European influence, there exists proof of pre-Columbian festivities that were very similar in spirit, with the Aztec people having at least six celebrations during the year that were very similar to Day of the Dead, the closest one being Quecholli, a celebration that honored Mixcóatl (the god of war) and was celebrated between October 20 and November 8. This celebration included elements such as the placement of altars with food (tamales) near the burying grounds of warriors to help them in their journey to the afterlife. Influential Mexican poet and Nobel prize laureate Octavio Paz strongly supported the syncretic view of the Día de Muertos tradition being a continuity of ancient Aztec festivals celebrating death, as is most evident in the chapter &quot;All Saints, Day of the Dead&quot; of his 1950 book-length essay &quot;The Labyrinth of Solitude&quot;.

Ruben C. Cordova emphasizes the zeal with which the Spanish attempted to extinguish indigenous religious beliefs and practices, such that it is often difficult to reconstruct their main features. Over time, indigenous converts became extremely devout Catholics. As Mexico modernized, the traditional practices that the Spanish had brought to the Americas survived most robustly in rural and less affluent communities, which had high concentrations of indigenous and mestizo populations. Thus archaic Spanish religious practices in marginal areas came to be mistakenly regarded as the &quot;pure&quot; core of primarily &quot;indigenous&quot; Day of the Dead festivities.

The Aztecs devoted two twenty-day months in their ritual calendar to the dead: the ninth and tenth months, which were for children and adults, respectively. Cordova argues that some recollection of these festivals &quot;was compressed down to two days and cryptically celebrated within the Catholic liturgical calendar&quot;, which is why, in Mexico, &quot;unlike other Latin American countries with Day of the Dead traditions — All Saints&#x27; Day is dedicated to children, and All Souls&#x27; Day is dedicated to adults.&quot; 

He also notes that the same object, such as a stone skull carved by the Aztecs, would have different meanings in different religious contexts. For the Aztecs, bones—and skulls in particular—were reservoirs of enormous sacred power. A stone skull could evoke sacrifice, and the skull racks where the skulls of sacrificed captives were displayed. The Spanish could take an Aztec skull and repurpose it by placing it on a holy water font, or under a cross in a cemetery, whereby it would be transformed into a memento mori.

Regardless of its origin, the festivity has become a national symbol in Mexico and as such is taught in the nation&#x27;s school system, typically asserting a native origin. It is also a school holiday nationwide.

==Observance in Mexico==

=== Altars and installations in Mexico City museums and public spaces ===
A number of Mexico City&#x27;s museums and public spaces have played an important part in developing and promoting urban Day of the Dead traditions through altars and installations. These notable organizations include: Anahuacalli, The Frida Kahlo Museum, The Museum of Popular Cultures, The Dolores Olmedo Museum, The Museum of the First Printing Press, and The Cloister of Sor Juana. From turn of the millennium until the imposition of the James Bond-inspired parade, remarkable large-scale installations were created on the Zocalo, Mexico City&#x27;s central square.

=== Altars () ===
During Día de Muertos, the tradition is to build private altars (&quot;ofrendas&quot;) containing the favorite foods and beverages, as well as photos and memorabilia, of the departed. The intent is to encourage visits by the souls, so the souls will hear the prayers and the words of the living directed to them. These altars are often placed at home or in public spaces such as schools and libraries, but it is also common for people to go to cemeteries to place these altars next to the tombs of the departed.
Plans for the day are made throughout the year, including gathering the goods to be offered to the dead. During the three-day period families usually clean and decorate graves; most visit the cemeteries where their loved ones are buried and decorate their graves with (altars), which often include orange Mexican marigolds (&quot;Tagetes erecta&quot;) called (originally named , Nāhuatl for &#x27;twenty flowers&#x27;). In modern Mexico the marigold is sometimes called (&#x27;Flower of Dead&#x27;). These flowers are thought to attract souls of the dead to the offerings. It is also believed the bright petals with a strong scent can guide the souls from cemeteries to their family homes. The common name in English, marigold, is derived from &quot;Mary&#x27;s gold&quot;, a name first applied to a similar plant native to Europe, &quot;Calendula officinalis&quot;.

Toys are brought for dead children (, or &#x27;the little angels&#x27;), and bottles of tequila, mezcal or pulque or jars of for adults. Families will also offer trinkets or the deceased&#x27;s favorite candies on the grave. Some families have in homes, usually with foods such as candied pumpkin, (&#x27;bread of dead&#x27;), and sugar skulls; and beverages such as . The are left out in the homes as a welcoming gesture for the deceased. Some people believe the spirits of the dead eat the &quot;spiritual essence&quot; of the &#x27; food, so though the celebrators eat the food after the festivities, they believe it lacks nutritional value. Pillows and blankets are left out so the deceased can rest after their long journey. In some parts of Mexico, such as the towns of Mixquic, Pátzcuaro and Janitzio, people spend all night beside the graves of their relatives. In many places, people have picnics at the grave site, as well.
Some families build altars or small shrines in their homes; these sometimes feature a Christian cross, statues or pictures of the Blessed Virgin Mary, pictures of deceased relatives and other people, scores of candles, and an . Traditionally, families spend some time around the altar, praying and telling anecdotes about the deceased. In some locations, celebrants wear shells on their clothing, so when they dance, the noise will wake up the dead; some will also dress up as the deceased.

==== Food ====
During Day of the Dead festivities, food is both eaten by living people and given to the spirits of their departed ancestors as (&#x27;offerings&#x27;). are one of the most common dishes prepared for this day for both purposes.

 and are associated specifically with Day of the Dead. is a type of sweet roll shaped like a bun, topped with sugar, and often decorated with bone-shaped pieces of the same pastry. , or sugar skulls, display colorful designs to represent the vitality and individual personality of the departed.

In addition to food, drinks are also important to the tradition of Day of the Dead. Historically, the main alcoholic drink was pulque; today families will commonly drink the favorite beverage of their deceased ancestors. Other drinks associated with the holiday are and , warm, thick, non-alcoholic masa drinks.

 (water of hibiscus) is a popular herbal tea made of the flowers and leaves of the Jamaican hibiscus plant (&quot;Hibiscus sabdariffa&quot;), known as in Mexico. It is served cold and quite sweet with a lot of ice. The ruby-red beverage is also known as hibiscus tea in English-speaking countries.

In the Yucatán Peninsula, mukbil pollo (píib chicken) is traditionally prepared on October 31 or November 1, and eaten by the family throughout the following days. It is similar to a big tamale, composed of masa and pork lard, and stuffed with pork, chicken, tomato, garlic, peppers, onions, epazote, achiote, and spices. Once stuffed, the mukbil pollo is bathed in kool sauce, made with meat broth, habanero chili, and corn masa. It is then covered in banana leaves and steamed in an underground oven over the course of several hours. Once cooked, it is dug up and opened to eat.

=== &quot;Calaveras&quot; ===
A common symbol of the holiday is the skull (in Spanish ), which celebrants represent in masks, called (colloquial term for skeleton), and foods such as chocolate or sugar skulls, which are inscribed with the name of the recipient on the forehead. Sugar skulls can be given as gifts to both the living and the dead. Other holiday foods include , a sweet egg bread made in various shapes from plain rounds to skulls, often decorated with white frosting to look like twisted bones.
In some parts of the country, especially the larger cities, children in costumes roam the streets, knocking on people&#x27;s doors for a , a small gift of candies or money; they also ask passersby for it. This custom is similar to that of Halloween&#x27;s trick-or-treating in the United States, but without the component of mischief to homeowners if no treat is given.
A distinctive literary form exists within this holiday where people write short poems in traditional rhyming verse, called (lit. &quot;literary skulls&quot;), which are mocking, light-hearted epitaphs mostly dedicated to friends, classmates, co-workers, or family members (living or dead) but also to public or historical figures, describing interesting habits and attitudes, as well as comedic or absurd anecdotes that use death-related imagery which includes but is not limited to cemeteries, skulls, or the grim reaper, all of this in situations where the dedicatee has an encounter with death itself. This custom originated in the 18th or 19th century after a newspaper published a poem narrating a dream of a cemetery in the future which included the words &quot;and all of us were dead&quot;, and then proceeding to read the tombstones. Current newspapers dedicate to public figures, with cartoons of skeletons in the style of the famous of José Guadalupe Posada, a Mexican illustrator. In modern Mexico, are a staple of the holiday in many institutions and organizations, for example, in public schools, students are encouraged or required to write them as part of the language class.


Posada&#x27;s most famous print, (&quot;The Elegant Skull&quot;), was likely intended as a criticism of Mexican upper-class women who imitated European fashions. It was first published posthumously in a broadside with a text (not by Posada) that mocked working-class vendors of chickpeas.

Posada&#x27;s image of a skeletal figure with a big hat decorated with two ostrich feathers and flowers was elaborated into a full scale figure by Mexican Muralist Diego Rivera in a fresco painted in 1946–47. Rivera&#x27;s Catrina has a simple Tehuana dress and a feather boa, as well as other features that make allusions to the indigenous peoples of Mexico. Through the addition of these indigenous features, Rivera rehabilitated Catrina into a nationalist emblem.

The Catrina character has become deeply associated with the Day of the Dead. Catrina figures made of a wide range of materials, as well as people with Catrina costumes, have come to play a prominent role in modern Day of the Dead observances in Mexico and elsewhere. The Catrina phenomenon has in fact gone beyond Day of the Dead, resulting in non-seasonal and even permanent &quot;Catrinas&quot;, including COVID-19 masks, tattoos, permanently decorated cars, and Catrina-themed artworks. Some artists have even developed a sub-specialization in Catrina imagery.

Theatrical presentations of &quot;Don Juan Tenorio&quot; by José Zorrilla (1817–1893) are also traditional on this day.

=== Local traditions ===

The traditions and activities that take place in celebration of the Day of the Dead are not universal, often varying from town to town. For example, in the town of Pátzcuaro on the Lago de Pátzcuaro in Michoacán, the tradition is very different if the deceased is a child rather than an adult. On November 1 of the year after a child&#x27;s death, the godparents set a table in the parents&#x27; home with sweets, fruits, , a cross, a rosary (used to ask the Virgin Mary to pray for them), and candles. This is meant to celebrate the child&#x27;s life, in respect and appreciation for the parents. There is also dancing with colorful costumes, often with skull-shaped masks and devil masks in the plaza or garden of the town. At midnight on November 2, the people light candles and ride winged boats called (butterflies) to Janitzio, an island in the middle of the lake where there is a cemetery, to honor and celebrate the lives of the dead there.

In contrast, the town of Ocotepec, north of Cuernavaca in the State of Morelos, opens its doors to visitors in exchange for (small wax candles) to show respect for the recently deceased. In return the visitors receive tamales and . This is done only by the owners of the house where someone in the household has died in the previous year. Many people of the surrounding areas arrive early to eat for free and enjoy the elaborate altars set up to receive the visitors.

Another peculiar tradition involving children is (the Dance of the Old Men) where boys and young men dressed like grandfathers crouch and jump in an energetic dance.

In the 2015 James Bond film &quot;Spectre&quot;, the opening sequence features a Day of the Dead parade in Mexico City. At the time, no such parade took place in Mexico City; one year later, due to the interest in the film and the government desire to promote the Mexican culture, the federal and local authorities decided to organize an actual parade through Paseo de la Reforma and Centro Historico on October 29, 2016, which was attended by 250,000 people. This could be seen as an example of the pizza effect. The idea of a massive celebration was also popularized in the Disney Pixar movie &quot;Coco&quot;.

==Observances outside of Mexico==
===North America===

====United States====

In many communities in the United States with Mexican residents, Day of the Dead celebrations are very similar to those held in Mexico. In some of these communities, in states such as Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona, the celebrations tend to be mostly traditional. The All Souls Procession has been an annual event since 1990 in Tucson, Arizona. The event combines elements of traditional Day of the Dead celebrations with those of pagan harvest festivals. People wearing masks carry signs honoring the dead and an urn in which people can place slips of paper with prayers on them to be burned. Likewise, Old Town San Diego, California, annually hosts a traditional two-day celebration culminating in a candlelight procession to the historic El Campo Santo Cemetery.

The festival also was held annually at historic Forest Hills Cemetery in Boston&#x27;s Jamaica Plain neighborhood. Sponsored by Forest Hills Educational Trust and the folkloric performance group La Piñata, the Day of the Dead festivities celebrated the cycle of life and death. People brought offerings of flowers, photos, mementos, and food for their departed loved ones, which they placed at an elaborately and colorfully decorated altar. A program of traditional music and dance also accompanied the community event. The Jamaica Plain celebration was discontinued in 2011.

The Smithsonian Institution, in collaboration with the University of Texas at El Paso and Second Life, have created a Smithsonian Latino Virtual Museum and accompanying multimedia e-book: &quot;Día de los Muertos: Day of the Dead&quot;. The project&#x27;s website contains some of the text and images which explain the origins of some of the customary core practices related to the Day of the Dead, such as the background beliefs and the &quot;offrenda&quot; (the special altar commemorating one&#x27;s deceased loved one). The Made For iTunes multimedia e-book version provides additional content, such as further details; additional photo galleries; pop-up profiles of influential Latino artists and cultural figures over the decades; and video clips of interviews with artists who make &quot;Día de Muertos&quot;-themed artwork, explanations and performances of Aztec and other traditional dances, an animation short that explains the customs to children, virtual poetry readings in English and Spanish.

In 2021, the Biden-Harris administration celebrated the &quot;Día de Muertos&quot;.

=====California=====
Santa Ana, California, is said to hold the &quot;largest event in Southern California&quot; honoring &quot;Día de Muertos&quot;, called the annual , which began in 2002. The celebration of the Day of the Dead in Santa Ana has grown to two large events with the creation of an event held at the Santa Ana Regional Transportation Center for the first time on November 1, 2015.

In other communities, interactions between Mexican traditions and American culture are resulting in celebrations in which Mexican traditions are being extended to make artistic or sometimes political statements. For example, in Los Angeles, California, the Self Help Graphics &amp; Art Mexican-American cultural center presents an annual Day of the Dead celebration that includes both traditional and political elements, such as altars to honor the victims of the Iraq War, highlighting the high casualty rate among Latino soldiers. An updated, intercultural version of the Day of the Dead is also evolving at Hollywood Forever Cemetery. There, in a mixture of Native Californian art, Mexican traditions and Hollywood hip, conventional altars are set up side by side with altars to Jayne Mansfield and Johnny Ramone. Colorful native dancers and music intermix with performance artists, while sly pranksters play on traditional themes.

Similar traditional and intercultural updating of Mexican celebrations are held in San Francisco. For example, the Galería de la Raza, SomArts Cultural Center, Mission Cultural Center, de Young Museum and altars at Garfield Square by the Marigold Project. Oakland is home to &quot;Corazon Del Pueblo&quot; in the Fruitvale district. &quot;Corazon Del Pueblo&quot; has a shop offering handcrafted Mexican gifts and a museum devoted to Day of the Dead artifacts. Also, the Fruitvale district in Oakland serves as the hub of the &quot;Día de Muertos&quot; annual festival which occurs the last weekend of October. Here, a mix of several Mexican traditions come together with traditional Aztec dancers, regional Mexican music, and other Mexican artisans to celebrate the day.

In San Diego, California, the city that borders Mexico, the celebrations range across the entire county. All the way up at the most northern part of the county, Oceanside celebrates their annual event which includes community and family altars built around the Oceanside Civic Center and Pier View Way, as well as events at the Mission San Luis Rey de Francia. In the more central area of San Diego, City Heights celebrates through a public festival in Jeremy Henwood Memorial Park that includes at least 35 altars, lowriders, and entertainment, all for free. Down in Chula Vista, they celebrate the tradition through a movie night at Third and Davidson streets where they will be screening &quot;Coco.&quot; This movie night also consists of a community altar, an Altar contest, a catrin/catrina contest, as well as lots of music, food, and vendors. Overall, San Diego is booming with colorful celebrations honoring ancestors across the county.

===Italy===
In Italy, November 2 is All Souls&#x27; Day and is colloquially known as Day of the Dead or &quot;Giorno dei Morti&quot;. While many regional nuances exist, celebrations generally consist of placing flowers at cemeteries and family burial sites and speaking to deceased relatives. Some traditions also include lighting a red candle or &quot;lumino&quot; on the window sills at sunset and laying out a table of food for deceased relatives who will come to visit. Like other Day of the Dead traditions around the world, Giorno dei Morti is a day dedicated to honoring the lives of those who have died. Additionally, it is a tradition that teaches children not to be afraid of death.

In Sicily, families celebrate a long-held Day of the Dead tradition called The Festival of the Dead or &quot;Festa dei Morti&quot;. On the eve of November 1, La Festa di Ognissanti, or All Saints&#x27; Day, older family members act as the &quot;defunti&quot;, or spirits of deceased family members, who sneak into the home and hide sweets and gifts for their young descendants to awake to. On the morning of November 2, children begin the day by hunting to find the gifts in shoes or a special wicker basket of the dead called &quot;cannistru dei morti&quot; or &quot;u cannistru&quot;, which typically consist of various sweets, small toys, boned-shaped almond flavored cookies called &quot;ossa dei morti&quot;, sugar dolls called &quot;pupi di zucchero&quot;, and fruit, vegetable, and ghoul shaped marzipan treats called &quot;Frutta martorana&quot;. The pupi di zucchero, thought to be an Arabic cultural import, are often found in the shapes of folkloric characters who represent humanized versions of the souls of the dead. Eating the sugar dolls reflects the idea of the individual absorbing the dead and, in doing so, bringing the dead back to life within themselves on November 2. After gifts are shared and breakfast is enjoyed, the whole family will often visit the cemetery or burial site bearing flowers. They will light candles and play amongst the graves to thank the deceased for the gifts, before enjoying a hearty feast. The tradition holds that the spirits of the deceased will remain with the family to enjoy a day of feasting and merriment.

Acclaimed Sicilian author Andrea Camilleri recounts his Giorno dei Morti experience as boy, as well as the negative cultural impact that WWII era American influence had on the long-held tradition.

Food plays an important part of Italy&#x27;s day of the dead tradition, with various regional treats being used as offerings to the dead on their journey to the afterlife. In Tuscany and Milan the &quot;pane dei morti&quot; or &quot;bread of the dead&quot; is said to be the characteristic offering. In northern Apulia, a wheat growing region, a sweet dish for the Day of the Dead is Colva or &quot;Grains of the Dead&quot;. Fave dei morti or &quot;fava beans of the dead&quot; are another dish for the day found widespread through Italy. Ossa dei morti, suitably elongated and frosted &quot;bones of the dead&quot; are sweets found in Apulia and Sicily. In Sicily, families enjoy special day of the dead cakes and cookies that are made into symbolic shapes such as skulls and finger bones. The &quot;sweets of the dead&quot; are a marzipan treats called frutta martorana. On the night of November 1, Sicilian parents and grandparents traditionally buy Frutta di Martorana to gift to children on November 2.

In addition to visiting their own family members, some people pay respects to those without a family. Some Italians take it upon themselves to adopt centuries-old unclaimed bodies and give them offerings like money or jewelry as a way to ease their pain and ask for favors.

===Asia and Oceania===
Mexican-style Day of the Dead celebrations occur in major cities in Australia, Fiji, and Indonesia, most organized by Mexican communities. Additionally, an independent annual celebration is held in Wellington, New Zealand, complete with altars celebrating the deceased with flowers and gifts.

===Philippines===

In the Philippines &quot;Undás&quot; and &quot;Araw ng mga Yumao&quot;, All Saints&#x27; Day and All Souls&#x27; Day, are celebrated following with the Roman Catholic tradition. Filipinos traditionally observe these days by visiting the family dead to clean and repair their tombs, just as is done in Mexico. Offerings of prayers, flowers, candles, and even food, while Chinese Filipinos additionally burn joss sticks and joss paper (&quot;kim&quot;). Many also spend the day and ensuing night holding reunions at the cemetery, having feasts and merriment. Due the cultural connections of the Philippines and Mexico with links going back to the Spanish Empire, they share some of the aspects of the practices done in the celebration.

===Czech Republic===
As part of a promotion by the Mexican embassy in Prague, Czech Republic, since the late 20th century, some local citizens join in a Mexican-style Day of the Dead. A theater group conducts events involving candles, masks, and make-up using luminous paint in the form of sugar skulls.

==Similar or related festivities==
===Americas===
====Belize====
In Belize, Day of the Dead is practiced by people of the Yucatec Maya ethnicity. The celebration is known as which means &#x27;food for the souls&#x27; in their language. Altars are constructed and decorated with food, drinks, candies, and candles put on them.

====Bolivia====
&quot;Día de las Ñatitas&quot; (&quot;Day of the Skulls&quot;) is a festival celebrated in La Paz, Bolivia, at the beginning of November after the celebrations of All Saints. In pre-Columbian times indigenous Andeans had a tradition of sharing a day with the bones of their ancestors on the third year after burial. Today families keep only the skulls for such rituals. Traditionally, the skulls of family members are kept at home to watch over the family and protect them during the year. On November 9, the family crowns the skulls with fresh flowers, sometimes also dressing them in various garments, and making offerings of cigarettes, coca leaves, alcohol, and various other items in thanks for the year&#x27;s protection. The skulls are also sometimes taken to the central cemetery in La Paz for a special Mass and blessing.

====Brazil====
The Brazilian public holiday of &quot;Dia de Finados&quot;, &quot;Dia dos Mortos&quot; or &quot;Dia dos Fiéis Defuntos&quot; (Portuguese: &quot;Day of the Dead&quot; or &quot;Day of the Faithful Deceased&quot;) is celebrated on November 2. Similar to other Day of the Dead celebrations, people go to cemeteries and churches with flowers and candles and offer prayers. The celebration is intended as a positive honoring of the dead. Memorializing the dead draws from indigenous and European Catholic origins.

====Costa Rica====
Costa Rica celebrates Día De Los Muertos on November 2. The day is also called &quot;Día de Todos Santos&quot; (All Saints Day) and &quot;Día de Todos Almas&quot; (All Souls&#x27; Day). Catholic masses are celebrated and people visit their loved ones&#x27; graves to decorate them with flowers and candles.

====Ecuador====
In Ecuador the Day of the Dead is observed to some extent by all parts of society, though it is especially important to the indigenous Kichwa peoples, who make up an estimated quarter of the population. &quot;Indigena&quot; families gather together in the community cemetery with offerings of food for a day-long remembrance of their ancestors and lost loved ones. Ceremonial foods include &quot;colada morada&quot;, a spiced fruit porridge that derives its deep purple color from the Andean blackberry and purple maize. This is typically consumed with &quot;guaguas de pan&quot;, bread shaped like infants (or, more generally, people), though variations include many pigs—the latter being traditional to the city of Loja. The bread, which is wheat flour-based today, but was made with masa in the Pre-Columbian era, can be made savory with cheese inside or sweet with a filling of guava paste. These traditions have permeated mainstream society, as well, where food establishments add both &quot;colada morada&quot; and &quot;guaguas de pan&quot; to their menus for the season. Many non-indigenous Ecuadorians visit the graves of the deceased, cleaning and bringing flowers, or preparing the traditional foods, too.

====Guatemala====
Guatemalan celebrations of the Day of the Dead, on November 1, are highlighted by the construction and flying of giant kites. It is customary to fly kites to help the spirits find their way back to Earth. A few kites have notes for the dead attached to the strings of the kites. The kites are used as a kind of telecommunication to heaven. A big event also is the consumption of &quot;fiambre&quot;, which is made only for this day during the year. In addition to the traditional visits to grave sites of ancestors, the tombs and graves are decorated with flowers, candles, and food for the dead. In a few towns, Guatemalans repair and repaint the cemetery with vibrant colors to bring the cemetery to life. They fix things that have gotten damaged over the years or just simply need a touch-up, such as wooden grave cross markers. They also lay flower wreaths on the graves. Some families have picnics in the cemetery.

====Peru====
It is common for Peruvians to visit the cemetery, play music and bring flowers to decorate the graves of dead relatives.

===Europe===

====Southern Italy and Sicily====
A traditional biscotti-type cookie, &quot;ossa di morto&quot; or &quot;bones of the dead&quot; are made and placed in shoes once worn by dead relatives.

==See also==

* Bon Festival
* Danse Macabre
* Literary Calavera
* Qingming Festival
* Skull art
* Thursday of the Dead
* Veneration of the dead


==References==
==Further reading==

* Andrade, Mary J. &quot;Day of the Dead A Passion for Life – Día de los Muertos Pasión por la Vida&quot;. La Oferta Publishing, 2007. 
* Anguiano, Mariana, et al. &quot;Las tradiciones de Día de Muertos en México&quot;. Mexico City 1987.
* 
* 
* Cadafalch, Antoni. &quot;The Day of the Dead&quot;. Korero Books, 2011. 
* Carmichael, Elizabeth; Sayer, Chloe. &quot;The Skeleton at the Feast: The Day of the Dead in Mexico&quot;. Great Britain: The Bath Press, 1991. 
* Cordova, Ruben C. (2005). &quot;Calaveras&quot;. In Ilan Stavans, ed.-in-chief, and Harold Augenbraum, assoc. ed., &quot;Encyclopedia Latina: History, Culture, and Society in the United States&quot;. Danbury, CT: Grolier Academic Reference, 4 vols.: I: 248 – 249. 
* Cordova, Ruben C. (2005). &quot;Posada, José Guadalupe&quot;. In Ilan Stavans, ed.-in-chief, and Harold Augenbraum, assoc. ed., &quot;Encyclopedia Latina: History, Culture, and Society in the United States&quot;. Danbury, CT: Grolier Academic Reference, 4 vols.: II: 258 – 259.
* Cordova, Ruben C. (2019). &quot;Is Day of the Dead More Indigenous or Catholic? Friars Durán and Sahagún vs. Wikipedia&quot;. &quot;Glasstire&quot;, October 31. 
* Cordova, Ruben C. (2019). &quot;José Guadalupe Posada and Diego Rivera Fashion Catrina: From Sellout To National Icon (and Back Again?)&quot;. &quot;Glasstire&quot;, November 2.
* Cordova, Ruben C. (2019). &quot;A Guide to Day of the Dead in Mexico City&quot;. &quot;Glasstire&quot;, November 2. 
* Cordova, Ruben C. (2019). &quot;The Day of the Dead in Art&quot;. San Antonio, TX: City of San Antonio Department of Arts &amp; Culture, Centro de Artes. https://www.getcreativesanantonio.com/Portals/3/Files/DOD_CATALGOGUE_digital.pdf
* Cordova, Ruben C. (2020). &quot;A Brief History of Day of the Dead&quot;. &quot;San Antonio Report&quot;, November 1,
* Cordova, Ruben C. (2020). &quot;Catrina Mania!&quot;. &quot;Glasstire&quot;, November 2.
* Cordova, Ruben C. (2021). &quot;Catrina Mania III&quot;. &quot;Glasstire&quot;, November 1.
* Cordova, Ruben C. (2022). &quot;Catrina Mania IV: Brandon Maldonado&#x27;s Catrinas&quot;. &quot;Glasstire&quot;, October 30.
*Greenleigh, John; Rosalind Rosoff Beimler. &quot;Days of the Dead / Los Días de Muertos&quot;. San Francisco CA: Pomegranate 1998 
* Haley, Shawn D.; Fukuda, Curt. &quot;Day of the Dead: When Two Worlds Meet in Oaxaca&quot;. Berhahn Books, 2004. 
* Lane, Sarah and Marilyn Turkovich, &quot;Días de los Muertos/Days of the Dead&quot;. Chicago 1987.
* Lomnitz, Claudio. &quot;Death and the Idea of Mexico&quot;. Zone Books, 2005. 
* Matos Moctezuma, Eduardo, et al. &quot;Miccahuitl: El culto a la muerte&quot;, special issue of &quot;Artes de México&quot; 145 (1971)
* Nutini, Hugo G. &quot;Todos Santos in Rural Tlaxcala: A Syncretic, Expressive, and Symbolic Analysis of the Cult of the Dead&quot;. Princeton 1988.
* Oliver Vega, Beatriz, et al. &quot;The Days of the Dead, a Mexican Tradition&quot;. Mexico City 1988.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q309256" start="4" end="19" title="Day of the Dead" label="Day of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="451" end="457" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643137" start="619" end="632" title="Allhallowtide" label="Allhallowtide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314452" start="660" end="678" title="Indigenous Mexican" label="Indigenous Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="690" end="695" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626928" start="1087" end="1095" title="calavera" label="calavera"/>
<link wikidata="Q759876" start="1101" end="1117" title="Tagetes erecta" label="marigold flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004723" start="1138" end="1148" title="home altar" label="home altar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720163" start="1422" end="1435" title="pan de muerto" label="pan de muerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772" start="1536" end="1543" title="epitaph" label="epitaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435332" start="1664" end="1731" title="Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity" label="Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1735" end="1741" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q296718" start="2009" end="2024" title="Lázaro Cárdenas" label="Lázaro Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435332" start="2281" end="2348" title="Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity" label="Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="2352" end="2358" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="2555" end="2565" title="syncretism" label="syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643137" start="2612" end="2625" title="Allhallowtide" label="Allhallowtide"/>
<link wikidata="Q473450" start="3010" end="3023" title="Danse macabre" label="Danse macabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q901361" start="3370" end="3415" title="Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia" label="Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia"/>
<link wikidata="Q901361" start="3417" end="3421" title="INAH" label="INAH"/>
<link wikidata="Q901361" start="3426" end="3472" title="National Institute of Anthropology and History" label="National Institute of Anthropology and History"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017743" start="4187" end="4207" title="Arqueología Mexicana" label="Arqueología Mexicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q473450" start="4383" end="4396" title="Danse macabre" label="Danse macabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091916" start="4877" end="4888" title="Reform Laws" label="Reform Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q182276" start="4913" end="4926" title="Benito Juarez" label="Benito Juarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109432" start="5260" end="5270" title="Hispanismo" label="Hispanismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179818" start="5446" end="5458" title="Quetzalcoatl" label="Quetzalcoatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q51671" start="5533" end="5544" title="Biblical Magi" label="Three Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q296718" start="5750" end="5765" title="Lázaro Cárdenas" label="Lázaro Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="5825" end="5841" title="anti-clericalism" label="anti-clericalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="6170" end="6181" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084690" start="6555" end="6574" title="La Calavera Catrina" label="La Calavera Catrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q133036" start="6592" end="6604" title="lithographer" label="lithographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q732526" start="6605" end="6626" title="José Guadalupe Posada" label="José Guadalupe Posada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="6932" end="6943" title="renaissance" label="renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432" start="6970" end="6987" title="Francisco de Goya" label="Francisco de Goya"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="6995" end="7022" title="Peninsular war" label="Spanish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="7031" end="7039" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307681" start="7052" end="7058" title="Mexica" label="Mexica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060746" start="7059" end="7069" title="tzompantli" label="tzompantli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779829" start="7153" end="7160" title="couplet" label="couplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q770735" start="7203" end="7219" title="Don Juan Tenorio" label="Don Juan Tenorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q331863" start="7257" end="7270" title="José Zorrilla" label="José Zorrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242952" start="7700" end="7709" title="Quecholli" label="Quecholli"/>
<link wikidata="Q46739" start="8040" end="8051" title="Octavio Paz" label="Octavio Paz"/>
<link wikidata="Q645470" start="8297" end="8322" title="The Labyrinth of Solitude" label="The Labyrinth of Solitude"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10244" end="10258" title="Academic year#School holidays" label="school holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q759876" start="11803" end="11817" title="Tagetes erecta" label="Tagetes erecta"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="11852" end="11859" title="Nahuatl language" label="Nāhuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="12010" end="12015" title="Soul (spirit)" label="souls"/>
<link wikidata="Q145930" start="12311" end="12332" title="Calendula officinalis" label="Calendula officinalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q122195" start="12429" end="12436" title="tequila" label="tequila"/>
<link wikidata="Q726413" start="12438" end="12444" title="mezcal" label="mezcal"/>
<link wikidata="Q511700" start="12448" end="12454" title="pulque" label="pulque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626928" start="12672" end="12683" title="sugar skull" label="sugar skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q937097" start="13117" end="13124" title="San Andrés Mixquic" label="Mixquic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021051" start="13126" end="13135" title="Pátzcuaro" label="Pátzcuaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637479" start="13140" end="13148" title="Janitzio" label="Janitzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q101687" start="13295" end="13300" title="altar" label="altar"/>
<link wikidata="Q697295" start="13311" end="13317" title="shrine" label="shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q392371" start="13361" end="13376" title="Christian cross" label="Christian cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="13405" end="13424" title="Blessed Virgin Mary" label="Blessed Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q511700" start="14434" end="14440" title="pulque" label="pulque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006089" start="14606" end="14610" title="masa" label="masa"/>
<link wikidata="Q940047" start="14631" end="14639" title="Hibiscus tea" label="hibiscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q319390" start="14734" end="14753" title="Hibiscus sabdariffa" label="Hibiscus sabdariffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q940047" start="14874" end="14886" title="hibiscus tea" label="hibiscus tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q130978" start="14926" end="14943" title="Yucatán Peninsula" label="Yucatán Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14945" end="14957" title="mukbil pollo" label="mukbil pollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q106864701" start="14959" end="14963" title="píib" label="píib"/>
<link wikidata="Q640032" start="15211" end="15218" title="epazote" label="epazote"/>
<link wikidata="Q147701" start="15220" end="15227" title="achiote" label="achiote"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15285" end="15295" title="kool sauce" label="kool sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="15540" end="15546" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q161524" start="15620" end="15624" title="mask" label="mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="15684" end="15693" title="chocolate" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="15885" end="15888" title="egg (food)" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="16250" end="16259" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q47195" start="16267" end="16284" title="trick-or-treating" label="trick-or-treating"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="16461" end="16465" title="poem" label="poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661" start="16490" end="16495" title="Verse (poetry)" label="verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772" start="16573" end="16580" title="epitaph" label="epitaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q131803011" start="16891" end="16902" title="grim reaper" label="grim reaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="17045" end="17054" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q627603" start="17276" end="17283" title="cartoon" label="cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881" start="17288" end="17296" title="skeleton" label="skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q732526" start="17328" end="17349" title="José Guadalupe Posada" label="José Guadalupe Posada"/>
<link wikidata="Q81375" start="17853" end="17861" title="chickpea" label="chickpea"/>
<link wikidata="Q938864" start="18012" end="18028" title="Mexican muralism" label="Mexican Muralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q171128" start="18029" end="18041" title="Diego Rivera" label="Diego Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="18047" end="18053" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q629479" start="18109" end="18116" title="Tehuantepec" label="Tehuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="18898" end="18908" title="Theatrical" label="Theatrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q770735" start="18932" end="18948" title="Don Juan Tenorio" label="Don Juan Tenorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q331863" start="18958" end="18971" title="José Zorrilla y Moral" label="José Zorrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021051" start="19209" end="19218" title="Pátzcuaro" label="Pátzcuaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352646" start="19226" end="19243" title="Lago de Pátzcuaro" label="Lago de Pátzcuaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q79861" start="19247" end="19256" title="Michoacán" label="Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q223973" start="19397" end="19407" title="godparents" label="godparents"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348754" start="20020" end="20028" title="Ocotepec, Cuernavaca, Morelos" label="Ocotepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q204245" start="20039" end="20049" title="Cuernavaca" label="Cuernavaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q66117" start="20066" end="20073" title="Morelos" label="Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147853" start="20213" end="20220" title="tamales" label="tamales"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="20643" end="20653" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q18602670" start="20665" end="20672" title="Spectre (2015 film)" label="Spectre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478843" start="20991" end="21010" title="Paseo de la Reforma" label="Paseo de la Reforma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146288" start="21015" end="21031" title="Historic center of Mexico City" label="Centro Historico"/>
<link wikidata="Q17075153" start="21131" end="21143" title="pizza effect" label="pizza effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q5815826" start="21232" end="21236" title="Coco (2017 film)" label="Coco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="21507" end="21512" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="21514" end="21524" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="21530" end="21537" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21591" end="21611" title="Tucson, Arizona#All Souls Procession Weekend" label="All Souls Procession"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="21651" end="21666" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468959" start="22138" end="22159" title="Forest Hills Cemetery" label="Forest Hills Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="22163" end="22169" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q985993" start="22177" end="22190" title="Jamaica Plain" label="Jamaica Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="22671" end="22694" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093110" start="22722" end="22752" title="University of Texas at El Paso" label="University of Texas at El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q106827" start="22757" end="22768" title="Second Life" label="Second Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="23204" end="23210" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q101369347" start="23688" end="23715" title="Presidency of Joe Biden" label="Biden-Harris administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q49244" start="23781" end="23802" title="Santa Ana, California" label="Santa Ana, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097671" start="24075" end="24115" title="Santa Ana Regional Transportation Center" label="Santa Ana Regional Transportation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="24385" end="24408" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243036" start="24414" end="24442" title="Self Help Graphics &amp;amp; Art" label="Self Help Graphics &amp;amp; Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="24621" end="24629" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q744299" start="24818" end="24836" title="Indigenous peoples of California" label="Native Californian"/>
<link wikidata="Q229507" start="24939" end="24954" title="Jayne Mansfield" label="Jayne Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q317262" start="24959" end="24972" title="Johnny Ramone" label="Johnny Ramone"/>
<link wikidata="Q213156" start="25022" end="25037" title="performance art" label="performance art"/>
<link wikidata="Q931092" start="25053" end="25058" title="prank" label="prank"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="25176" end="25189" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518465" start="25208" end="25226" title="Galería de la Raza" label="Galería de la Raza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470276" start="25278" end="25293" title="de Young Museum" label="de Young Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523101" start="25308" end="25323" title="Garfield Square" label="Garfield Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="25869" end="25890" title="San Diego" label="San Diego, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q488924" start="26027" end="26036" title="Oceanside, California" label="Oceanside"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878751" start="26194" end="26225" title="Mission San Luis Rey de Francia" label="Mission San Luis Rey de Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905192" start="26266" end="26278" title="City Heights, San Diego" label="City Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q49270" start="26434" end="26445" title="Chula Vista, California" label="Chula Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="26828" end="26833" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033140" start="26849" end="26868" title="All Souls&amp;#x27; Day" label="All Souls&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="27510" end="27516" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q587" start="27692" end="27712" title="All Saints&amp;#x27; Day" label="All Saints&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q106252" start="28309" end="28317" title="marzipan" label="marzipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471040" start="28338" end="28354" title="Frutta martorana" label="Frutta martorana"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="28401" end="28407" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q334219" start="29097" end="29113" title="Andrea Camilleri" label="Andrea Camilleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="29444" end="29451" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="29456" end="29461" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="29581" end="29587" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="30644" end="30653" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="30655" end="30659" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="30665" end="30674" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="30774" end="30784" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q587" start="30961" end="30981" title="All Saints&amp;#x27; Day" label="All Saints&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033140" start="30986" end="31005" title="All Souls&amp;#x27; Day" label="All Souls&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974839" start="31259" end="31276" title="Chinese Filipinos" label="Chinese Filipinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q273131" start="31295" end="31305" title="joss stick" label="joss stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630552" start="31311" end="31321" title="joss paper" label="joss paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="31482" end="31493" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="31498" end="31504" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="31534" end="31548" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="31694" end="31716" title="Prague, Czech Republic" label="Prague, Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q266545" start="31884" end="31898" title="luminous paint" label="luminous paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q242" start="31997" end="32003" title="Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q13354" start="32051" end="32063" title="Yucatec Maya" label="Yucatec Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491" start="32363" end="32369" title="La Paz" label="La Paz"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="32371" end="32378" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="32450" end="32463" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="33123" end="33129" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40953" start="33478" end="33484" title="prayer" label="prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q587" start="33759" end="33773" title="All Saints Day" label="All Saints Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033140" start="33811" end="33830" title="All Souls&amp;#x27; Day" label="All Souls&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="33974" end="33981" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740805" start="34106" end="34112" title="Kichwa" label="Kichwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q838099" start="34367" end="34380" title="colada morada" label="colada morada"/>
<link wikidata="Q602740" start="34456" end="34473" title="Rubus" label="Andean blackberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613295" start="34530" end="34544" title="T&amp;#x27;anta wawa" label="guaguas de pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q944697" start="34688" end="34692" title="Loja, Ecuador" label="Loja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006089" start="34757" end="34761" title="masa" label="masa"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="34769" end="34786" title="Pre-Columbian era" label="Pre-Columbian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459788" start="34853" end="34864" title="guava paste" label="guava paste"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="35207" end="35216" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744332" start="35592" end="35599" title="fiambre" label="fiambre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154888" start="36481" end="36493" title="Bon (festival)" label="Bon Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q473450" start="36496" end="36509" title="Danse Macabre" label="Danse Macabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933635" start="36512" end="36529" title="Literary Calavera" label="Literary Calavera"/>
<link wikidata="Q718778" start="36532" end="36549" title="Qingming Festival" label="Qingming Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7536961" start="36552" end="36561" title="Skull art" label="Skull art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799417" start="36564" end="36584" title="Thursday of the Dead" label="Thursday of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q238199" start="36587" end="36609" title="Veneration of the dead" label="Veneration of the dead"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52309" wikidata="Q158622" url="?curid=52309" title="Rafflesia">
<text>Rafflesia (), or stinking corpse lily, is a genus of parasitic flowering plants in the family Rafflesiaceae. The species have enormous flowers, the buds rising from the ground or directly from the lower stems of their host plants; one species has the largest flower in the world. Plants of the World Online lists up to 41 species from this genus; all of them are found throughout Southeast Asia.

Western Europeans first learned about plants of this genus from French surgeon and naturalist Louis Deschamps when he was in Java between 1791 and 1794; but his notes and illustrations were seized by the British in 1798 and were not available to Western scientists until 1861. The first British person to see one was Joseph Arnold in 1818, in the Indonesia rainforest in Bengkulu, Sumatra, after a Malay servant working for him discovered a flower and pointed it out to him. The flower, and the genus, was later named after Stamford Raffles, the leader of the expedition and the founder of the British colony of Singapore.

The following is from Arnold&#x27;s account of discovering the flower:
Vivid contemporary accounts documenting some of the most inaccessible species of Rafflesia are described in the popular science book, &quot;Pathless Forest: The Quest to Save the World&#x27;s Largest Flowers&quot;, by botanist Chris Thorogood based at the University of Oxford Botanic Garden.

== Description ==

The plant has no stems, leaves or roots. It is a holoparasite of vines in the genus &quot;Tetrastigma&quot; (a plant in the Vitaceae, the grape vine family), spreading its absorptive organ, the haustorium, inside the tissue of the vine. The only part of the plant that can be seen outside the host vine is the five-petalled flower. In some species, such as &quot;Rafflesia arnoldii&quot;, the flower may be over in diameter, and weigh up to . A &quot;Rafflesia&quot; that flowered in West Sumatra in 2019 was measured to be almost in diameter, the largest flower ever recorded – wider than the flower reported as the largest in 2017. Even one of the smallest species, &quot;R. baletei&quot;, has diameter flowers. A team of morphologists and geneticists headed by Prof. Charles Davis of Harvard has discovered an important difference between &quot;Rafflesia&quot; spp. and the very similar &quot;Sapria&quot; spp. In both genera the petals are now described as sepals (or more correctly as &quot;petaloid tepals&quot;) instead of vaguely defined &quot;perigon lobes&quot;. In &quot;Sapria&quot;, the &quot;diaphragm&quot; is a true corona while in &quot;Rafflesia&quot; the diaphragm is made up of adnate petals to form a dome, the true corona being greatly reduced.

The flowers look and smell like rotting flesh. The foul odour attracts insects such as carrion flies, which transport pollen from male to female flowers. Most species are dioecious, having separate male and female flowers, but a few (&quot;R. baletei&quot; and &quot;R. verrucosa&quot;) have hermaphroditic flowers. Little is known about seed dispersal. Tree shrews and other forest mammals eat the fruits. The extremely tiny seeds have extremely tiny elaiosomes, and are thus most likely dispersed by ants. The seeds are packed into berries, each of which contains hundreds of thousands of seeds.

Because &quot;Amorphophallus&quot; has the world&#x27;s largest unbranched inflorescence, it is sometimes mistakenly credited as having the world&#x27;s largest flower. Both &quot;Rafflesia&quot; and &quot;Amorphophallus&quot; are flowering plants, but they are unrelated to each other. &quot;Rafflesia arnoldii&quot; has the largest &quot;single&quot; flower of any flowering plant, at least in terms of weight. &quot;Amorphophallus titanum&quot; has the largest &quot;unbranched&quot; inflorescence, while the talipot palm (&quot;Corypha umbraculifera&quot;) forms the largest &quot;branched&quot; inflorescence, containing thousands of flowers; the talipot is monocarpic, meaning the individual plants die after flowering.

&quot;Rafflesia&quot; are also remarkable for showing a large horizontal transfer of genes from their host plants. This is well known among bacteria, but not higher organisms. It occurs in the mitochondria (originally derived from bacteria) found within the cells of &quot;Rafflesia&quot;; these appear to have exchanged genes with the mitochondria of the host tissue.

== Names ==

In Indonesian and Malaysian, it is known as &quot;padma&quot;. The species &quot;R. arnoldii&quot; is known as &quot;padma raksasa&quot; (&quot;giant &quot;padma&quot;&quot;). In Javanese it is called &quot;patma&quot;. In Malay, the &#x27;normal&#x27; &quot;R. hasseltii&quot; is vernacularly known as &quot;pakma&quot;, &quot;patma&quot; or &quot;ambai-ambai&quot;, whereas the goliath &quot;R. arnoldii&quot; from Sumatra is called &quot;krubut&quot; or &quot;kerubut&quot;, &#x27;great flower&#x27;. The words &quot;padma&quot;, &quot;pakma&quot; or &quot;patma&quot; originate etymologically from the word पद्म (&quot;padma&quot;), Sanskrit for &#x27;lotus&#x27;.

In English &quot;Rafflesia&quot; is known as the stinking corpse lily. It is also known as &quot;corpse flower&quot;, or &quot;bunga bangkai&quot; in Indonesian, a name that more commonly refers to the titan arum (&quot;Amorphophallus titanum&quot;) of the family Araceae. The type species &quot;arnoldii&quot; has been called the &quot;monster flower&quot;.

== Taxonomy ==
Robert Brown introduced the genus &quot;Rafflesia&quot; to the wider scientific world in a presentation before the Linnean Society of London in June 1820, but his scientific paper on the subject was only published in late 1821.

In 1999 the British botanical historian David Mabberley pointed out that the genus &quot;Rafflesia&quot; was first validated by an anonymous report on the meeting published in the &quot;Annals of Philosophy&quot; in September 1820 (the name was technically an unpublished &quot;nomen nudum&quot; until this publication). Mabberley claimed the author was Samuel Frederick Gray. However, as that is nowhere stated in the &quot;Annals&quot;, per Article 46.8 of the code of ICBN, Mabberley was wrong to formally ascribe the validation to Gray. The validation of the name was thus attributed to one Thomas Thomson, the editor of the &quot;Annals&quot; in 1820, by the IPNI. Mabberley admitted his error in 2017. This Thomson was not the botanist Thomas Thomson, who was three years old in 1820, but his identically named father, a chemist.

== Evolution and phylogeny ==


Comparison of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequences of &quot;Rafflesia&quot; with other angiosperm mtDNA indicated this parasite evolved from photosynthetic plants of the order Malpighiales. Another 2004 study confirmed this result using both mtDNA and nuclear DNA sequences, and showed the three other groups traditionally classified in Rafflesiaceae were unrelated. A 2007 study more specifically found &quot;Rafflesia&quot; and its relatives to be embedded within the family Euphorbiaceae as traditionally circumscribed, which was surprising, as members of that family typically have very small flowers. According to their analysis, the rate of flower size evolution was more or less constant throughout the family except at the origin of Rafflesiaceae, where the flowers rapidly evolved to become much larger before reverting to the slower rate of change.

To maintain monophyletic families, in 2016 the APG IV system separated the family Peraceae from the Euphorbiaceae. A summary cladogram is shown below, with family placements in the APG IV system.
A 2010 molecular phylogenetic study of 18 species of &quot;Rafflesia&quot; found that they fell into four clear-cut geographically defined groups:

However, the clear monophyly of the four geographical clades does not correspond to any clear difference in appearance. There is no consistency within the clades in the size of flowers, or the presence or absence of white warts; species in different clades resemble one another more than they do some other species within the same clade. Homoplasy – repeatedly gaining or losing traits – seems to be the rule within &quot;Rafflesia&quot;.

=== Accepted species ===

, Plants of the World Online accepted the following species:
*&quot;Rafflesia arnoldii&quot; – Sumatra, Borneo
*&quot;Rafflesia aurantia&quot; – Philippines (Luzon)
*&quot;Rafflesia azlanii&quot; – Peninsular Malaysia
*&quot;Rafflesia baletei&quot; – Philippines (Luzon)
*&quot;Rafflesia banaoana&quot; – Philippines (Luzon); treated as a synonym of &quot;R. leonardi&quot; by other sources
*&quot;Rafflesia bengkuluensis&quot; – Sumatra (Indonesia) 
*&quot;Rafflesia borneensis&quot; – Indonesian Borneo (northeast Kalimantan)
*&quot;Rafflesia camarinensis&quot; – the Philippines
*&quot;Rafflesia cantleyi&quot; – Peninsular Malaysia
*&quot;Rafflesia ciliata&quot; – Indonesian Borneo (northeast Kalimantan)
*&quot;Rafflesia consueloae&quot; – Philippines (Luzon)
*&quot;Rafflesia gadutensis&quot; – Sumatra (Indonesia)
*&quot;Rafflesia hasseltii&quot; – Sumatra
*&quot;Rafflesia horsfieldii&quot; – West Java (Indonesia)
*&quot;Rafflesia keithii&quot; – Borneo
*&quot;Rafflesia kemumu&quot; – Sumatra (Indonesia)
*&quot;Rafflesia kerrii&quot; – Thailand, Peninsular Malaysia
*&quot;Rafflesia lagascae&quot; – Philippines (Luzon)
*&quot;Rafflesia lawangensis&quot; – Sumatra
*&quot;Rafflesia leonardi&quot; – Philippines (Luzon)
*&quot;Rafflesia lobata&quot; – Philippines (Panay)
*&quot;Rafflesia manillana&quot; – Philippines (Samar)
*&quot;Rafflesia meijeri&quot; – North Sumatra, Indonesia 
*&quot;Rafflesia micropylora&quot; – Sumatra
*&quot;Rafflesia mira&quot; – Philippines (Mindanao)
*&quot;Rafflesia mixta&quot; – Philippines (Mindanao)
*&quot;Rafflesia parvimaculata&quot; – Peninsular Malaysia 
*&quot;Rafflesia philippensis&quot; – Philippines (Luzon)
*&quot;Rafflesia pricei&quot; – Borneo
*&quot;Rafflesia rochussenii&quot; – Java, Sumatra
*&quot;Rafflesia schadenbergiana&quot; – Philippines (Mindanao)
*&quot;Rafflesia sharifah-hapsahiae&quot; – Peninsular Malaysia
*&quot;Rafflesia speciosa&quot; – Philippines (Panay)
*&quot;Rafflesia su-meiae&quot; – Peninsular Malaysia
*&quot;Rafflesia tengku-adlinii&quot; – Borneo (Sabah)
*&quot;Rafflesia tiomanensis&quot; – Pulau Tioman, Peninsular Malaysia
*&quot;Rafflesia tuan-mudae&quot; – Borneo (Sarawak)
*&quot;Rafflesia tuanku-halimii&quot; – Peninsular Malaysia
*&quot;Rafflesia verrucosa&quot; – Philippines (Mindanao)
*&quot;Rafflesia witkampii&quot; – Indonesian Borneo (East Kalimantan)
*&quot;Rafflesia zollingeriana&quot; – East Java (Indonesia)
=== Other names ===
*&quot;Rafflesia patma&quot; – Java; considered a synonym of &quot;R. horsfieldii&quot; by Plants of the World Online, apparently based on the confused writings of a British historian of botany, although &quot;R. horsfieldii&quot;, for which no specimens were ever collected, only a drawing made which was lost centuries ago, is not considered a valid taxon by &quot;Rafflesia&quot; experts.
*&quot;Rafflesia titan&quot; – A synonym of &quot;R. arnoldii&quot;; it was in fact validly published earlier, being rushed to publication in Singapore in 1820 by a British botanist who feared that the French, who had actually discovered a species before the British, might deny the glory of the species description to servants of the British Empire. In order to retain the honour of naming the species to the famous British scientist Robert Brown, the historian of botany mentioned above chose to pretend a 1821 pre-print Brown sent to a colleague was a valid &#x27;effective publication&#x27;, which has been accepted by the relevant British institutions.

=== Loss of the chloroplast genome ===
Research published in 2014 revealed that one Philippine &quot;Rafflesia&quot; species from the island of Luzon, &quot;R. lagascae&quot; (a synonym of &quot;R. manillana&quot;), may have lost the genome of its chloroplast and it is speculated that the loss happened due to the parasitic lifestyle of the plant.

== Distribution ==
===Malay Peninsula===
Rafflesia can be found along the area of Peninsular Malaysia and Thailand in the Malay Peninsula.

==== Malaysia ====
In Peninsular Malaysia, the flower can be found in few states, such as Kelantan, Pahang, Perak and Terengganu. In Perak, three species of the flower can be found in Royal Belum state park and Gerik forest reserve of which are &quot;Rafflesia kerrii&quot;, &quot;Rafflesia cantleyi&quot; and &quot;Rafflesia azlanii&quot;. &quot;Rafflesia azlanii&quot; was named after the Sultan of Perak, Sultan Azlan Shah. Meanwhile, two species of the flower hosted by &quot;Tetrastigma Planch&quot; can be found in three location in Kelantan. The &quot;Rafflesia cantleyi&quot; species can be found in Ulut Sat and Chabang Tongkat while &quot;Rafflesia kerrii&quot; can be found in Lojing. Furthermore, two locations in Pahang where this flower can be found are Lembah Benum forest reserve and Lata Jarum. For Terengganu, the flower of &quot;Rafflesia Cantleyi&quot; species can be found in Kuala Berang. A flower has been found in this area hanging on the root of its host three metres above the ground, unlike the common flowers found on the ground roots.

The locations of these flowers are turned into tourist attractions for biodiversity lovers and hikers and helps to generate income for the local people.

==== Thailand ====
In Thailand &quot;Rafflesia&quot; can be observed in Khao Sok National Park where the flowers are numbered and monitored by the park rangers.

=== Greater Sunda Islands ===
Species native to Borneo include &quot;Rafflesia arnoldii&quot;, &quot;R. cantleyi&quot;, &quot;R. hasseltii&quot;, &quot;R. keithii&quot;, &quot;R. kerrii&quot;, &quot;R. pricei&quot;, &quot;R. tengku-adlinii&quot; and &quot;R. tuan-mudae&quot;. &quot;R. arnoldii&quot; boasts the world&#x27;s largest single bloom.

&quot;R. keithii&quot; is an endemic species in Sabah and the largest among the three species of Rafflesia found in Sabah. The flower size is between 60 cm to 80 cm. Due to its size, the flower is generally found on the forest floor growing on the underground stem or root of &quot;Tetrastigma lanceolarium&quot;. &quot;R. keithii&quot; can be mostly found around the area of Poring, Sabah.

=== Mindanao species ===
The Mindanao species is known as &quot;Rafflesia schadenbergiana&quot;, after the naturalist Alexander Schadenberg, who first discovered the species at the foothills of Mount Apo in 1882. With a flower of nearly a meter, it is close to the size of a seated child. On Mindanao, the species has been seen in Davao del Sur, South Cotabato and Mount Kitanglad in Bukidnon. &quot;R. mira&quot; and &quot;R. magnifica&quot; are two names for a single species. Both were discovered at Mount Candalaga in Maragusan, Compostela Valley. The two forms differ in size measurements in which the scientific description of &quot;R. magnifica&quot; came from measurements of flowers in full bloom while that of &quot;R. mira&quot; was from photographs of nearly dead samples. The medium-sized &quot;R. mira&quot; flowers measure about half a meter in diameter and they have round or elliptic perigone wart. The third species on Mindanao is the &quot;R. mixta&quot; which has only been found so far in the town of Mainit, Surigao del Norte. It shows a combination of three features of Philippine &quot;Rafflesia&quot;, namely: the shape and size of the conical process in &quot;R. schadenbergiana&quot;, the floral size and sparsely distributed perigone warts of &quot;R. speciosa&quot;, and the overall resemblance, floral size, faint scent, diaphragm and ramenta morphology of &quot;R. mira&quot;. A fourth species is &quot;Rafflesia verrucosa&quot; which is found only in Mount Kampalili in Davao Oriental Province.

== Ecology ==

Species of &quot;Rafflesia&quot; are all thought to be holoparasites of lianas of the genus &quot;Tetrastigma&quot;, vines which belong to the Vitaceae, the family of the grape vines. They are thus, in a way, hyperparasites, because &quot;Tetrastigma&quot; are themselves, in a way, structural parasites of the trees they use to climb up to the light. &quot;Rafflesia&quot; appear to be species-specific, with each &quot;Rafflesia&quot; species naturally only growing on one to three species of &quot;Tetrastigma&quot;. Of the 57 known species of &quot;Tetrastigma&quot;, only ten are known to be host plants. Of the 30 odd species of &quot;Rafflesia&quot;, the host plants are only known from about half of the species. A certain species of &quot;Tetrastigma&quot; is very popular among &quot;Rafflesia&quot;: &quot;T. tuberculatum&quot; is a host plant for at least 15 species, and only two Philippine species are not known to infect it. &quot;T. papillosum&quot; and &quot;T. diepenhorstii&quot; both host at least two species. The flowers may bud from different locations; &quot;R. cantleyi&quot; flowers from the vine some two meters from the ground,
 whereas &quot;R. zollingeriana&quot; always buds out of the roots and appears out of the ground.

The gender ratio may be skewed. In &quot;R. lobata&quot; there are approximately nine male flowers for every female flower. Rarely are there flowers of both sexes at one location to ensure pollination and thus sexual reproduction. This may not matter: female flowers usually form fruit anyway and may thus be agamospermous. Flowering is relatively constant, and sites may continue to flower for decades.

In &quot;Rafflesia arnoldii&quot; the flowers are visited by the flies &quot;Drosophila colorata&quot;, &quot;Chrysomya megacephala&quot; and &quot;Sarcophaga haemorrhoidalis&quot;. Black ants of the genus &quot;Euprenolepis&quot; may feed on the developing flower buds, perhaps killing them. Mammals which are known to eat the flowers are the Javan treeshrew &quot;Tupaia javanica&quot; and the porcupine &quot;Hystrix javanica&quot;. Mammals which have been recorded destroying the buds or flowers, often simply by stepping on and crushing them, are: pigs (&quot;Sus scrofa&quot;), wild cats (&quot;Prionailurus bengalensis&quot;), rusa (&quot;Cervus timorensis&quot;), muntjak (&quot;Muntiacus muntjak&quot;) and banteng (&quot;Bos javanicus&quot;).

==Uses==
In Thailand the buds and flowers of &quot;R. kerrii&quot; are considered a delicacy. They are also harvested for herbalism, a concoction is believed to act as a sexual stimulant and to help for fever or backache. In the Philippines the plants are also used in folk herbalism, but the flowers are also fed to swine as fodder. On Java the buds of &quot;R. zollingeriana&quot; are harvested and dried for use in &quot;jamu&quot;, the ancient traditional herbalism of the island. It is unknown for what the buds are supposed to be good for; &quot;jamu&quot; concoctions are often complex mixtures and often are supposed to help with sexual prowess.

These plants also have some economic use in attracting ecotourists.

Research in Malaysia and Indonesia has made it possible to propagate the species for use in horticulture, with the famous Bogor Botanical Garden growing the first plants in the 1850s using grafts of infected vines. The Malaysian biologist Jamili Nais was the first to propagate the plants using the seeds around the year 2000.

==See also==
*&quot;Amorphophallus titanum&quot;, a similar smelling plant, sometimes known as the &quot;corpse flower&quot;
*Parasitic plant
*Carrion flower

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
*Rafflesia flower and threats
*Parasitic Plant Connection: &quot;Rafflesia&quot; Gallery
*ARKive: images and movies of the rafflesia &quot;(Rafflesia spp)&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q158622" start="17" end="37" title="Rafflesia" label="stinking corpse lily"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="44" end="49" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q127498" start="53" end="62" title="Parasitic plants" label="parasitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="63" end="78" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q157019" start="94" end="107" title="Rafflesiaceae" label="Rafflesiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q221673" start="218" end="228" title="host plant" label="host plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542613" start="280" end="306" title="Plants of the World Online" label="Plants of the World Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="380" end="394" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3261136" start="491" end="506" title="Louis Auguste Deschamps" label="Louis Deschamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="522" end="526" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184535" start="714" end="727" title="Joseph Arnold" label="Joseph Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="754" end="764" title="rainforest" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890" start="768" end="776" title="Bengkulu" label="Bengkulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="778" end="785" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q130327" start="921" end="937" title="Stamford Raffles" label="Stamford Raffles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420036" start="991" end="1005" title="Singapore in the Straits Settlements" label="British colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="1009" end="1018" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q126960031" start="1232" end="1247" title="Pathless Forest" label="Pathless Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115661" start="1348" end="1383" title="University of Oxford Botanic Garden" label="University of Oxford Botanic Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075151" start="1454" end="1466" title="holoparasite" label="holoparasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981583" start="1495" end="1506" title="Tetrastigma" label="Tetrastigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q26220" start="1529" end="1537" title="Vitaceae" label="Vitaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q195161" start="1599" end="1609" title="haustorium" label="haustorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="1729" end="1735" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q161888" start="1768" end="1786" title="Rafflesia arnoldii" label="Rafflesia arnoldii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2772" start="1889" end="1901" title="West Sumatra" label="West Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282599" start="2079" end="2089" title="Rafflesia baletei" label="R. baletei"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="2192" end="2199" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q139481" start="2301" end="2307" title="Sapria" label="Sapria"/>
<link wikidata="Q504930" start="2537" end="2543" title="Corona (perianth)" label="corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683938" start="2603" end="2609" title="Adnation" label="adnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404" start="2760" end="2773" title="Calliphoridae" label="carrion flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q148681" start="2844" end="2853" title="dioecious" label="dioecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q18119873" start="2940" end="2952" title="Rafflesia verrucosa" label="R. verrucosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q231550" start="3027" end="3038" title="Scandentia" label="Tree shrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324911" start="3125" end="3134" title="elaiosome" label="elaiosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q132651" start="3286" end="3300" title="Amorphophallus" label="Amorphophallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="3347" end="3360" title="inflorescence" label="inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q161888" start="3565" end="3583" title="Rafflesia arnoldii" label="Rafflesia arnoldii"/>
<link wikidata="Q431224" start="3691" end="3713" title="Amorphophallus titanum" label="Amorphophallus titanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q856001" start="3804" end="3825" title="Corypha umbraculifera" label="Corypha umbraculifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q354608" start="3935" end="3945" title="monocarpic" label="monocarpic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83185" start="4061" end="4089" title="Horizontal gene transfer" label="horizontal transfer of genes"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="4192" end="4204" title="mitochondria" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="4385" end="4395" title="Indonesian language" label="Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15065" start="4400" end="4409" title="Malaysian language" label="Malaysian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33549" start="4561" end="4569" title="Javanese language" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="4605" end="4610" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="5019" end="5027" title="Sanskrit language" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16528" start="5038" end="5043" title="Nelumbo nucifera" label="lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q431224" start="5254" end="5264" title="Amorphophallus titanum" label="titan arum"/>
<link wikidata="Q48227" start="5316" end="5323" title="Araceae" label="Araceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q155764" start="5427" end="5439" title="Robert Brown (Scottish botanist from Montrose)" label="Robert Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q867447" start="5542" end="5567" title="Linnean Society of London" label="Linnean Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236979" start="5696" end="5711" title="David Mabberley" label="David Mabberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q844326" start="5934" end="5945" title="nomen nudum" label="nomen nudum"/>
<link wikidata="Q540667" start="6010" end="6031" title="Samuel Frederick Gray" label="Samuel Frederick Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427703" start="6398" end="6412" title="Thomas Thomson (botanist)" label="Thomas Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q902546" start="6455" end="6479" title="Thomas Thomson (chemist)" label="identically named father"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="6539" end="6556" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="6611" end="6621" title="angiosperm" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q21887" start="6700" end="6712" title="Malpighiales" label="Malpighiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q156584" start="7001" end="7014" title="Euphorbiaceae" label="Euphorbiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121761" start="7032" end="7045" title="Circumscription (taxonomy)" label="circumscribed"/>
<link wikidata="Q157019" start="7265" end="7278" title="Rafflesiaceae" label="Rafflesiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="7396" end="7408" title="Monophyly" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895148" start="7431" end="7444" title="APG IV system" label="APG IV system"/>
<link wikidata="Q136819" start="7466" end="7474" title="Peraceae" label="Peraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895148" start="7565" end="7578" title="APG IV system" label="APG IV system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="7587" end="7609" title="Molecular phylogenetics" label="molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="7747" end="7756" title="monophyly" label="monophyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q14035451" start="8066" end="8075" title="Homoplasy" label="Homoplasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542613" start="8196" end="8222" title="Plants of the World Online" label="Plants of the World Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q161888" start="8262" end="8280" title="Rafflesia arnoldii" label="Rafflesia arnoldii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="8289" end="8296" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="8298" end="8304" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117765" start="8312" end="8330" title="Rafflesia aurantia" label="Rafflesia aurantia"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="8352" end="8357" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282600" start="8366" end="8383" title="Rafflesia azlanii" label="Rafflesia azlanii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973345" start="8392" end="8411" title="Peninsular Malaysia" label="Peninsular Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282599" start="8419" end="8436" title="Rafflesia baletei" label="Rafflesia baletei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117729" start="8472" end="8490" title="Rafflesia banaoana" label="Rafflesia banaoana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282598" start="8592" end="8615" title="Rafflesia bengkuluensis" label="Rafflesia bengkuluensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="8633" end="8642" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15378009" start="8652" end="8672" title="Rafflesia borneensis" label="Rafflesia borneensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795" start="8681" end="8698" title="Indonesian Borneo" label="Indonesian Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795" start="8710" end="8720" title="Kalimantan" label="Kalimantan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8729" end="8751" title="Rafflesia camarinensis" label="Rafflesia camarinensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="8764" end="8775" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117744" start="8783" end="8801" title="Rafflesia cantleyi" label="Rafflesia cantleyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631071" start="8837" end="8854" title="Rafflesia ciliata" label="Rafflesia ciliata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795" start="8892" end="8902" title="Kalimantan" label="Kalimantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22960677" start="8911" end="8931" title="Rafflesia consueloae" label="Rafflesia consueloae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117746" start="8967" end="8987" title="Rafflesia gadutensis" label="Rafflesia gadutensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="9005" end="9014" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117768" start="9023" end="9042" title="Rafflesia hasseltii" label="Rafflesia hasseltii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272946" start="9066" end="9087" title="Rafflesia horsfieldii" label="Rafflesia horsfieldii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="9101" end="9105" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q843274" start="9125" end="9142" title="Rafflesia keithii" label="Rafflesia keithii"/>
<link wikidata="Q48729983" start="9165" end="9181" title="Rafflesia kemumu" label="Rafflesia kemumu"/>
<link wikidata="Q908442" start="9217" end="9233" title="Rafflesia kerrii" label="Rafflesia kerrii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9279" end="9297" title="Rafflesia lagascae" label="Rafflesia lagascae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18119869" start="9333" end="9354" title="Rafflesia lawangensis" label="Rafflesia lawangensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117729" start="9378" end="9396" title="Rafflesia leonardi" label="Rafflesia leonardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117722" start="9432" end="9448" title="Rafflesia lobata" label="Rafflesia lobata"/>
<link wikidata="Q332359" start="9470" end="9475" title="Panay" label="Panay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282601" start="9484" end="9503" title="Rafflesia manillana" label="Rafflesia manillana"/>
<link wikidata="Q219737" start="9525" end="9530" title="Samar" label="Samar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18119870" start="9539" end="9556" title="Rafflesia meijeri" label="Rafflesia meijeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117737" start="9598" end="9619" title="Rafflesia micropylora" label="Rafflesia micropylora"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489827" start="9643" end="9657" title="Rafflesia mira" label="Rafflesia mira"/>
<link wikidata="Q124873" start="9679" end="9687" title="Mindanao" label="Mindanao"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9696" end="9711" title="Rafflesia mixta" label="Rafflesia mixta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9750" end="9773" title="Rafflesia parvimaculata" label="Rafflesia parvimaculata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118523" start="9810" end="9832" title="Rafflesia philippensis" label="Rafflesia philippensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282604" start="9868" end="9884" title="Rafflesia pricei" label="Rafflesia pricei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282603" start="9907" end="9928" title="Rafflesia rochussenii" label="Rafflesia rochussenii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439373" start="9958" end="9983" title="Rafflesia schadenbergiana" label="Rafflesia schadenbergiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10022" end="10050" title="Rafflesia sharifah-hapsahiae" label="Rafflesia sharifah-hapsahiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715202" start="10086" end="10104" title="Rafflesia speciosa" label="Rafflesia speciosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q332359" start="10126" end="10131" title="Panay" label="Panay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10140" end="10158" title="Rafflesia su-meiae" label="Rafflesia su-meiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282607" start="10194" end="10218" title="Rafflesia tengku-adlinii" label="Rafflesia tengku-adlinii"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="10235" end="10240" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10249" end="10270" title="Rafflesia tiomanensis" label="Rafflesia tiomanensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q771765" start="10279" end="10291" title="Tioman Island" label="Pulau Tioman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282605" start="10320" end="10340" title="Rafflesia tuan-mudae" label="Rafflesia tuan-mudae"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="10357" end="10364" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10373" end="10397" title="Rafflesia tuanku-halimii" label="Rafflesia tuanku-halimii"/>
<link wikidata="Q18119873" start="10433" end="10452" title="Rafflesia verrucosa" label="Rafflesia verrucosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631072" start="10491" end="10510" title="Rafflesia witkampii" label="Rafflesia witkampii"/>
<link wikidata="Q100890508" start="10562" end="10585" title="Rafflesia zollingeriana" label="Rafflesia zollingeriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="10605" end="10614" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272946" start="10643" end="10658" title="Rafflesia patma" label="Rafflesia patma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="10667" end="10671" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="10686" end="10693" title="Synonym (taxonomy)" label="synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q161888" start="11035" end="11050" title="Rafflesia titan" label="Rafflesia titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361864" start="11324" end="11343" title="species description" label="species description"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="11831" end="11836" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282601" start="11876" end="11900" title="Rafflesia manillana" label="&amp;quot;R. manillana&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q47263" start="11935" end="11946" title="chloroplast" label="chloroplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973345" start="12119" end="12138" title="Peninsular Malaysia" label="Peninsular Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="12143" end="12151" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="12159" end="12174" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q185944" start="12267" end="12275" title="Kelantan" label="Kelantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191346" start="12277" end="12283" title="Pahang" label="Pahang"/>
<link wikidata="Q188953" start="12285" end="12290" title="Perak" label="Perak"/>
<link wikidata="Q189701" start="12295" end="12305" title="Terengganu" label="Terengganu"/>
<link wikidata="Q14206230" start="12361" end="12383" title="Belum-Temengor" label="Royal Belum state park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550859" start="12388" end="12393" title="Gerik" label="Gerik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649311" start="12568" end="12583" title="Sultan of Perak" label="Sultan of Perak"/>
<link wikidata="Q561319" start="12585" end="12602" title="Azlan Shah of Perak" label="Sultan Azlan Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981583" start="12657" end="12675" title="Tetrastigma" label="Tetrastigma Planch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760520" start="13468" end="13490" title="Khao Sok National Park" label="Khao Sok National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="13606" end="13612" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q161888" start="13627" end="13645" title="Rafflesia arnoldii" label="Rafflesia arnoldii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117744" start="13659" end="13670" title="Rafflesia cantleyi" label="R. cantleyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117768" start="13684" end="13696" title="Rafflesia hasseltii" label="R. hasseltii"/>
<link wikidata="Q843274" start="13710" end="13720" title="Rafflesia keithii" label="R. keithii"/>
<link wikidata="Q908442" start="13734" end="13743" title="Rafflesia kerrii" label="R. kerrii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282604" start="13751" end="13772" title="Rafflesia pricei" label="&amp;quot;R. pricei&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282607" start="13780" end="13797" title="Rafflesia tengku-adlinii" label="R. tengku-adlinii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282605" start="13814" end="13827" title="Rafflesia tuan-mudae" label="R. tuan-mudae"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="13935" end="13950" title="endemism" label="endemic species"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="13954" end="13959" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230115" start="14282" end="14288" title="Poring" label="Poring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439373" start="14362" end="14387" title="Rafflesia schadenbergiana" label="Rafflesia schadenbergiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14416" end="14437" title="Alexander Schadenberg" label="Alexander Schadenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q455963" start="14492" end="14501" title="Mount Apo" label="Mount Apo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586619" start="14663" end="14678" title="Mount Kitanglad" label="Mount Kitanglad"/>
<link wikidata="Q13753" start="14682" end="14690" title="Bukidnon" label="Bukidnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489827" start="14698" end="14705" title="Rafflesia mira" label="R. mira"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14801" end="14816" title="Mount Candalaga" label="Mount Candalaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q315512" start="14820" end="14848" title="Maragusan, Compostela Valley" label="Maragusan, Compostela Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q155808" start="15320" end="15345" title="Mainit, Surigao del Norte" label="Mainit, Surigao del Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715202" start="15575" end="15586" title="Rafflesia speciosa" label="R. speciosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18119873" start="15732" end="15751" title="Rafflesia verrucosa" label="Rafflesia verrucosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15781" end="15796" title="Mount Kampalili" label="Mount Kampalili"/>
<link wikidata="Q13806" start="15800" end="15814" title="Davao Oriental" label="Davao Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075151" start="15896" end="15908" title="holoparasite" label="holoparasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q14079" start="15913" end="15918" title="liana" label="liana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981583" start="15939" end="15950" title="Tetrastigma" label="Tetrastigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q26220" start="15984" end="15992" title="Vitaceae" label="Vitaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366299" start="16050" end="16063" title="hyperparasite" label="hyperparasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q221673" start="16438" end="16448" title="host plant" label="host plant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16658" end="16673" title="Tetrastigma tuberculatum" label="T. tuberculatum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16787" end="16800" title="Tetrastigma papillosum" label="T. papillosum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16817" end="16833" title="Tetrastigma diepenhorstii" label="T. diepenhorstii"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="17285" end="17296" title="pollination" label="pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q528033" start="17405" end="17418" title="agamospermous" label="agamospermous"/>
<link wikidata="Q13598191" start="17578" end="17597" title="Drosophila colorata" label="Drosophila colorata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967396" start="17611" end="17632" title="Chrysomya megacephala" label="Chrysomya megacephala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423614" start="17649" end="17675" title="Sarcophaga haemorrhoidalis" label="Sarcophaga haemorrhoidalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038295" start="17713" end="17725" title="Euprenolepis" label="Euprenolepis"/>
<link wikidata="Q572842" start="17867" end="17882" title="Tupaia javanica" label="Tupaia javanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080880" start="17913" end="17929" title="Hystrix javanica" label="Hystrix javanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="18066" end="18076" title="Sus scrofa" label="Sus scrofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q42627" start="18102" end="18126" title="Leopard cat" label="Prionailurus bengalensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q663412" start="18147" end="18164" title="Cervus timorensis" label="Cervus timorensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q533451" start="18188" end="18205" title="Muntiacus muntjak" label="Muntiacus muntjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q183035" start="18232" end="18245" title="Bos javanicus" label="Bos javanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="18377" end="18386" title="herbalism" label="herbalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q211420" start="18425" end="18441" title="sexual stimulant" label="sexual stimulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="18581" end="18587" title="fodder" label="fodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200773" start="18679" end="18683" title="jamu" label="jamu"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="18965" end="18975" title="ecotourist" label="ecotourist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123665" start="19101" end="19123" title="Bogor Botanical Garden" label="Bogor Botanical Garden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19218" end="19229" title="Jamili Nais" label="Jamili Nais"/>
<link wikidata="Q431224" start="19327" end="19349" title="Amorphophallus titanum" label="Amorphophallus titanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q127498" start="19433" end="19448" title="Parasitic plant" label="Parasitic plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632669" start="19450" end="19464" title="Carrion flower" label="Carrion flower"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52313" wikidata="Q823982" url="?curid=52313" title="MathML">
<text>Mathematical Markup Language (MathML) is a mathematical markup language, an application of XML for describing mathematical notations and capturing both its structure and content. Its aim is to natively integrate mathematical formulae into World Wide Web pages and other documents. It is part of HTML5 and standardised by ISO/IEC since 2015.

== History ==
Following some experiments in the Arena browser based on proposals for mathematical markup in HTML, MathML 1 was released as a W3C recommendation in April 1998 as the first XML language to be recommended by the W3C. Version 1.01 of the format was released in July 1999 and version 2.0 appeared in February 2001. Implementations of the specification appeared in Amaya 1.1, Mozilla 1.0 and Opera 9.5. In October 2003, the second edition of MathML Version 2.0 was published as the final release by the W3C Math Working Group.

MathML was originally designed before the finalization of XML namespaces. However, it was assigned a namespace immediately after the Namespace Recommendation was completed, and for XML use, the elements should be in the namespace with namespace URL &quot;http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML&quot;. When MathML is used in HTML (as opposed to XML) this namespace is automatically inferred by the HTML parser and need not be specified in the document.

=== MathML version 3 ===
Version 3 of the MathML specification was released as a W3C recommendation on 20 October 2010. A recommendation of &quot;A MathML for CSS Profile&quot; was later released on 7 June 2011; this is a subset of MathML suitable for CSS formatting. Another subset, &quot;Strict Content MathML&quot;, provides a subset of content MathML with a uniform structure and is designed to be compatible with OpenMath. Other content elements are defined in terms of a transformation to the strict subset. New content elements include which associates bound variables () to expressions, for example a summation index. The new element allows structure sharing.

The development of MathML 3.0 went through a number of stages. In June 2006, the W3C rechartered the MathML Working Group to produce a MathML 3 Recommendation until February 2008, and in November 2008 extended the charter to April 2010. A sixth Working Draft of the MathML 3 revision was published in June 2009. On 10 August 2010 version 3 graduated to become a &quot;Proposed Recommendation&quot; rather than a draft. An implementation of MathML 2 landed in WebKit around this same time, with a Chromium implementation following a couple of years later, although that implementation was removed from Chromium after less than a year.

The Second Edition of MathML 3.0 was published as a W3C Recommendation on 10 April 2014. The specification was approved as an ISO/IEC international standard 40314:2015 on 23 June 2015. Also in 2015, the MathML Association was founded to support the adoption of the MathML standard. At that time, according to a member of the MathJax team, none of the major browser makers paid any of their developers for any MathML-rendering work; whatever support existed was overwhelmingly the result of unpaid volunteer time/work.

=== MathML Core ===
In August 2021, a new specification called MathML Core was published, described as the “core subset of Mathematical Markup Language, or MathML, that is suitable for browser implementation.” MathML Core set itself apart from MathML 3.0 by including detailed rendering rules and integration with CSS, automated browser support testing resources, and focusing on a fundamental subset of MathML. An implementation was added to Chromium at the beginning of 2023.

== Presentation and semantics ==

MathML deals not only with the &quot;presentation&quot; but also the &quot;meaning&quot; of formula components (the latter part of MathML is known as &quot;Content MathML&quot;). Because the meaning of the equation is preserved separate from the presentation, how the content is communicated can be left up to the user. For example, web pages with MathML embedded in them can be viewed as normal web pages with many browsers, but visually impaired users can also have the same MathML read to them through the use of screen readers (e.g. using the VoiceOver in Safari). JAWS from version 16 onward supports MathML voicing as well as braille output.

The quality of rendering of MathML in a browser depends on the installed fonts. The STIX Fonts project have released a comprehensive set of mathematical fonts under an open license. The Cambria Math font supplied with Microsoft Windows had slightly more limited support.

A valid MathML document typically consists of the XML declaration, DOCTYPE declaration, and document element. The document body then contains MathML expressions which appear in elements as needed in the document. Often, MathML will be embedded in more general documents, such as HTML, DocBook, or other XML-based formats.

=== Presentation MathML ===

Presentation MathML focuses on the display of an equation, and has about 30 elements. The elements&#x27; names all begin with . A Presentation MathML expression is built up out of &quot;tokens&quot; that are combined using higher-level elements, which control their layout. Finer details of presentation are affected by close to 50 attributes.

Token elements generally only contain characters (not other elements). They include:
* – identifiers;
* – operators;
* – numbers;
* – text.

Note, however, that these token elements may be used as extension points, allowing markup in host languages.
MathML in HTML5 allows most inline HTML markup in mtext, and is conforming, with the HTML markup being used within the MathML to mark up the embedded text (making the first word bold in this example).

These are combined using layout elements, that generally contain only elements. They include:
* – a horizontal row of items;
* , , and others – superscripts, limits over and under operators like sums, etc.;
* – fractions;
* and – roots;
* – surrounding content with fences, such as parentheses.

As usual in HTML and XML, many entities are available for specifying special symbols by name, such as and . An interesting feature of MathML is that entities also exist to express normally-invisible operators, such as (or the shorthand ) for implicit multiplication. They are:
* (to distinguish formula_1 from formula_2 in formula_3);
* (to distinguish formula_4 from formula_5 in formula_6);
* (vice versa);
* (to distinguish formula_7 from formula_8 in formula_9).

The full specification of MathML entities is closely coordinated with the corresponding specifications for use with HTML and XML in general.

Thus, the expression formula_10 requires two layout elements: one to create the overall horizontal row and one for the superscripted exponent. However, the individual tokens also have to be identified as identifiers (), operators (), or numbers (). Adding the token markup, the full form ends up as
&lt;mrow&gt;
 &lt;mi&gt;a&lt;/mi&gt; &lt;mo&gt;&amp;InvisibleTimes;&lt;/mo&gt; &lt;msup&gt;&lt;mi&gt;x&lt;/mi&gt;&lt;mn&gt;2&lt;/mn&gt;&lt;/msup&gt;
 &lt;mo&gt;+&lt;/mo&gt;&lt;mi&gt;b&lt;/mi&gt;&lt;mo&gt;&amp;InvisibleTimes;&lt;/mo&gt;&lt;mi&gt;x&lt;/mi&gt;
 &lt;mo&gt;+&lt;/mo&gt;&lt;mi&gt;c&lt;/mi&gt;
&lt;/mrow&gt;
A complete document that consists of just the MathML example above, is shown here:
&lt;?xml version=&quot;1.0&quot; encoding=&quot;UTF-8&quot;?&gt;
&lt;!DOCTYPE math PUBLIC &quot;-//W3C//DTD MathML 2.0//EN&quot; &quot;http://www.w3.org/Math/DTD/mathml2/mathml2.dtd&quot;&gt;
formula_11
=== Content MathML ===

Content MathML focuses on the semantics, or meaning, of the expression rather than its layout. Central to Content MathML is the element that represents function application. The function being applied is the first child element under , and its operands or parameters are the remaining child elements. Content MathML uses only a few attributes.

Tokens such as identifiers and numbers are individually marked up, much as for Presentation MathML, but with elements such as and . Rather than being merely another type of token, operators are represented by specific elements, whose mathematical semantics are known to MathML: , , etc. There are over a hundred different elements for different functions and operators.

For example, represents formula_1 and represents formula_13. The elements representing operators and functions are empty elements, because their operands are the other elements under the containing .

The expression formula_10 could be represented as
formula_15
Content MathML is nearly isomorphic to expressions in a functional language such as Scheme and other dialects of Lisp. amounts to Scheme&#x27;s , and the many operator and function elements amount to Scheme functions. With this trivial literal transformation, plus un-tagging the individual tokens, the example above becomes:

(plus
 (times a (power x 2))
 (times b x)
 c)

This reflects the long-known close relationship between XML element structures, and LISP or Scheme S-expressions.

==== Wikidata annotation in Content MathML ====
According to the OM Society, OpenMath Content Dictionaries can be employed as collections of symbols and identifiers with declarations of their semanticsnames, descriptions and rules. A 2018 paper presented at the SIGIR conference proposed that the semantic knowledge base Wikidata could be used as an OpenMath Content Dictionary to link semantic elements of a mathematical formula to unique and language-independent Wikidata items.

== Example ==
The well-known quadratic formula could be represented in Presentation MathML as an expression tree made up from layout elements like or :
formula_16
This example uses the element, which can be used to embed a semantic annotation in non-XML format, for example to store the formula in the format used by an equation editor such as StarMath or the markup using LaTeX syntax. The field is usually a MIME type, although most of the equation encodings don&#x27;t have such a registration; freeform text may be used in such cases.

Although less compact than other formats, the XML structuring of MathML makes its content widely usable and accessible, allows near-instant display in applications such as web browsers, and facilitates an interpretation of its meaning in mathematical software products. MathML is not intended to be written or edited directly by humans.

== Embedding MathML in HTML/XHTML files ==
MathML, being XML, can be embedded inside other XML files such as XHTML files using XML namespaces.
&lt;?xml version=&quot;1.0&quot; encoding=&quot;UTF-8&quot;?&gt;
&lt;!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC &quot;-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1 plus MathML 2.0//EN&quot;
 &quot;http://www.w3.org/Math/DTD/mathml2/xhtml-math11-f.dtd&quot;&gt;
&lt;html xmlns=&quot;http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml&quot; xml:lang=&quot;en&quot;&gt;
 &lt;head&gt;
 &lt;title&gt;Example of MathML embedded in an XHTML file&lt;/title&gt;
 &lt;meta name=&quot;description&quot; content=&quot;Example of MathML embedded in an XHTML file&quot;/&gt;
 &lt;/head&gt;
 &lt;body&gt;
 &lt;h1&gt;Example of MathML embedded in an XHTML file&lt;/h1&gt;
 &lt;p&gt;
 The area of a circle is 
 formula_17.
 &lt;/p&gt;
 &lt;/body&gt;
&lt;/html&gt;

Inline MathML is also supported in HTML5 files. There is no need to specify namespaces as there was in XHTML.

&lt;!DOCTYPE html&gt;
&lt;html lang=&quot;en&quot;&gt;
 &lt;head&gt;
 &lt;meta charset=&quot;utf-8&quot;&gt;
 &lt;title&gt;Example of MathML embedded in an HTML5 file&lt;/title&gt;
 &lt;/head&gt;
 &lt;body&gt;
 &lt;h1&gt;Example of MathML embedded in an HTML5 file&lt;/h1&gt;
 &lt;p&gt;
 The area of a circle is 
 formula_18.
 &lt;/p&gt;
 &lt;/body&gt;
&lt;/html&gt;
== Other standards ==
Another standard called OpenMath that has been more specifically designed (largely by the same people who devised Content MathML) for storing formulae semantically can be used to complement MathML. OpenMath data can be embedded in MathML using the element. OpenMath &quot;content dictionaries&quot; can be used to define the meaning of elements. The following would define &quot;P&quot;1(&quot;x&quot;) to be the first Legendre polynomial:

&lt;apply&gt;
 &lt;csymbol encoding=&quot;OpenMath&quot; definitionURL=&quot;http://www.openmath.org/cd/contrib/cd/orthpoly1.xhtml#legendreP&quot;&gt;
 &lt;msub&gt;&lt;mi&gt;P&lt;/mi&gt;&lt;mn&gt;1&lt;/mn&gt;&lt;/msub&gt;
 &lt;/csymbol&gt;
 &lt;ci&gt;x&lt;/ci&gt;
&lt;/apply&gt;
The OMDoc format has been created for markup of larger mathematical structures than formulae, from statements like definitions, theorems, proofs, and examples, to complete theories and even entire text books. Formulae in OMDoc documents can either be written in Content MathML or in OpenMath; for presentation, they are converted to Presentation MathML.

The ISO/IEC standard Office Open XML (OOXML) defines a different XML math syntax, derived from Microsoft Office products. However, it is partially compatible through XSL Transformations.

== See also ==

* CSS
* List of document markup languages
* Comparison of document markup languages
* Formula editors
* LaTeX2HTML
* LaTeXML
* KaTeXJavaScript library that converts LaTeX to MathML
* MathJaxJavaScript library that converts LaTeX to MathML

== References ==
== Further reading ==

=== Specifications ===
* W3C Recommendation: Mathematical Markup Language (MathML) 1.01 Specification
* W3C Recommendation: Mathematical Markup Language (MathML) Version 2.0 (Second Edition)
* W3C Recommendation: Mathematical Markup Language (MathML) Version 3.0 (Third Edition)

== External links ==
* W3C Math Home – Contains the specifications, a FAQ, and a list of supporting software.
* – A collection of XSLT programs for handling MathML (e.g. converting Content MathML to Presentation MathML, converting Presentation MathML to TeX)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q823982" start="0" end="28" title="MathML" label="Mathematical Markup Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q823982" start="30" end="36" title="MathML" label="MathML"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786860" start="43" end="71" title="mathematical markup language" label="mathematical markup language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="91" end="94" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="110" end="122" title="mathematics" label="mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="239" end="253" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053" start="295" end="300" title="HTML5" label="HTML5"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="321" end="324" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788871" start="390" end="403" title="Arena browser" label="Arena browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="529" end="532" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="567" end="570" title="W3C" label="W3C"/>
<link wikidata="Q455973" start="717" end="726" title="Amaya (web editor)" label="Amaya 1.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="728" end="739" title="Firefox" label="Mozilla 1.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010586" start="744" end="753" title="Opera 9.5" label="Opera 9.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="855" end="877" title="World Wide Web Consortium" label="W3C Math Working Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295992" start="938" end="951" title="XML namespace" label="XML namespace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1410" end="1428" title="World Wide Web Consortium#W3C recommendation (REC)" label="W3C recommendation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465300" start="1747" end="1755" title="OpenMath" label="OpenMath"/>
<link wikidata="Q654034" start="2457" end="2463" title="WebKit" label="WebKit"/>
<link wikidata="Q48524" start="2494" end="2502" title="Chromium (web browser)" label="Chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q193858" start="2759" end="2766" title="International Electrotechnical Commission" label="ISO/IEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137109" start="2958" end="2965" title="MathJax" label="MathJax"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="3466" end="3469" title="CSS" label="CSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328864" start="4181" end="4195" title="screen readers" label="screen readers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808580" start="4212" end="4221" title="VoiceOver" label="VoiceOver"/>
<link wikidata="Q35773" start="4225" end="4231" title="Safari (web browser)" label="Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676557" start="4234" end="4238" title="JAWS (screen reader)" label="JAWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394748" start="4398" end="4416" title="STIX Fonts project" label="STIX Fonts project"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300682" start="4500" end="4512" title="Cambria Math" label="Cambria Math"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372118" start="4653" end="4660" title="Document type declaration" label="DOCTYPE"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="4865" end="4869" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q796483" start="4871" end="4878" title="DocBook" label="DocBook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="4889" end="4892" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053" start="5543" end="5548" title="HTML5" label="HTML5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567428" start="6062" end="6070" title="character entity reference" label="entities"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="8571" end="8581" title="isomorphic" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913895" start="8585" end="8596" title="Binary expression tree" label="expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q193076" start="8602" end="8621" title="Functional programming" label="functional language"/>
<link wikidata="Q187560" start="8630" end="8636" title="Scheme (programming language)" label="Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="8659" end="8663" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="9004" end="9008" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="LISP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113529" start="9019" end="9032" title="S-expressions" label="S-expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574597" start="9297" end="9302" title="Special Interest Group on Information Retrieval" label="SIGIR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013" start="9356" end="9364" title="Wikidata" label="Wikidata"/>
<link wikidata="Q15909572" start="9546" end="9563" title="quadratic formula" label="quadratic formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q375079" start="9861" end="9869" title="StarMath" label="StarMath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310" start="9890" end="9895" title="LaTeX" label="LaTeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667978" start="9927" end="9936" title="MIME type" label="MIME type"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="10229" end="10240" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q166074" start="10504" end="10509" title="XHTML" label="XHTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053" start="11253" end="11258" title="HTML5" label="HTML5"/>
<link wikidata="Q166074" start="11321" end="11326" title="XHTML" label="XHTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465300" start="11742" end="11750" title="OpenMath" label="OpenMath"/>
<link wikidata="Q215405" start="12137" end="12156" title="Legendre polynomial" label="Legendre polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q268086" start="12442" end="12447" title="OMDoc" label="OMDoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="12797" end="12800" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q193858" start="12801" end="12804" title="International Electrotechnical Commission" label="IEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q279979" start="12814" end="12829" title="Office Open XML" label="Office Open XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q11255" start="12888" end="12904" title="Microsoft Office" label="Microsoft Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q32110" start="12959" end="12978" title="XSL Transformations" label="XSL Transformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="12999" end="13002" title="CSS" label="CSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867281" start="13005" end="13038" title="List of document markup languages" label="List of document markup languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155868" start="13041" end="13080" title="Comparison of document markup languages" label="Comparison of document markup languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345429" start="13083" end="13097" title="Formula editor" label="Formula editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310" start="13101" end="13111" title="LaTeX2HTML" label="LaTeX2HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064117" start="13114" end="13121" title="LaTeXML" label="LaTeXML"/>
<link wikidata="Q28448331" start="13124" end="13129" title="KaTeX" label="KaTeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137109" start="13180" end="13187" title="MathJax" label="MathJax"/>
<link wikidata="Q32110" start="13687" end="13691" title="XSLT" label="XSLT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301" start="13811" end="13814" title="TeX" label="TeX"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52315" wikidata="Q312939" url="?curid=52315" title="Peter Waldo">
<text>Peter Waldo (; also &quot;Valdo&quot;, &quot;Valdes&quot;, &quot;Waldes&quot;; , &quot;de Vaux&quot;; ; c. 1140 – c. 1205) was the leader of the Waldensians, a Christian spiritual movement of the Middle Ages.

The tradition that his first name was &quot;Peter&quot; can only be traced back to the fourteenth century. This has caused some historians, such as Jana Schulman, to see it as likely a later invention. He is considered a Proto-Protestant.

== Relationship with Waldenses ==

Peter Waldo is regarded by many historians, including Jana Schulman, as having founded the Waldensians sometime between 1170 and 1177.

There were claims that the Waldensians predated Peter Waldo. In his &quot;A History of the Vaudois Church&quot; (1859), Antoine Monastier quotes Bernard, Abbott of Foncald, writing at the end of the 12th century, that the Waldensians arose during the papacy of Lucius. Monastier takes him to mean Lucius II, Pope from 1144 to 1145, and concludes that the Waldenses were active before 1145. Bernard also says that the same Pope Lucius condemned them as heretics, but they were condemned by Pope Lucius III in 1184.

Monastier also says that Eberard de Béthune, writing in 1210 (although Monastier says 1160), claimed that the name &quot;Vaudois&quot; meant &quot;valley dwellers&quot; or those who &quot;dwell in a vale of sorrow and tears&quot;, and was in use before Peter Waldo.

A claim persisted until the 19th century that Waldo had not begun any new movement but that he had arisen from a pure Christianity established by the Apostles in the Alps soon after Jesus&#x27; ascension, and that Waldo was merely perpetuating this pure faith.

==Life and work==
Most details of Waldo&#x27;s life are unknown. Extant sources relate that he was a wealthy clothier and merchant from Lyon and a man of some learning. After establishing himself as a successful merchant, Waldo commissioned monks to create a translated copy of the Bible for him. The clerics from Lyon translated the New Testament into the vernacular &quot;Romance&quot; (Franco-Provençal). This has caused Waldo to be credited with providing to Europe the first translation of the Bible in a &#x27;modern tongue&#x27; outside of Latin.

Through reading his Bible and writings of the Church Fathers, Waldo became fascinated with the concepts of purity and perfection. He was also influenced by the movement started by Arnold of Brescia.&quot;. In 1173 in pursuit of purity, he embraced poverty after hearing an itinerant singer perform a song about Saint Alexius. Alexius had given up a large inheritance and a beautiful bride in order to live in poverty like Jesus. Waldo sold all he had, forswore his marriage and home, and put his two young daughters into a convent.

Waldo began traveling around Lombardy begging and preaching about the value of poverty. The region of Lombardy was a hotbed of religious reform movements at the time, many of which would be later deemed heresies by the Catholic Church. These include the Cathars, the Humiliati, the Albigensians, and the Speronists. As Waldo gathered followers and they determined their own doctrines they shared many features with these other reform movements - to the point that it becomes difficult for historians to determine the origins of many of the religious ideas circulating among them. Unlike the leaders of these other groups Waldo had never joined the Catholic Church&#x27;s priesthood or any of its religious orders.

Other events, besides hearing of Saint Alexius, may have also contributed to Waldo&#x27;s decision to take up poverty and preaching including a rejection of transubstantiation when it was considered a capital crime to do it, and the sudden and unexpected death of a friend during an evening meal. From this point onward he began living a radical Christian life, giving his property over to his wife, while the remainder of his belongings he distributed as alms to the poor. At about this time, Waldo began to preach and teach publicly, based on his ideas of simplicity and poverty, notably that &quot;No man can serve two masters, God and Mammon.&quot;

Inspired by his example Waldo began to attract followers and they grew into a community of believers. By 1170 Waldo had gathered a large number of followers, referred to as &quot;the Poor of Lyons,&quot; &quot;the Poor of Lombardy,&quot; or &quot;the Poor of God.&quot; They evangelized their teaching while traveling as peddlers. Often referred to as the Waldensians (or Waldenses), they were distinct from the Albigensians or Cathari. The Waldensian movement was characterized from the beginning by lay preaching, voluntary poverty, and strict adherence to the Bible.

In January 1179, Waldo and one of his went to Rome, where they were welcomed by Pope Alexander III and the Roman Curia. They had to explain their faith before a panel of three clergymen, including issues which were then debated within the Church, such as the universal priesthood, the gospel in the vulgate or local language, and the issue of voluntary poverty. The results of the meeting were inconclusive. The pope affirmed the Waldensians&#x27; vow of poverty, but forbade them to continue preaching due to their status as laypeople. Waldo and his followers revolted against the ban and increased their preaching and missionary efforts. They continued to gather followers and began proclaiming doctrines at odds with Catholicism - such as the right of all worthy members including women to preach the Scriptures without permission from Church authorities. They also began preaching against Purgatory, prayers for the dead, and indulgences. They were excommunicated by the Catholic Church. By the late 1180s, they were being pursued as heretics. This persecution only increased their preaching against the Roman Catholic Church. The Waldensians developed a doctrine that forbids the use of weapons or of oaths, which led them to refuse any participation in Catholic rituals. The Catholic hierarchy accused them of apostasy.

Waldo condemned what he considered as papal excesses and Catholic dogmas, including purgatory and transubstantiation. He said that these dogmas were &quot;the harlot&quot; from the book of Revelation.

Waldo&#x27;s ideas, but not the movement itself, were condemned at the Third Lateran Council in March of the same year. The leaders of the Waldensian movement were not yet excommunicated.

In 1180, Waldo composed a profession of faith which is still extant.

Driven away from Lyon, Waldo and his followers settled in the high valleys of Piedmont, and in France, in the Luberon, as they continued in their pursuit of Christianity based on the New Testament. Finally, Waldo was excommunicated by Pope Lucius III during the synod held at Verona in 1184. The doctrine of the Poor of Lyons was again condemned by the Fourth Lateran Council in 1215, when they mentioned the group by name for the first time, and declared its principles to be heresy. Fearing suppression from the Church, Waldo&#x27;s followers fled to the mountainous regions of northern Italy in the Waldensian Evangelical Church.
==See also==
*Waldensians
*Waldensian Evangelical Church
*John Charles Beckwith
*Luserna San Giovanni 
*Val Pellice
*Waldensian valleys

==References==
==Sources==
===Primary===
* 
* 
===Secondary===
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
==Further reading==

* Audisio, Gabriel, &quot;The Waldensian Dissent: Persecution and Survival, c.1170 – c.1570&quot;, Cambridge Medieval Textbooks. (1999) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312939" start="0" end="11" title="Peter Waldo" label="Peter Waldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="145" end="156" title="Waldensians" label="Waldensians"/>
<link wikidata="Q61750495" start="160" end="188" title="Christian movements" label="Christian spiritual movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="196" end="207" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q56292614" start="431" end="447" title="Proto-Protestant" label="Proto-Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q170385" start="918" end="927" title="Pope Lucius II" label="Lucius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q182474" start="1110" end="1125" title="Pope Lucius III" label="Pope Lucius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331803" start="1161" end="1179" title="Eberhard of Béthune" label="Eberard de Béthune"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="1801" end="1805" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="1999" end="2012" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="2022" end="2032" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q15087" start="2054" end="2070" title="Franco-Provençal language" label="Franco-Provençal"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2212" end="2217" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="2266" end="2280" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q456806" start="2400" end="2417" title="Arnold of Brescia" label="Arnold of Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q137947" start="2531" end="2544" title="Saint Alexius" label="Saint Alexius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484704" start="3020" end="3029" title="Humiliati" label="Humiliati"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3057" end="3067" title="Speronists" label="Speronists"/>
<link wikidata="Q214500" start="3625" end="3643" title="transubstantiation" label="transubstantiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q931406" start="3924" end="3928" title="alms" label="alms"/>
<link wikidata="Q747233" start="4107" end="4113" title="Mammon" label="Mammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="4344" end="4352" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q638172" start="4443" end="4450" title="peddler" label="peddler"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="4478" end="4489" title="Waldensians" label="Waldensians"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="4534" end="4546" title="Albigensians" label="Albigensians"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="4550" end="4557" title="Cathari" label="Cathari"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="4638" end="4655" title="voluntary poverty" label="voluntary poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q160116" start="4773" end="4791" title="Pope Alexander III" label="Pope Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q108169" start="4800" end="4811" title="Roman Curia" label="Roman Curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156551" start="4952" end="4972" title="universal priesthood" label="universal priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="6058" end="6063" title="Pope" label="papal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6077" end="6085" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q566" start="6104" end="6113" title="purgatory" label="purgatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q430079" start="6179" end="6185" title="Whore of Babylon" label="harlot"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="6201" end="6219" title="book of Revelation" label="book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q338611" start="6293" end="6314" title="Third Council of the Lateran" label="Third Lateran Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="6559" end="6567" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780121" start="6591" end="6598" title="Luberon" label="Luberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q182474" start="6716" end="6731" title="Pope Lucius III" label="Pope Lucius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="6757" end="6763" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q719992" start="6834" end="6856" title="Fourth Council of the Lateran" label="Fourth Lateran Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="6958" end="6964" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131615" start="7083" end="7112" title="Waldensian Evangelical Church" label="Waldensian Evangelical Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="7128" end="7139" title="Waldensians" label="Waldensians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131615" start="7141" end="7170" title="Waldensian Evangelical Church" label="Waldensian Evangelical Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225727" start="7172" end="7193" title="John Charles Beckwith (British Army officer)" label="John Charles Beckwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9442" start="7195" end="7215" title="Luserna San Giovanni" label="Luserna San Giovanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524033" start="7218" end="7229" title="Val Pellice" label="Val Pellice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356798" start="7231" end="7249" title="Occitan Valleys" label="Waldensian valleys"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52316" wikidata="Q188638" url="?curid=52316" title="Mood disorder">
<text>A mood disorder, also known as an affective disorder, is any of a group of conditions of mental and behavioral disorder where the main underlying characteristic is a disturbance in the person&#x27;s mood. The classification is in the &quot;Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders&quot; (DSM) and International Classification of Diseases (ICD).

Mood disorders fall into seven groups, including; abnormally elevated mood, such as mania or hypomania; depressed mood, of which the best-known and most researched is major depressive disorder (MDD) (alternatively known as clinical depression, unipolar depression, or major depression); and moods which cycle between mania and depression, known as bipolar disorder (BD) (formerly known as manic depression). There are several subtypes of depressive disorders or psychiatric syndromes featuring less severe symptoms such as dysthymic disorder (similar to MDD, but longer lasting and more persistent, though often milder) and cyclothymic disorder (similar to but milder than BD).

In some cases, more than one mood disorder can be present in an individual, like bipolar disorder and depressive disorder. Mood disorders may also be substance induced, or occur in response to a medical condition.

English psychiatrist Henry Maudsley proposed an overarching category of &quot;affective disorder&quot;. The term was then replaced by &quot;mood disorder&quot;, as the latter refers to the underlying or longitudinal emotional state, whereas the former refers to the external expression observed by others.
== Classification ==

=== Depressive disorders ===
* Major depressive disorder (MDD), commonly called major depression, unipolar depression, or clinical depression, wherein a person has one or more major depressive episodes. After a single episode, Major Depressive Disorder (single episode) would be diagnosed. After more than one episode, the diagnosis becomes Major Depressive Disorder (Recurrent). Depression without periods of mania is sometimes referred to as &quot;unipolar depression&quot; because the mood remains at the bottom &quot;pole&quot; and does not climb to the higher, manic &quot;pole&quot; as in bipolar disorder.

:Individuals with a major depressive episode or major depressive disorder are at increased risk for suicide. Seeking help and treatment from a health professional dramatically reduces the individual&#x27;s risk for suicide. Studies have demonstrated that asking if a depressed friend or family member has thought of committing suicide is an effective way of identifying those at risk, and it does not &quot;plant&quot; the idea or increase an individual&#x27;s risk for suicide in any way. Epidemiological studies carried out in Europe suggest that, at this moment, roughly 8.5 percent of the world&#x27;s population have a depressive disorder. No age group seems to be exempt from depression, and studies have found that depression appears in infants as young as 6 months old who have been separated from their mothers. However, there may be differences between cultures in prevalence of MDD due to cultural influences that &quot;challenge the definition and diagnosis of psychiatric disorders&quot;, as seen in a study by Parker et al. that researched MDD in Chinese individuals. Depressive disorder (also known as depression) is a common mental disorder. It involves a depressed mood or loss of pleasure or interest in activities for long periods of time. Depression is different from regular mood changes and feelings about everyday life. It can affect all aspects of life. Depression can happen to anyone. People who have lived through abuse, severe losses, or other stressful events are more likely to develop depression.
* Depressive disorder is frequent in primary care and general hospital practice but is often undetected. Unrecognized depressive disorder may slow recovery and worsen prognosis in physical illness, therefore it is important that all doctors be able to recognize the condition, treat the less severe cases, and identify those requiring specialist care.

: Diagnosticians recognize several subtypes or course specifiers:

:* &quot;Atypical depression&quot; (&quot;AD&quot;) is characterized by mood reactivity (paradoxical anhedonia) and positivity, significant weight gain or increased appetite (&quot;comfort eating&quot;), excessive sleep or somnolence (hypersomnia), a sensation of heaviness in limbs known as leaden paralysis, and significant social impairment as a consequence of hypersensitivity to perceived interpersonal rejection. Difficulties in measuring this subtype have led to questions of its validity and prevalence.

:* &quot;Melancholic depression&quot; is characterized by a loss of pleasure (anhedonia) in most or all activities, a failure of reactivity to pleasurable stimuli, a quality of depressed mood more pronounced than that of grief or loss, a worsening of symptoms in the morning hours, early-morning waking, psychomotor retardation, excessive weight loss (not to be confused with anorexia nervosa), or excessive guilt.

:* &quot;Psychotic major depression&quot; (&quot;PMD&quot;), or simply psychotic depression, is the term for a major depressive episode, in particular of melancholic nature, wherein the patient experiences psychotic symptoms such as delusions or, less commonly, hallucinations. These are most commonly mood-congruent (content coincident with depressive themes).

:* &quot;Catatonic depression&quot; is a rare and severe form of major depression involving disturbances of motor behavior and other symptoms. Here, the person is mute and almost stuporous, and either is immobile or exhibits purposeless or even bizarre movements. Catatonic symptoms can also occur in schizophrenia or a manic episode, or can be due to neuroleptic malignant syndrome.

:* &quot;Postpartum depression&quot; (&quot;PPD&quot;) is listed as a course specifier in DSM-IV-TR; it refers to the intense, sustained and sometimes disabling depression experienced by women after giving birth. Postpartum depression, which affects 10–15% of women, typically sets in within three months of labor, and lasts as long as three months. It is quite common for women to experience a short-term feeling of tiredness and sadness in the first few weeks after giving birth; however, postpartum depression is different because it can cause significant hardship and impaired functioning at home, work, or school as well as, possibly, difficulty in relationships with family members, spouses, or friends, or even problems bonding with the newborn. In the treatment of postpartum major depressive disorders and other unipolar depressions in women who are breastfeeding, nortriptyline, paroxetine (Paxil), and sertraline (Zoloft) are in general considered to be the preferred medications. Women with personal or family histories of mood disorders are at particularly high risk of developing postpartum depression.

:* &quot;Premenstrual dysphoric disorder&quot; (&quot;PMDD&quot;) is a severe and disabling form of premenstrual syndrome affecting 3–8% of menstruating women. The disorder consists of a &quot;cluster of affective, behavioral and somatic symptoms&quot; that recur monthly during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle. PMDD was added to the list of depressive disorders in the &quot;Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders&quot; in 2013. The exact pathogenesis of the disorder is still unclear and is an active research topic. Treatment of PMDD relies largely on antidepressants that modulate serotonin levels in the brain via serotonin reuptake inhibitors as well as ovulation suppression using contraception.

:* &quot;Seasonal affective disorder&quot; (&quot;SAD&quot;), also known as &quot;winter depression&quot; or &quot;winter blues&quot;, is a specifier. Some people have a seasonal pattern, with depressive episodes coming on in the autumn or winter, and resolving in spring. The diagnosis is made if at least two episodes have occurred in colder months with none at other times over a two-year period or longer. It is commonly hypothesised that people who live at higher latitudes tend to have less sunlight exposure in the winter and therefore experience higher rates of SAD, but the epidemiological support for this proposition is not strong (and latitude is not the only determinant of the amount of sunlight reaching the eyes in winter). It is said that this disorder can be treated by light therapy. SAD is also more prevalent in people who are younger and typically affects more females than males.

:* &quot;Dysthymia&quot; is a condition related to unipolar depression, where the same physical and cognitive problems are evident, but they are not as severe and tend to last longer (usually at least 2 years). The treatment of dysthymia is largely the same as for major depression, including antidepressant medications and psychotherapy.

:* &quot;Double depression&quot; can be defined as a fairly depressed mood (dysthymia) that lasts for at least two years and is punctuated by periods of major depression.

:*Unspecified Depressive Disorder is designated by the code &quot;311&quot; for depressive disorders. In the DSM-5, Unspecified Depressive Disorder encompasses symptoms that are characteristic of depressive disorders and cause significant impairment in functioning, but do not meet the criteria for the diagnosis of any specified depressive disorders. In the DSM-IV, this was called Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.

:*&quot;Depressive personality disorder&quot; (DPD) is a controversial psychiatric diagnosis that denotes a personality disorder with depressive features. Originally included in the DSM-II, depressive personality disorder was removed from the DSM-III and DSM-III-R. Recently, it has been reconsidered for reinstatement as a diagnosis. Depressive personality disorder is currently described in Appendix B in the DSM-IV-TR as worthy of further study.

:* &quot;Recurrent brief depression&quot; (&quot;RBD&quot;), distinguished from major depressive disorder primarily by differences in duration. People with RBD have depressive episodes about once per month, with individual episodes lasting less than two weeks and typically less than 2–3 days. Diagnosis of RBD requires that the episodes occur over the span of at least one year and, in female patients, independently of the menstrual cycle. People with clinical depression can develop RBD, and vice versa and both illnesses have similar risks.

:* &quot;Minor depressive disorder&quot;, or simply minor depression, which refers to a depression that does not meet full criteria for major depression but in which at least two symptoms are present for two weeks.

=== Bipolar disorders ===
* Bipolar disorder (BD) (also called &quot;manic depression&quot; or &quot;manic-depressive disorder&quot;), an unstable emotional condition characterized by cycles of abnormal, persistent high mood (mania) and low mood (depression), which was formerly known as &quot;manic depression&quot; (and in some cases rapid cycling, mixed states, and psychotic symptoms). Subtypes include:

:* &quot;Bipolar I&quot; is distinguished by the presence or history of one or more manic episodes or mixed episodes with or without major depressive episodes. A depressive episode is not required for the diagnosis of Bipolar I Disorder, but depressive episodes are usually part of the course of the illness.
:* &quot;Bipolar II&quot; consisting of recurrent intermittent hypomanic and depressive episodes or mixed episodes.
:* &quot;Cyclothymia&quot; is a form of bipolar disorder, consisting of recurrent hypomanic and dysthymic episodes, but no full manic episodes or full major depressive episodes.
:* &quot;Bipolar disorder not otherwise specified&quot; (&quot;BD-NOS&quot;), sometimes called &quot;sub-threshold&quot; bipolar, indicates that the patient has some symptoms in the bipolar spectrum (e.g., manic and depressive symptoms) but does not fully qualify for any of the three formal bipolar DSM-IV diagnoses mentioned above.
:It is estimated that roughly 1% of the adult population has bipolar I, a further 1% has bipolar II or cyclothymia, and somewhere between 2% and 5% percent have &quot;sub-threshold&quot; forms of bipolar disorder. Furthermore, the possibility of getting bipolar disorder when one parent is diagnosed with it is 15–30%. Risk, when both parents have it, is 50–75%. Also, while with bipolar siblings the risk is 15–25%, with identical twins it is about 70%.

=== Substance-induced ===

A mood disorder can be classified as substance-induced if its etiology can be traced to the direct physiologic effects of a psychoactive drug or other chemical substance, or if the development of the mood disorder occurred contemporaneously with substance intoxication or withdrawal. Also, an individual may have a mood disorder coexisting with a substance abuse disorder. Substance-induced mood disorders can have features of a manic, hypomanic, mixed, or depressive episode. Most substances can induce a variety of mood disorders. For example, stimulants such as amphetamine, methamphetamine, and cocaine can cause manic, hypomanic, mixed, and depressive episodes.

==== Alcohol-induced ====

High rates of major depressive disorder occur in heavy drinkers and those with alcoholism. Controversy has previously surrounded whether those who abused alcohol and developed depression were self-medicating their pre-existing depression. Recent research has concluded that, while this may be true in some cases, alcohol misuse directly causes the development of depression in a significant number of heavy drinkers. Participants studied were also assessed during stressful events in their lives and measured on a &quot;Feeling Bad Scale.&quot; Likewise, they were also assessed on their affiliation with &quot; deviant &quot; peers, unemployment, and their partner&#x27;s substance use and criminal offending. High rates of suicide also occur in those who have alcohol-related problems. It is usually possible to differentiate between alcohol-related depression and depression that is not related to alcohol intake by taking a careful history of the patient. Depression and other mental health problems associated with alcohol misuse may be due to distortion of brain chemistry, as they tend to improve on their own after a period of abstinence.

==== Benzodiazepine-induced ====
Benzodiazepines, such as alprazolam, clonazepam, lorazepam and diazepam, can cause both depression and mania.

Benzodiazepines are a class of medication commonly used to treat anxiety, panic attacks and insomnia, and are also commonly misused and abused. Those with anxiety, panic and sleep problems commonly have negative emotions and thoughts, depression, suicidal ideations, and often have comorbid depressive disorders. While the anxiolytic and hypnotic effects of benzodiazepines may disappear as tolerance develops, depression and impulsivity with high suicidal risk commonly persist. These symptoms are &quot;often interpreted as an exacerbation or as a natural evolution of previous disorders and the chronic use of sedatives is overlooked&quot;. Benzodiazepines do not prevent the development of depression, can exacerbate preexisting depression, can cause depression in those with no history of it, and can lead to suicide attempts. Risk factors for suicide and suicide attempts while using benzodiazepines include high dose prescriptions (even in those not misusing the medications), benzodiazepine intoxication, and underlying depression.

The long-term use of benzodiazepines may have a similar effect on the brain as alcohol, and are also implicated in depression. As with alcohol, the effects of benzodiazepine on neurochemistry, such as decreased levels of serotonin and norepinephrine, are believed to be responsible for the increased depression. Additionally, benzodiazepines can indirectly worsen mood by worsening sleep (i.e., benzodiazepine-induced sleep disorder). Like alcohol, benzodiazepines can put people to sleep but, while asleep, they disrupt sleep architecture: decreasing sleep time, delaying time to REM sleep, and decreasing deep sleep (the most restorative part of sleep for both energy and mood). Just as some antidepressants can cause or worsen anxiety in some patients due to being activating, benzodiazepines can cause or worsen depression due to being a central nervous system depressant—worsening thinking, concentration and problem solving (i.e., benzodiazepine-induced neurocognitive disorder). However, unlike antidepressants, in which the activating effects usually improve with continued treatment, benzodiazepine-induced depression is unlikely to improve until after stopping the medication.

In a long-term follow-up study of patients dependent on benzodiazepines, it was found that 10 people (20%) had taken drug overdoses while on chronic benzodiazepine medication despite only two people ever having had any pre-existing depressive disorder. A year after a gradual withdrawal program, no patients had taken any further overdoses.

Just as with intoxication and chronic use, benzodiazepine withdrawal can also cause depression. While benzodiazepine-induced depressive disorder may be exacerbated immediately after discontinuation of benzodiazepines, evidence suggests that mood significantly improves after the acute withdrawal period to levels better than during use. Depression resulting from withdrawal from benzodiazepines usually subsides after a few months but in some cases may persist for 6–12 months.

===Due to another medical condition===
&quot;Mood disorder due to a general medical condition&quot; is used to describe manic or depressive episodes which occur secondary to a medical condition. There are many medical conditions that can trigger mood episodes, including neurological disorders (e.g. dementias), hearing loss and associated disorders (e.g. tinnitus or hyperacusis), metabolic disorders (e.g. electrolyte disturbances), gastrointestinal diseases (e.g. cirrhosis), endocrine disease (e.g. thyroid abnormalities), cardiovascular disease (e.g. heart attack), pulmonary disease (e.g. chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), cancer, autoimmune diseases (e.g. multiple sclerosis), and pregnancy.

===Not otherwise specified===
Mood disorder not otherwise specified (MD-NOS) is a mood disorder that is impairing but does not fit in with any of the other officially specified diagnoses. In the DSM-IV MD-NOS is described as &quot;any mood disorder that does not meet the criteria for a specific disorder.&quot; MD-NOS is not used as a clinical description but as a statistical concept for filing purposes. The diagnosis of MD-NOS does not exist in the DSM-5, however the diagnoses of unspecified depressive disorder and unspecified bipolar disorder are in the DSM-5.

Most cases of MD-NOS represent hybrids between mood and anxiety disorders, such as mixed anxiety-depressive disorder or atypical depression. An example of an instance of MD-NOS is being in minor depression frequently during various intervals, such as once every month or once in three days. There is a risk for MD-NOS not to get noticed, and for that reason not to get treated.

== Causes ==
Meta-analyses show that high scores on the personality domain neuroticism are a strong predictor for the development of mood disorders. A number of authors have also suggested that mood disorders are an evolutionary adaptation (&quot;see also evolutionary psychiatry&quot;). A low or depressed mood can increase an individual&#x27;s ability to cope with situations in which the effort to pursue a major goal could result in danger, loss, or wasted effort. In such situations, low motivation may give an advantage by inhibiting certain actions. This theory helps to explain why negative life incidents precede depression in around 80 percent of cases, and why they so often strike people during their peak reproductive years. These characteristics would be difficult to understand if depression were a dysfunction.

A depressed mood is a predictable response to certain types of life occurrences, such as loss of status, divorce, or death of a child or spouse. These are events that signal a loss of reproductive ability or potential, or that did so in humans&#x27; ancestral environment. A depressed mood can be seen as an adaptive response, in the sense that it causes an individual to turn away from the earlier (and reproductively unsuccessful) modes of behavior.

A depressed mood is common during illnesses, such as influenza. It has been argued that this is an evolved mechanism that assists the individual in recovering by limiting their physical activity. The occurrence of low-level depression during the winter months, or seasonal affective disorder, may have been adaptive in the past, by limiting physical activity at times when food was scarce. It is argued that humans have retained the instinct to experience low mood during the winter months, even if the availability of food is no longer determined by the weather.

Much of what is known about the genetic influence of clinical depression is based upon research that has been done with identical twins. Identical twins have exactly the same genetic code. It has been found that when one identical twin becomes depressed the other will also develop clinical depression approximately 76% of the time. When identical twins are raised apart from each other, they will both become depressed about 67% of the time. Because both twins become depressed at such a high rate, the implication is that there is a strong genetic influence. If it happened that when one twin becomes clinically depressed the other always develops depression, then clinical depression would likely be entirely genetic.

Bipolar disorder is also considered a mood disorder and it is hypothesized that it might be caused by mitochondrial dysfunction.

===Sex differences===
Mood disorders, specifically stress-related mood disorders such as anxiety and depression, have been shown to have differing rates of diagnosis based on sex. In the United States, women are two times more likely than men to be diagnosed with a stress-related mood disorder. Underlying these sex differences, studies have shown a dysregulation of stress-responsive neuroendocrine function causing an increase in the likelihood of developing these affective disorders. Overactivation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis could provide potential insight into how these sex differences arise. Neuropeptide corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) is released from the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus, stimulating adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) release into the blood stream. From here ACTH triggers the release of glucocorticoids such as cortisol from the adrenal cortex. Cortisol, known as the main stress hormone, creates a negative feedback loop back to the hypothalamus to deactivate the stress response. When a constant stressor is present, the HPA axis remains overactivated and cortisol is constantly produced. This chronic stress is associated with sustained CRF release, resulting in the increased production of anxiety- and depressive-like behaviors and serving as a potential mechanism for differences in prevalence between men and women.

==Diagnosis==

===&quot;DSM-5&quot;===
The &quot;DSM-5&quot;, released in May 2013, separates the mood disorder chapter from the &quot;DSM-IV-TR&quot; into two sections: Depressive and related disorders and bipolar and related disorders. Bipolar disorders fall in between depressive disorders and schizophrenia spectrum and related disorders &quot;in recognition of their place as a bridge between the two diagnostic classes in terms of symptomatology, family history and genetics&quot; (Ref. 1, p 123). Bipolar disorders underwent a few changes in the &quot;DSM-5&quot;, most notably the addition of more specific symptomology related to hypomanic and mixed manic states. Depressive disorders underwent the most changes, the addition of three new disorders: disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, persistent depressive disorder (previously dysthymia), and premenstrual dysphoric disorder (previously in appendix B, the section for disorders needing further research). Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is meant as a diagnosis for children and adolescents who would normally be diagnosed with bipolar disorder as a way to limit the bipolar diagnosis in this age cohort. Major depressive disorder (MDD) also underwent a notable change, in that the bereavement clause has been removed. Those previously exempt from a diagnosis of MDD due to bereavement are now candidates for the MDD diagnosis.

==Treatment==
There are different types of treatments available for mood disorders, such as therapy and medications. Behaviour therapy, cognitive behaviour therapy and interpersonal therapy have all shown to be potentially beneficial in depression. Major depressive disorder medications usually include antidepressants; a combination of antidepressants and cognitive behavioral therapy has shown to be more effective than one treatment alone. Bipolar disorder medications can consist of antipsychotics, mood stabilizers, anticonvulsants and/or lithium. Lithium specifically has been proven to reduce suicide and all causes of mortality in people with mood disorders. If mitochondrial dysfunction or mitochondrial diseases are the cause of mood disorders like bipolar disorder, then it has been hypothesized that N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC), acetyl-L-carnitine (ALCAR), S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe), coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10), alpha-lipoic acid (ALA), creatine monohydrate (CM), and melatonin could be potential treatment options. In determining treatment, there are many types of depression scales that are used. One of the depression scales is a self-report scale called Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). Another scale is the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAMD). HAMD is a clinical rating scale in which the patient is rated based on clinician observation. The Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) is a scale for depression symptoms that applies to the general population. This scale is typically used in research and not for self-reports. The PHQ-9 which stands for Patient-Health Questionnaire-9 questions, is a self-report as well. Finally, the Mood Disorder Questionnaire (MDQ) evaluates bipolar disorder.

==Epidemiology==

According to a substantial number of epidemiology studies conducted, women are twice as likely to develop certain mood disorders, such as major depression. Although there is an equal number of men and women diagnosed with bipolar II disorder, women have a slightly higher frequency of the disorder.

In 2011, mood disorders were the most common reason for hospitalization among children aged 1–17 years in the United States, with approximately 112,000 stays. Mood disorders were top principal diagnosis for Medicaid super-utilizers in the United States in 2012. Further, a study of 18 states found that mood disorders accounted for the highest number of hospital readmissions among Medicaid patients and the uninsured, with 41,600 Medicaid patients and 12,200 uninsured patients being readmitted within 30 days of their index stay—a readmission rate of 19.8 per 100 admissions and 12.7 per 100 admissions, respectively. In 2012, mood and other behavioral health disorders were the most common diagnoses for Medicaid-covered and uninsured hospital stays in the United States (6.1% of Medicaid stays and 5.2% of uninsured stays).

A study conducted in 1988 to 1994 amongst young American adults involved a selection of demographic and health characteristics. A population-based sample of 8,602 men and women ages 17–39 years participated. Lifetime prevalence were estimated based on six mood measures:
* major depressive episode (MDE) 8.6%,
* major depressive disorder with severity (MDE-s) 7.7%,
* dysthymia 6.2%,
* MDE-s with dysthymia 3.4%,
* any bipolar disorder 1.6%, and
* any mood disorder 11.5%.

== Research ==
Kay Redfield Jamison and others have explored the possible links between mood disorders – especially bipolar disorder – and creativity. It has been proposed that a &quot;ruminating personality type may contribute to both [mood disorders] and art.&quot;

Jane Collingwood notes an Oregon State University study that:looked at the occupational status of a large group of typical patients and found that &#x27;those with bipolar illness appear to be disproportionately concentrated in the most creative occupational category.&#x27; They also found that the likelihood of &#x27;engaging in creative activities on the job&#x27; is significantly higher for bipolar than nonbipolar workers.In Liz Paterek&#x27;s article &quot;Bipolar Disorder and the Creative Mind&quot; she wrote:Memory and creativity are related to mania. Clinical studies have shown that those in a manic state will rhyme, find synonyms, and use alliteration more than controls. This mental fluidity could contribute to an increase in creativity. Moreover, mania creates increases in productivity and energy. Those in a manic state are more emotionally sensitive and show less inhibition about attitudes, which could create greater expression. Studies performed at Harvard looked into the amount of original thinking in solving creative tasks. Bipolar individuals, whose disorder was not severe, tended to show greater degrees of creativity.The relationship between depression and creativity appears to be especially strong among poets.

==See also==
* Personality disorder
* Endorphins
* Bipolar Disorder
* Depression (mood)
* Dysthymia
* Hypomania
* Major depressive disorder
* Mania

== References ==

;Cited texts
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188638" start="2" end="15" title="Mood disorder" label="mood disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q188638" start="34" end="52" title="Mood disorder" label="affective disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="89" end="95" title="mental disorder" label="mental"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724302" start="100" end="110" title="Abnormal behavior" label="behavioral"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="111" end="119" title="Disorder (medicine)" label="disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q331769" start="199" end="203" title="mood (psychology)" label="mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q201561" start="240" end="293" title="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders" label="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q50018" start="310" end="350" title="International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems" label="International Classification of Diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="443" end="448" title="mania" label="mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q188611" start="452" end="461" title="hypomania" label="hypomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="526" end="551" title="major depressive disorder" label="major depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="707" end="723" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q427810" start="882" end="891" title="dysthymic" label="dysthymic"/>
<link wikidata="Q245590" start="983" end="994" title="cyclothymic" label="cyclothymic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="1233" end="1250" title="medical condition" label="medical condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q211346" start="1261" end="1273" title="psychiatrist" label="psychiatrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436868" start="1274" end="1288" title="Henry Maudsley" label="Henry Maudsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="1612" end="1637" title="Major depressive disorder" label="Major depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738337" start="1757" end="1781" title="major depressive episode" label="major depressive episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="2147" end="2152" title="mania" label="manic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="2295" end="2302" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298118" start="2304" end="2316" title="Suicide prevention" label="Seeking help"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540880" start="3277" end="3296" title="Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified" label="Depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="3312" end="3322" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657784" start="4152" end="4171" title="Atypical depression" label="Atypical depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403879" start="4283" end="4294" title="weight gain" label="weight gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q751641" start="4378" end="4389" title="hypersomnia" label="hypersomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q674328" start="4537" end="4560" title="social rejection" label="interpersonal rejection"/>
<link wikidata="Q192077" start="4665" end="4687" title="Melancholic depression" label="Melancholic depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q545365" start="4734" end="4743" title="anhedonia" label="anhedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q859031" start="4811" end="4818" title="Stimulus (physiology)" label="stimuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026040" start="4877" end="4882" title="grief" label="grief"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064951" start="4960" end="4983" title="psychomotor retardation" label="psychomotor retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131749" start="5032" end="5048" title="anorexia nervosa" label="anorexia nervosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914583" start="5081" end="5107" title="Psychotic major depression" label="Psychotic major depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q189643" start="5305" end="5313" title="delusion" label="delusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="5334" end="5347" title="hallucination" label="hallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q129811907" start="5444" end="5464" title="Catatonic depression" label="Catatonic depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="5736" end="5749" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="5755" end="5768" title="manic episode" label="manic episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424956" start="5787" end="5817" title="neuroleptic malignant syndrome" label="neuroleptic malignant syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q935129" start="5829" end="5850" title="Postpartum depression" label="Postpartum depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q34581" start="6128" end="6133" title="childbirth" label="labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q61387" start="6694" end="6707" title="nortriptyline" label="nortriptyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q408471" start="6709" end="6719" title="paroxetine" label="paroxetine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407617" start="6733" end="6743" title="sertraline" label="sertraline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728811" start="6947" end="6978" title="Premenstrual dysphoric disorder" label="Premenstrual dysphoric disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q220193" start="7038" end="7059" title="premenstrual syndrome" label="premenstrual syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363481" start="7221" end="7233" title="luteal phase" label="luteal phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="7241" end="7256" title="menstrual cycle" label="menstrual cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q201561" start="7322" end="7375" title="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders" label="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051223" start="7674" end="7701" title="Seasonal affective disorder" label="Seasonal affective disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q243570" start="8453" end="8466" title="light therapy" label="light therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q427810" start="8578" end="8587" title="Dysthymia" label="Dysthymia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609930" start="8918" end="8935" title="Double depression" label="Double depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540880" start="9083" end="9114" title="Unspecified depressive disorder" label="Unspecified Depressive Disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078495" start="9136" end="9140" title="DSM-IV Codes" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260921" start="9518" end="9549" title="Depressive personality disorder" label="Depressive personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044888" start="9969" end="9995" title="Recurrent brief depression" label="Recurrent brief depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="10385" end="10400" title="menstrual cycle" label="menstrual cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q774111" start="10515" end="10540" title="Minor Depressive Disorder" label="Minor depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="10750" end="10766" title="Bipolar disorder" label="Bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="10948" end="10953" title="mania" label="mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="10969" end="10979" title="Clinical depression" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="11091" end="11100" title="psychosis" label="psychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915474" start="11140" end="11149" title="Bipolar I" label="Bipolar I"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="11215" end="11229" title="manic episodes" label="manic episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884016" start="11233" end="11247" title="mixed episodes" label="mixed episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086956" start="11449" end="11459" title="Bipolar II" label="Bipolar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188611" start="11503" end="11512" title="hypomania" label="hypomanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q245590" start="11565" end="11576" title="Cyclothymia" label="Cyclothymia"/>
<link wikidata="Q427810" start="11652" end="11661" title="dysthymia" label="dysthymic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540858" start="11743" end="11783" title="Bipolar disorder not otherwise specified" label="Bipolar disorder not otherwise specified"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="12675" end="12692" title="psychoactive drug" label="psychoactive drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q865968" start="12797" end="12819" title="substance intoxication" label="substance intoxication"/>
<link wikidata="Q498902" start="12823" end="12833" title="Drug withdrawal" label="withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="12898" end="12913" title="substance abuse" label="substance abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q211036" start="13097" end="13106" title="stimulant" label="stimulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q179452" start="13116" end="13127" title="amphetamine" label="amphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="13129" end="13144" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="13150" end="13157" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="13325" end="13335" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="14147" end="14154" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="14427" end="14441" title="Benzodiazepine" label="Benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q319877" start="14452" end="14462" title="alprazolam" label="alprazolam"/>
<link wikidata="Q407988" start="14464" end="14474" title="clonazepam" label="clonazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q408265" start="14476" end="14485" title="lorazepam" label="lorazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q210402" start="14490" end="14498" title="diazepam" label="diazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="14653" end="14680" title="Substance abuse" label="commonly misused and abused"/>
<link wikidata="Q62903" start="14861" end="14871" title="anxiolytic" label="anxiolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q62962" start="14876" end="14884" title="hypnotic" label="hypnotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425425" start="14929" end="14938" title="Drug tolerance" label="tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="15658" end="15665" title="alcoholic beverage" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="15800" end="15809" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="15814" end="15828" title="norepinephrine" label="norepinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q211402" start="16160" end="16169" title="REM sleep" label="REM sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q3964845" start="16186" end="16196" title="Slow-wave sleep" label="deep sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="16421" end="16443" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119887" start="17152" end="17177" title="benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome" label="benzodiazepine withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339235" start="17859" end="17880" title="neurological disorder" label="neurological disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="17888" end="17896" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="17900" end="17912" title="hearing loss" label="hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q192309" start="17944" end="17952" title="tinnitus" label="tinnitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421356" start="17956" end="17967" title="hyperacusis" label="hyperacusis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351083" start="17970" end="17988" title="metabolic disorder" label="metabolic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300099" start="18023" end="18048" title="gastrointestinal diseases" label="gastrointestinal diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="18055" end="18064" title="cirrhosis" label="cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661443" start="18067" end="18084" title="endocrine disease" label="endocrine disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="18115" end="18137" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="18144" end="18156" title="heart attack" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286546" start="18159" end="18176" title="pulmonary disease" label="pulmonary disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q199804" start="18183" end="18220" title="chronic obstructive pulmonary disease" label="chronic obstructive pulmonary disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="18223" end="18229" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084905" start="18231" end="18249" title="autoimmune disease" label="autoimmune disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="18257" end="18275" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q201561" start="18489" end="18495" title="DSM-IV" label="DSM-IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883955" start="18946" end="18979" title="mixed anxiety-depressive disorder" label="mixed anxiety-depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657784" start="18983" end="19002" title="atypical depression" label="atypical depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540168" start="19317" end="19328" title="neuroticism" label="neuroticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="19458" end="19481" title="natural selection" label="evolutionary adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q85760017" start="19498" end="19521" title="evolutionary psychiatry" label="evolutionary psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="20576" end="20585" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051223" start="20787" end="20814" title="seasonal affective disorder" label="seasonal affective disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="21810" end="21826" title="Bipolar disorder" label="Bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q935710" start="21912" end="21937" title="mitochondrial dysfunction" label="mitochondrial dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16262180" start="24856" end="24873" title="Behaviour therapy" label="Behaviour therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147152" start="24875" end="24902" title="cognitive behaviour therapy" label="cognitive behaviour therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707774" start="24907" end="24928" title="interpersonal psychotherapy" label="interpersonal therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="25042" end="25056" title="antidepressant" label="antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147152" start="25096" end="25124" title="cognitive behavioral therapy" label="cognitive behavioral therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208144" start="25226" end="25240" title="antipsychotics" label="antipsychotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622367" start="25242" end="25258" title="mood stabilizers" label="mood stabilizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q576618" start="25260" end="25274" title="anticonvulsant" label="anticonvulsant"/>
<link wikidata="Q152763" start="25283" end="25290" title="lithium (medication)" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q935710" start="25438" end="25460" title="mitochondrial diseases" label="mitochondrial diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q265762" start="28101" end="28121" title="Kay Redfield Jamison" label="Kay Redfield Jamison"/>
<link wikidata="Q170658" start="28225" end="28235" title="creativity" label="creativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q484495" start="29010" end="29022" title="alliteration" label="alliteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="29594" end="29598" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q270673" start="29617" end="29637" title="Personality disorder" label="Personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q190528" start="29640" end="29650" title="Endorphins" label="Endorphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="29653" end="29669" title="Bipolar Disorder" label="Bipolar Disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="29672" end="29689" title="Depression (mood)" label="Depression (mood)"/>
<link wikidata="Q427810" start="29692" end="29701" title="Dysthymia" label="Dysthymia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188611" start="29704" end="29713" title="Hypomania" label="Hypomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="29716" end="29741" title="Major depressive disorder" label="Major depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="29744" end="29749" title="Mania" label="Mania"/>
</links>
</doc>
