<doc id="55904" wikidata="Q3711" url="?curid=55904" title="Belgrade">
<text>Belgrade is the capital and largest city of Serbia. It is located at the confluence of the Sava and Danube rivers and at the crossroads of the Pannonian Plain and the Balkan Peninsula. The population of the Belgrade metropolitan area is 1,685,563 according to the 2022 census. It is one of the major cities of Southeast Europe and the third most populous city on the Danube river.

Belgrade is one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in Europe and the world. One of the most important prehistoric cultures of Europe, the Vinča culture, evolved within the Belgrade area in the 6th millennium BC. In antiquity, Thraco-Dacians inhabited the region and, after 279 BC, Celts settled the city, naming it &quot;Singidūn&quot;. It was conquered by the Romans under the reign of Augustus and awarded Roman city rights in the mid-2nd century. It was settled by the Slavs in the 520s, and changed hands several times between the Byzantine Empire, the Frankish Empire, the Bulgarian Empire, and the Kingdom of Hungary before it became the seat of the Serbian king Stefan Dragutin in 1284. Belgrade served as capital of the Serbian Despotate during the reign of Stefan Lazarević, and then his successor Đurađ Branković returned it to the Hungarian king in 1427. Noon bells in support of the Hungarian army against the Ottoman Empire during the siege in 1456 have remained a widespread church tradition to this day. In 1521, Belgrade was conquered by the Ottomans and became the seat of the Sanjak of Smederevo. It frequently passed from Ottoman to Habsburg rule, which saw the destruction of most of the city during the Ottoman–Habsburg wars.

Following the Serbian Revolution, Belgrade was once again named the capital of Serbia in 1841. Northern Belgrade remained the southernmost Habsburg post until 1918, when it was attached to the city, due to former Austro-Hungarian territories becoming part of the new Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes after World War I. Belgrade was the capital of Yugoslavia from its creation to its dissolution. In a fatally strategic position, the city has been battled over in 115 wars and razed 44 times, being bombed five times and besieged many times.

Being Serbia&#x27;s primate city, Belgrade has special administrative status within Serbia. It is the seat of the central government, administrative bodies, and government ministries, as well as home to almost all of the largest Serbian companies, media, and scientific institutions. Belgrade is classified as a Beta-Global City. The city is home to the University Clinical Centre of Serbia, a hospital complex with one of the largest capacities in the world; the Church of Saint Sava, one of the largest Orthodox church buildings; and the Belgrade Arena, one of the largest capacity indoor arenas in Europe.

Belgrade hosted major international events such as the Danube River Conference of 1948, the first Non-Aligned Movement Summit (1961), the first major gathering of the OSCE (1977–1978), the Eurovision Song Contest (2008), as well as sports events such as the first FINA World Aquatics Championships (1973), UEFA Euro (1976), Summer Universiade (2009) and EuroBasket three times (1961, 1975, 2005). On 21 June 2023, Belgrade was confirmed host of the BIE- Specialized Exhibition Expo 2027.

==History==

===Prehistory===
Chipped stone tools found in Zemun show that the area around Belgrade was inhabited by nomadic foragers in the Palaeolithic and Mesolithic eras. Some of these tools are of Mousterian industry—belonging to Neanderthals rather than modern humans. Aurignacian and Gravettian tools have also been discovered near the area, indicating some settlement between 50,000 and 20,000 years ago.
The first farming people to settle in the region are associated with the Neolithic Starčevo culture, which flourished between 6200 and 5200 BC. There are several Starčevo sites in and around Belgrade, including the eponymous site of Starčevo. The Starčevo culture was succeeded by the Vinča culture (5500–4500 BC), a more sophisticated farming culture that grew out of the earlier Starčevo settlements and also named for a site in the Belgrade region (Vinča-Belo Brdo). The Vinča culture is known for its very large settlements, one of the earliest settlements by continuous habitation and some of the largest in prehistoric Europe. Also associated with the Vinča culture are anthropomorphic figurines such as the Lady of Vinča, the earliest known copper metallurgy in Europe, and a proto-writing form developed prior to the Sumerians and Minoans known as the Old European script, which dates back to around 5300 BC. Within the city proper, on Cetinjska Street, a skull of a Paleolithic human dated to before 5000 BC was discovered in 1890.

===Antiquity===
Evidence of early knowledge about Belgrade&#x27;s geographical location comes from a variety of ancient myths and legends. The ridge overlooking the confluence of the Sava and Danube rivers, for example, has been identified as one of the places in the story of Jason and the Argonauts. In the time of antiquity, too, the area was populated by Paleo-Balkan tribes, including the Thracians and the Dacians, who ruled much of Belgrade&#x27;s surroundings. Specifically, Belgrade was at one point inhabited by the Thraco-Dacian tribe Singi; following Celtic invasion in 279 BC, the Scordisci wrested the city from their hands, naming it &quot;Singidūn&quot; (&quot;d|ūn&quot;, fortress). In 34–33 BC, the Roman army reached Belgrade. It became the romanised &quot;Singidunum&quot; in the 1st century AD and, by the mid-2nd century, the city was proclaimed a &quot;municipium&quot; by the Roman authorities, evolving into a full-fledged &quot;colonia&quot; (the highest city class) by the end of the century. While the first Christian Emperor of Rome—Constantine I, also known as Constantine the Great—was born in the territory of Naissus to the city&#x27;s south, Roman Christianity&#x27;s champion, Flavius Iovianus (Jovian/Jovan), was born in Singidunum. Jovian reestablished Christianity as the official religion of the Roman Empire, ending the brief revival of traditional Roman religions under his predecessor Julian the Apostate. In 395 AD, the site passed to the Eastern Roman or Byzantine Empire. Across the Sava from Singidunum was the Celtic city of Taurunum (Zemun); the two were connected with a bridge throughout Roman and Byzantine times.

===Middle Ages===
In 442, the area was ravaged by Attila the Hun. In 471, it was taken by Theodoric the Great, king of the Ostrogoths, who continued into Italy. As the Ostrogoths left, another Germanic tribe, the Gepids, invaded the city. In 539, it was retaken by the Byzantines. In 577, some 100,000 Slavs poured into Thrace and Illyricum, pillaging cities and more permanently settling the region.
The Avars, under Bayan I, conquered the whole region and its new Slavic population by 582. Following Byzantine reconquest, the Byzantine chronicle &quot;De Administrando Imperio&quot; mentions the White Serbs, who had stopped in Belgrade on their way back home, asking the &quot;strategos&quot; for lands; they received provinces in the west, towards the Adriatic, which they would rule as subjects to Heraclius (610–641). In 829, Khan Omurtag was able to add Singidunum and its environs to the First Bulgarian Empire. The first record of the name &quot;Belograd&quot; appeared on April, 16th, 878, in a Papal missive to Bulgarian ruler Boris I. This name would appear in several variants: &quot;Alba Bulgarica&quot; in Latin, &quot;Griechisch Weissenburg&quot; in High German, &quot;Nándorfehérvár&quot; in Hungarian, and &quot;Castelbianco&quot; in Venetian, among other names, all variations of &#x27;white fortress&#x27; or &#x27;Bulgar white fortress&#x27;. For about four centuries, the city would become a battleground between the Byzantine Empire, the medieval Kingdom of Hungary, and the Bulgarian Empire. Basil II (976–1025) installed a garrison in Belgrade. The city hosted the armies of the First and the Second Crusade, but, while passing through during the Third Crusade, Frederick Barbarossa and his 190,000 crusaders saw Belgrade in ruins.
King Stefan Dragutin (r. 1276–1282) received Belgrade from his father-in-law, Stephen V of Hungary, in 1284, and it served as the capital of the Kingdom of Syrmia, a vassal state to the Kingdom of Hungary. Dragutin (Hungarian: &quot;Dragutin István&quot;) is regarded as the first Serbian king to rule over Belgrade.

Following the battles of Maritsa (1371) and Kosovo field (1389), Moravian Serbia, to Belgrade&#x27;s south, began to fall to the Ottoman Empire.

The northern regions of what is now Serbia persisted as the Serbian Despotate, with Belgrade as its capital. The city flourished under Stefan Lazarević, the son of Serbian prince Lazar Hrebeljanović. Lazarević built a castle with a citadel and towers, of which only the Despot&#x27;s tower and the west wall remain. He also refortified the city&#x27;s ancient walls, allowing the Despotate to resist Ottoman conquest for almost 70 years. During this time, Belgrade was a haven for many Balkan peoples fleeing Ottoman rule, and is thought to have had a population ranging between 40,000 and 50,000 people.

In 1427, Stefan&#x27;s successor Đurađ Branković, returning Belgrade to the Hungarian king, made Smederevo his new capital. Even though the Ottomans had captured most of the Serbian Despotate, Belgrade, known as Nándorfehérvár in Hungarian, was unsuccessfully besieged in 1440 and 1456. As the city presented an obstacle to the Ottoman advance into Hungary and further, over 100,000 Ottoman soldiers besieged it in 1456, in which the Christian army led by the Hungarian General John Hunyadi successfully defended it. The &quot;noon bell&quot; ordered by Pope Callixtus III commemorates the victory throughout the Christian world to this day, which is now a cultural symbol of Hungary.

===Ottoman rule and Austrian invasions===
Seven decades after the initial siege, on 28 August 1521, the fort was finally captured by Suleiman the Magnificent with 250,000 Turkish soldiers and over 100 ships. Subsequently, most of the city was razed to the ground and its entire Orthodox Christian population was deported to Istanbul to an area that has since become known as the Belgrade forest.

Belgrade was made the seat of the Pashalik of Belgrade (also known as the Sanjak of Smederevo), and quickly became the second largest Ottoman town in Europe at over 100,000 people, surpassed only by Constantinople. Ottoman rule introduced Ottoman architecture, including numerous mosques, and the city was resurrected—now by Oriental influences.

In 1594, a major Serb rebellion was crushed by the Ottomans. In retribution, Grand Vizier Sinan Pasha ordered the relics of Saint Sava to be publicly torched on the Vračar plateau; in the 20th century, the church of Saint Sava was built to commemorate this event.

Occupied by the Habsburgs three times (1688–1690, 1717–1739, 1789–1791), headed by the Holy Roman Princes Maximilian of Bavaria and Eugene of Savoy, and field marshal Baron Ernst Gideon von Laudon, respectively, Belgrade was quickly recaptured by the Ottomans and substantially razed each time. During this period, the city was affected by the two Great Serbian Migrations, in which hundreds of thousands of Serbs, led by two Serbian Patriarchs, retreated together with the Austrian soldiers into the Habsburg Empire, settling in today&#x27;s Vojvodina and Slavonia.

===Principality and Kingdom of Serbia===
At the beginning of the 19th century, Belgrade was predominantly inhabited by a Muslim population. Traces of Ottoman rule and architecture—such as mosques and bazaars, were to remain a prominent part of Belgrade&#x27;s townscape into the 19th century; several decades, even, after Serbia was granted autonomy from the Ottoman Empire.

During the First Serbian Uprising, Serbian revolutionaries held the city from 8 January 1807 until 1813, when it was retaken by the Ottomans. In 1807, Turks in Belgrade were massacred and forcefully converted to Christianity. The massacre was encouraged by Russia in order to cement divisions between the Serb rebels and the Porte. Around 6,000 Muslims and Jews were forcibly converted to Christianity. Most mosques were converted into churches. Muslims, Jews, Aromanians and Greeks were
subjected to forced labour, and Muslim women were widely made available to young Serb men, and some were taken into slavery. Milenko Stojković bought many of them, and established his harem for which he gained fame. In this circumstances Belgrade demographically transformed from Ottoman to Serb. After the Second Serbian Uprising in 1815, Serbia achieved some sort of sovereignty, which was formally recognised by the Porte in 1830.

The development of Belgrade architecture after 1815 can be divided into four periods. In the first phase, which lasted from 1815 to 1835, the dominant architectural style was still of a Balkan character, with substantial Ottoman influence. At the same time, an interest in joining the European mainstream allowed Central and Western European architecture to flourish. Between 1835 and 1850, the amount of neoclassicist and baroque buildings south of the Austrian border rose considerably, exemplified by St Michael&#x27;s Cathedral (Serbian: &quot;Saborna crkva)&quot;, completed in 1840. Between 1850 and 1875, new architecture was characterised by a turn towards the newly popular Romanticism, along with older European architectural styles. Typical of Central European cities in the last quarter of the 19th century, the fourth phase was characterised by an eclecticist style based on the Renaissance and Baroque periods.

In 1841, Prince Mihailo Obrenović moved the capital of the Principality of Serbia from Kragujevac to Belgrade. During his first reign (1815–1839), Prince Miloš Obrenović pursued expansion of the city&#x27;s population through the addition of new settlements, aiming and succeeding to make Belgrade the centre of the Principality&#x27;s administrative, military and cultural institutions. His project of creating a new market space (the Abadžijska čaršija), however, was less successful; trade continued to be conducted in the centuries-old Donja čaršija and Gornja čaršija. Still, new construction projects were typical for the Christian quarters as the older Muslim quarters declined; from Serbia&#x27;s autonomy until 1863, the number of Belgrade quarters even decreased, mainly as a consequence of the gradual disappearance of the city&#x27;s Muslim population. An Ottoman city map from 1863 counts only 9 Muslim quarters (&quot;mahalas&quot;). The names of only five such neighbourhoods are known today: Ali-pašina, Reis-efendijina, Jahja-pašina, Bajram-begova, and Laz Hadži-Mahmudova. Following the Čukur Fountain incident, Belgrade was bombed by the Ottomans.
On 18 April 1867, the Ottoman government ordered the Ottoman garrison, which had been since 1826 the last representation of Ottoman suzerainty in Serbia, withdrawn from Kalemegdan. The forlorn Porte&#x27;s only stipulation was that the Ottoman flag continue to fly over the fortress alongside the Serbian one. Serbia&#x27;s &quot;de facto&quot; independence dates from this event. In the following years, urban planner Emilijan Josimović had a significant influence on Belgrade. He conceptualised a regulation plan for the city in 1867, in which he proposed the replacement of the town&#x27;s crooked streets with a grid plan. Of great importance also was the construction of independent Serbian political and cultural institutions, as well as the city&#x27;s now-plentiful parks. Pointing to Josimović&#x27;s work, Serbian scholars have noted an important break with Ottoman traditions. At the time of independence, Belgrade had a mainly Ottoman look, and Josimović stated 
he wanted to rebuild Belgrade so that &quot;the capital does not retain the form that barbarism gave it&quot;. Josimović designed Belgrade to resemble Vienna, right down to building grand boulevards inspired by the &quot;Ringstrasse&quot;. All that remains of Ottoman Belgrade today are two mosques, the citadel, and a fountain with Arabic inscriptions. However, Istanbul—the capital city of the state to which Belgrade and Serbia &quot;de jure&quot; still belonged—underwent similar changes. 

In May 1868, &quot;knez&quot; Mihailo was assassinated with his cousin Anka Konstantinović while riding in a carriage in his country residence.

With the Principality&#x27;s full independence in 1878 and its transformation into the Kingdom of Serbia in 1882, Belgrade once again became a key city in the Balkans, and developed rapidly. Nevertheless, conditions in Serbia remained those of an overwhelmingly agrarian country, even with the opening of a railway to Niš, Serbia&#x27;s second city. In 1900, the capital had only 70,000 inhabitants (at the time Serbia numbered 2.5 million). Still, by 1905, the population had grown to more than 80,000 and, by the outbreak of World War I in 1914, it had surpassed the 100,000 citizens, disregarding Zemun, which still belonged to Austria-Hungary.

The first-ever projection of motion pictures in the Balkans and Central Europe was held in Belgrade in June 1896 by André Carr, a representative of the Lumière brothers. He shot the first motion pictures of Belgrade in the next year; however, they have not been preserved. The first permanent cinema was opened in 1909 in Belgrade.

===World War I: Austro–German invasion ===
The First World War began on 28 July 1914 when Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia. Most of the subsequent Balkan offensives occurred near Belgrade. Austro-Hungarian monitors shelled Belgrade on 29 July 1914, and it was taken by the Austro-Hungarian Army under General Oskar Potiorek on 1 December. On 16 December, it was re-taken by Serbian troops under Marshal Radomir Putnik. After a prolonged battle which destroyed much of the city, starting on 6 October 1915, Belgrade fell to German and Austro-Hungarian troops commanded by Field Marshal August von Mackensen on 9 October of the same year. The city was liberated by Serbian and French troops on 1 November 1918, under the command of Marshal Louis Franchet d&#x27;Espèrey of France and Crown Prince Alexander of Serbia. Belgrade, devastated as a front-line city, lost the title of largest city in the Kingdom to Subotica for some time.

===Kingdom of Yugoslavia===
After the war, Belgrade became the capital of the new Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, renamed the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1929. The Kingdom was split into banovinas and Belgrade, together with Zemun and Pančevo, formed a separate administrative unit.
During this period, the city experienced fast growth and significant modernisation. Belgrade&#x27;s population grew to 239,000 by 1931 (with the inclusion of Zemun), and to 320,000 by 1940. The population growth rate between 1921 and 1948 averaged 4.08% a year.

In 1927, Belgrade&#x27;s first airport opened, and in 1929, its first radio station began broadcasting. The Pančevo Bridge, which crosses the Danube, was opened in 1935, while King Alexander Bridge over the Sava was opened in 1934. On 3 September 1939 the first Belgrade Grand Prix, the last Grand Prix motor racing race before the outbreak of World War II, was held around the Belgrade Fortress and was followed by 80,000 spectators. The winner was Tazio Nuvolari.

===World War II: German invasion ===
On 25 March 1941, the government of regent Crown Prince Paul signed the Tripartite Pact, joining the Axis powers in an effort to stay out of the Second World War and keep Yugoslavia neutral during the conflict. This was immediately followed by mass protests in Belgrade and a military coup d&#x27;état led by Air Force commander General Dušan Simović, who proclaimed King Peter II to be of age to rule the realm. As a result, the city was heavily bombed by the Luftwaffe on 6 April 1941, killing up to 2,274 people. Yugoslavia was then invaded by German, Italian, Hungarian, and Bulgarian forces. Belgrade was captured by subterfuge, with six German soldiers led by their officer Fritz Klingenberg feigning threatening size, forcing the city to capitulate.

 Belgrade was more directly occupied by the German Army in the same month and became the seat of the puppet Nedić regime, headed by its namesake general. Some of today&#x27;s parts of Belgrade were incorporated in the Independent State of Croatia in occupied Yugoslavia, another puppet state, where Ustashe regime carried out the Genocide of Serbs.

During the summer and autumn of 1941, in reprisal for guerrilla attacks, the Germans carried out several massacres of Belgrade citizens; in particular, members of the Jewish community were subject to mass shootings at the order of General Franz Böhme, the German Military Governor of Serbia. Böhme rigorously enforced the rule that for every German killed, 100 Serbs or Jews would be shot. Belgrade became the first city in Europe to be declared by the Nazi occupation forces to be &quot;judenfrei&quot;. The resistance movement in Belgrade was led by Major Žarko Todorović from 1941 until his arrest in 1943.

Just like Rotterdam, which was devastated twice by both German and Allied bombing, Belgrade was bombed once more during World War II, this time by the Allies on 16 April 1944, killing at least 1,100 people. This bombing fell on the Orthodox Christian Easter. Most of the city remained under German occupation until 20 October 1944, when it was liberated by the Red Army and the Communist Yugoslav Partisans.

On 29 November 1945, Marshal Josip Broz Tito proclaimed the Federal People&#x27;s Republic of Yugoslavia in Belgrade (later renamed to Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on 7 April 1963).

===Socialist Yugoslavia===

When the war ended, the city was left with 11,500 demolished housing units. During the post-war period, Belgrade grew rapidly as the capital of the renewed Yugoslavia, developing as a major industrial centre.

In 1948, construction of New Belgrade started. In the late 1940s and 1950s, the new regime made a point of rebuilding Belgrade in a modernistic style inspired by Le Corbusier to show that Yugoslavia was in the forefront of progress. In 1958, Belgrade&#x27;s first television station began broadcasting. In 1961, Belgrade hosted the first and founding conference of the Non-Aligned Movement under Tito&#x27;s chairmanship. In 1962, Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport was built. In the 1960s, a number of prestige buildings were put up such as the parliament building, the Ušće Towers which served as the headquarters for the Central Committee of the League of Communists, and the Hotel Jugoslavija. An American journalist from the &quot;Washington Post&quot; newspaper wrote in 1967: &quot;Belgrade is a lively, frivolous, noisy, jam-packed city compared with the one I remember from twenty years ago&quot;.. In 1964, Tito embarked upon the policy of &quot;market socialism&quot; that allowed capitalism to co-exist with communism. As a result, Western visitors to Belgrade in the late 1960s were astonished to see that the main streets were dominated by gigantic and garish billboards promoting Western brands such as Coca-Cola, Volkswagen, Siemens and Pan Am, giving Belgrade a very Western feel. Likewise, the Belgradians in the 1960s were described as dressed very much in fashionable Western styles with visitors noting that many women had an obsession with having their hair bleached blonde. The German historian Marie-Jannine Calic wrote that in the 1960s Belgrade &quot;a vibrant hustle and bustle prevailed in the streets, squares, and numerous cafes.&quot; She also noted that the core of Belgrade had a very modern look, but that &quot;along the mighty boulevards huddled pathetic little stores selling cloth, metal goods and dishware next to the dingy workshops of shoemakers, silversmiths and candle makers&quot;. On the periphery of Belgrade, there was a semi-rural feel as chickens and cows wandered about the streets while the people lived in dire poverty, making their living as peddlers, wandering musicians, rag pickers, panhandlers, shoe shiners, scissor grinders, casual laborers and other marginal occupations. In 1968, major student protests led to several street clashes between students and the police. 

By 1969, the population of Belgrade passed the one million mark for the first time. The population increase was largely due to people moving from rural areas to Belgrade as it was estimated in 1969 that two of three Belgradians had been born in the countryside. The population increase in the 1960s imposed serious social strains as more people were moving to Belgrade faster than the pace of housing construction, leading a housing crisis. The 1961 Yugoslav census showed that an average of 2.5 people lived per one room in Belgrade compared to the average of 1.6 people per room in the rest of Yugoslavia. In 1965, it was estimated that there was a shortage of 50, 000 housing units in Belgrade, which led to many people to make illegal makeshift homes in shops, basements, laundry rooms and even elevator shafts while on the periphery of Belgrade people built wooden huts and cottages. The mayor of Belgrade, Branko Pešić, told a journalist in 1965: &quot;In the last seven or eight years, 20,000 to 30,000 people have come to Belgrade each year. That equals an entire small town...And all of these people find shelter somewhere, hole up someplace. Some get an apartment, but that is the smallest percentage of them. A great number are forced...to house in basement, in unhygienic apartments and barracks. And whoever has not yet seen this should definitely see what this looks like...Something like this doesn&#x27;t even exist in Africa&quot;. 

In 1972, Belgrade faced a smallpox outbreak, the last major outbreak of smallpox in Europe since World War II. Between October 1977 and March 1978, the city hosted the first major gathering of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe with the aim of implementing the Helsinki Accords from, while in 1980 Belgrade hosted the UNESCO General Conference. Josip Broz Tito died in May 1980 and his funeral in Belgrade was attended by high officials and state delegations from 128 of the 154 members of the United Nations from all over the world, based on which it became one of the largest funerals in history.

===Breakup of Yugoslavia===

On 9 March 1991, massive demonstrations led by Vuk Drašković were held in the city against Slobodan Milošević. According to various media outlets, there were between 100,000 and 150,000 people on the streets. Two people were killed, 203 were injured and 108 were arrested during the protests, and later that day tanks were deployed onto the streets to restore order. Many anti-war protests were held in Belgrade, with the largest protests being dedicated to solidarity with the victims from the besieged Sarajevo. Further anti-government protests were held in Belgrade from November 1996 to February 1997 against the same government after alleged electoral fraud in local elections. These protests brought Zoran Đinđić to power, the first mayor of Belgrade since World War II who did not belong to the League of Communists of Yugoslavia or its later offshoot, the Socialist Party of Serbia.

In 1999, during the Kosovo War, the NATO bombing campaign targeted a number a buildings in Belgrade. Among the sites bombed were some ministry buildings, the RTS building, hospitals, Hotel Jugoslavija, the Central Committee building, Avala Tower, and the Chinese embassy. Between 500 and 2,000 civilians were killed in Serbia and Montenegro as a result of the NATO bombings, of which 47 were killed in Belgrade. After the Yugoslav Wars, Serbia became home to the highest number of refugees and internally displaced persons in Europe, with more than a third of these refugees having settled in Belgrade.

After the 2000 presidential elections, Belgrade was the site of major public protests, with over half a million people taking part. These demonstrations resulted in the ousting of president Milošević as a part of the Otpor movement.

===Development===

In 2014, Belgrade Waterfront, an urban renewal project, was initiated by the Government of Serbia and its Emirati partner, Eagle Hills Properties. Around €3.5 billion was to be jointly invested by the Serbian government and their Emirati partners. The project includes office and luxury apartment buildings, five-star hotels, a shopping mall and the envisioned &#x27;Belgrade Tower&#x27;. The project is, however, quite controversial—there are a number of uncertainties regarding its funding, necessity, and its architecture&#x27;s arguable lack of harmony with the rest of the city.

In addition to Belgrade Waterfront, the city is under rapid development and reconstruction, especially in the area of Novi Beograd, where (as of 2020) apartment and office buildings were under construction to support the burgeoning Belgrade IT sector, now one of Serbia&#x27;s largest economic players. In September 2020, there were around 2000 active construction sites in Belgrade. The city budget for 2023 stood at 205,5 billion dinars (1.750 billion Euros). The budget for the city of Belgrade has been estimated to be more than 2 billion Euros for 2024.

==Geography==
===Topography===

Belgrade lies above sea level and is located at the confluence of the Danube and Sava rivers. The historical core of Belgrade, Kalemegdan, lies on the right banks of both rivers. Since the 19th century, the city has been expanding to the south and east; after World War II, New Belgrade was built on the left bank of the Sava river, connecting Belgrade with Zemun. Smaller, chiefly residential communities across the Danube, like Krnjača, Kotež and Borča, also merged with the city, while Pančevo, a heavily industrialised satellite city, remains separate. The city has an urban area of , while together with its metropolitan area it covers .

On the right bank of the Sava, central Belgrade has a hilly terrain, while the highest point of Belgrade proper is Torlak hill at . The mountains of Avala () and Kosmaj () lie south of the city. Across the Sava and Danube, the land is mostly flat, consisting of alluvial plains and loessial plateaus.

One of the characteristics of the city terrain is mass wasting. On the territory covered by the General Urban Plan there are 1,155 recorded mass wasting points, out of which 602 are active and 248 are labeled as &#x27;high risk&#x27;. They cover almost 30% of the city territory and include several types of mass wasting. Downhill creeps are located on the slopes above the rivers, mostly on the clay or loam soils, inclined between 7 and 20%. The most critical ones are in Karaburma, Zvezdara, Višnjica, Vinča and Ritopek, in the Danube valley, and Umka, and especially its neighbourhood of Duboko, in the Sava valley. They have moving and dormant phases, and some of them have been recorded for centuries. Less active downhill creep areas include the entire Terazije slope above the Sava (Kalemegdan, Savamala), which can be seen by the inclination of the Pobednik monument and the tower of the Cathedral Church, and the Voždovac section, between Banjica and Autokomanda.

Landslides encompass smaller areas, develop on the steep cliffs, sometimes being inclined up to 90%. They are mostly located in the artificial loess hills of Zemun: Gardoš, Ćukovac and Kalvarija.

However, the majority of the land movement in Belgrade, some 90%, is triggered by the construction works and faulty water supply system (burst pipes, etc.). The neighbourhood of Mirijevo is considered to be the most successful project of fixing the problem. During the construction of the neighbourhood from the 1970s, the terrain was systematically improved and the movement of the land is today completely halted.

===Climate===
Under the Köppen climate classification, Belgrade has a humid subtropical climate (&quot;Cfa&quot;) bordering on a humid continental climate (&quot;Dfa&quot;) with four seasons and uniformly spread precipitation. Monthly averages range from in January to in July, with an annual mean of . There are, on average, 44.6 days a year when the maximum temperature is at or above , and 95 days when the temperature is above , On the other hand, Belgrade experiences 52.1 days per year in which the minimum temperature falls below , with 13.8 days having a maximum temperature below freezing as well. Belgrade receives about of precipitation a year, with late spring being wettest. The average annual number of sunny hours is 2,020.

Belgrade may experience thunderstorms at any time of the year, experiencing 31 days annually, but it&#x27;s much more common in spring and summer months. Hail is rare and occurs exclusively in spring or summer.

The highest officially recorded temperature in Belgrade was on 24 July 2007, while on the other end, the lowest temperature was on 10 January 1893. The highest recorded value of daily precipitation was on 15 May 2014.
==Administration==

Belgrade is a separate territorial unit in Serbia, with its own autonomous city authority. The Assembly of the City of Belgrade has 110 members, elected on four-year terms. 
A 13-member City Council, elected by the Assembly and presided over by the mayor and his deputy, has the control and supervision of the city administration, which manages day-to-day administrative affairs. It is divided into 14 Secretariats, each having a specific portfolio such as traffic or health care, and several professional services, agencies and institutes.

The 2024 Belgrade City Assembly election was won by the Serbian Progressive Party, which formed a ruling coalition with the Socialist Party of Serbia. Between 2004 and 2013, the Democratic Party was in power. Due to the importance of Belgrade in political and economic life of Serbia, the office of city&#x27;s mayor is often described as the third most important office in the state, after the President of the Government and the President of the Republic.

As the capital city, Belgrade is seat of all Serbian state authorities – executive, legislative, judiciary, and the headquarters of almost all national political parties as well as 75 diplomatic missions. This includes the National Assembly, the Presidency, the Government of Serbia and all the ministries, Supreme Court and the Constitutional Court.

===Municipalities===

The city is divided into 17 municipalities. Previously, they were classified into 10 urban (lying completely or partially within borders of the city proper) and 7 suburban municipalities, whose centres are smaller towns. With the new 2010 City statute, they were all given equal status, with the proviso that suburban ones (except Surčin) have certain autonomous powers, chiefly related with construction, infrastructure and public utilities.

Most of the municipalities are situated on the southern side of the Danube and Sava rivers, in the Šumadija region. Three municipalities (Zemun, Novi Beograd, and Surčin), are on the northern bank of the Sava in the Syrmia region and the municipality of Palilula, spanning the Danube, is in both the Šumadija and Banat regions.


==Demographics==
According to the 2022 census, the statistical city proper has a population of 1,197,714, the urban area (with adjacent urban settlements like Borča, Ovča, Surčin, etc.) has 1,383,875 inhabitants, while the population of the administrative area of the City of Belgrade (often equated with Belgrade&#x27;s metropolitan area) stands at 1,681,405 people. However, Belgrade&#x27;s metropolitan area has not been defined, either statistically or administratively, and it sprawls into the neighboring municipalities like Pančevo, Opovo, Pećinci or Stara Pazova.

Belgrade is home to many ethnicities from across the former Yugoslavia and the wider Balkans region. The main ethnic group comprising over 86% of the metropolitan population of Belgrade are Serbs (1,449,241). Some significant minorities include Roma (23,160), Yugoslavs (10,499), Gorani (5,249), Montenegrins (5,134), Russians (4,659), Croats (4,554), Macedonians (4,293), and ethnic Muslims (2,718). Many people came to the city as economic migrants from smaller towns and the countryside, while tens of thousands arrived as refugees from Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo, as a result of the Yugoslav wars of the 1990s. The most recent wave of immigration following the Russian invasion of Ukraine saw tens of thousands of Russians and Ukrainians register their residence in Serbia, majority of them in Belgrade.

Between 10,000 and 20,000 Chinese people are estimated to live in Belgrade and, since their arrival in the mid-1990s, Block 70 in New Belgrade has been known colloquially as the Chinese quarter. Many Middle Easterners, mainly from Syria, Iran, Jordan and Iraq, arrived in order to pursue their studies during the 1970s and 1980s, and have remained in the city. Throughout the 19th and early 20th century, small communities of Aromanians, Czechs, Greeks, Germans, Hungarians, Jews, Turks, Armenians and Russian White émigrés also existed in Belgrade. There are two suburban settlements with significant minority population today: Ovča and the village of Boljevci, both with about one quarter of their population being Romanians and Slovaks, respectively. Immigration to Belgrade from other countries accelerates. In 2023, more than 30,000 foreign workers got working and residence permits only in Belgrade.
Although there are several historic religious communities in Belgrade, the religious makeup of the city is relatively homogeneous. The Serbian Orthodox community is by far the largest, with 1,475,168 adherents. There are also 31,914 Muslims, 13,720 Roman Catholics, and 3,128 Protestants.

There once was a significant Jewish community in Belgrade but, following the World War II Nazi occupation of the city and subsequent Jewish emigration, their numbers have fallen from over 10,000 to just 295. Belgrade also used to have one of the largest Buddhist colonies in Europe outside Russia when some 400 mostly Buddhist Kalmyks settled on the outskirts of Belgrade following the Russian Civil War. The first Buddhist temple in Europe was built in Belgrade in 1929. Most of them moved away after the World War II and their temple, Belgrade pagoda, was abandoned, claimed by the new Communist regime and eventually demolished.

==Economy==


Belgrade is the financial centre of Serbia and Southeast Europe, with a total of of office space. It is also home to the country&#x27;s Central Bank. 750,550 people are employed (July 2020) in 120,286 companies, 76,307 enterprises and 50,000 shops. The City of Belgrade itself owns of rentable office space.

As of 2019, Belgrade contained 31.4% of Serbia&#x27;s employed population and generated over 40.4% of its GDP. City GDP in 2023 at purchasing power parity is estimated at $73 bn USD, which is $43,400 per capita in terms of purchasing power parity. Nominal GDP in 2023 is estimated at $31.5 bn USD, which is $18.700 per capita.

New Belgrade is the country&#x27;s Central business district and one of Southeastern Europe&#x27;s financial centres. It offers a range of facilities, such as hotels, congress halls (e.g. Sava Centar), Class A and B office buildings, and business parks (e.g. Airport City Belgrade). Over of land is under construction in New Belgrade, with the value of planned construction over the next three years estimated at over 1.5 billion euros. The Belgrade Stock Exchange is also located in New Belgrade.

With 6,924 companies in the IT sector (), Belgrade is one of the foremost information technology hubs in Southeast Europe. Microsoft&#x27;s Development Center Serbia, located in Belgrade, was, at the time of its establishment, the fifth such programme on the globe. Many global IT companies choose Belgrade as their European or regional centre of operations, such as Asus, Intel, Dell, Huawei, Nutanix, NCR etc. The most famous Belgrade IT startups, among others, are Nordeus, ComTrade Group, MicroE, FishingBooker, and Endava. IT facilities in the city include the Mihajlo Pupin Institute and the ILR, as well as the brand-new IT Park Zvezdara. Many prominent IT innovators began their careers in Belgrade, including Voja Antonić and Veselin Jevrosimović.

In December 2021, the average Belgrade monthly net salary stood at 94,463 RSD ($946) in net terms, with the gross equivalent at 128,509 RSD ($1288), while in New Belgrade CBD is Euros 1,059. 88% of the city&#x27;s households owned a computer, 89% had a broadband internet connection and 93% had pay television services.

According to Cushman &amp; Wakefield, Knez Mihajlova street is 36th most expensive retail street in the world in terms of renting commercial space.

As an example of the attractiveness of the city and its importance in this part of the continent is the fact that numerous multinational companies choose precisely Belgrade to place its local headquarters. An early example of this was the multinational food-giant McDonald&#x27;s opening its first ever restaurant in a communist country in Europe in Belgrade.

==Culture==

According to the BBC, Belgrade is one of the five most creative cities in the world.
Belgrade hosts many annual international cultural events, including the Film Festival, Theatre Festival, Summer Festival, BEMUS, Belgrade Early Music Festival, Book Fair, Belgrade Choir Festival, Eurovision Song Contest 2008, and the Beer Fest. In 2022 Belgrade was also home to the Europride event, even though the Serbian president, Aleksandar Vučić, tried to cancel it. The Nobel Prize winning author Ivo Andrić wrote his most famous work, &quot;The Bridge on the Drina&quot;, in Belgrade. Other prominent Belgrade authors include Branislav Nušić, Miloš Crnjanski, Borislav Pekić, Milorad Pavić and Meša Selimović. The most internationally prominent artists from Belgrade are Charles Simic, Marina Abramović and Milovan Destil Marković.

Most of Serbia&#x27;s film industry is based in Belgrade. FEST is an annual film festival that has been held since 1971. Through 2013, the festival had been attended by four million people and had presented almost 4,000 films.

The city was one of the main centres of the Yugoslav new wave in the 1980s: VIS Idoli, Ekatarina Velika, Šarlo Akrobata and Električni Orgazam were all from Belgrade. Other notable Belgrade rock acts include Riblja Čorba, Bajaga i Instruktori and Partibrejkers. Today, it is the centre of the Serbian hip hop scene, with acts such as Beogradski Sindikat, Bad Copy, Škabo, Marčelo, and most of the Bassivity Music stable hailing from or living in the city. There are numerous theatres, the most prominent of which are National Theatre, Theatre on Terazije, Yugoslav Drama Theatre, Zvezdara Theatre, and Atelier 212. The Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts is also based in Belgrade, as well as the National Library of Serbia. Other major libraries include the Belgrade City Library and the Belgrade University Library. Belgrade&#x27;s two opera houses are: National Theatre and Madlenianum Opera House. Following the victory of Serbia&#x27;s representative Marija Šerifović at the Eurovision Song Contest 2007, Belgrade hosted the Contest in 2008.

There are more than 1650 public sculptures in Belgrade.

===Museums===
The most prominent museum in Belgrade is the National Museum, founded in 1844 and reconstructed from 2003 until June 2018. The museum houses a collection of more than 400,000 exhibits (over 5600 paintings and 8400 drawings and prints, including many foreign masters like Bosch, Juan de Flandes, Titian, Tintoretto, Rubens, Cézanne, G.B. Tiepolo, Renoir, Monet, Lautrec, Matisse, Picasso, Gauguin, Chagall, Van Gogh, Mondrian etc.) and also the famous Miroslav&#x27;s Gospel. The Ethnographic Museum, established in 1901, contains more than 150,000 items showcasing the rural and urban culture of the Balkans, particularly the countries of former Yugoslavia.

The Museum of Contemporary Art was the first contemporary art museum in Yugoslavia and one of the first museums of this type in the world. Following its foundation in 1965, has amassed a collection of more than 8,000 works from art produced across the former Yugoslavia. The collection represents some of the most notable Serbian and Yugoslav 20th century artists, including Sava Šumanović, Nadežda Petrović, Petar Dobrović, Milena Pavlović-Barili, Milan Konjović, Zora Petrović, Đorđe Andrejević Kun, Vladimir Veličković, Petar Lubarda, Krsto Hegedušić, Mića Popović, Ivan Meštrović, Antun Augustinčić, Toma Rosandić, Olga Jevrić, Olga Jančić, Lojze Dolinar, among others. The museum was closed in 2007, but has since been reopened in 2017 to focus on the modern as well as on the Yugoslav art scenes. Artist Marina Abramović, who was born in Belgrade, held an exhibition in the Museum of Contemporary Art, which the &quot;New York Times&quot; described as one of the most important cultural happenings in the world in 2019. The exhibition was seen by almost 100,000 visitors. Marina Abramović made a stage speech and performance in front of 20,000 people. In the heart of Belgrade you can also find the Museum of Applied Arts, a museum that has been awarded for the Institution of the Year 2016 by ICOM.

The Military Museum, established in 1878 in Kalemegdan, houses a wide range of more than 25,000 military objects dating from the prehistoric to the medieval to the modern eras. Notable items include Turkish and oriental arms, national banners, and Yugoslav Partisan regalia.

The Museum of Aviation in Belgrade located near Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport has more than 200 aircraft, of which about 50 are on display, and a few of which are the only surviving examples of their type, such as the Fiat G.50. This museum also displays parts of shot down US and NATO aircraft, such as the F-117 and F-16.

The Nikola Tesla Museum, founded in 1952, preserves the personal items of Nikola Tesla, the inventor after whom the Tesla unit was named. It holds around 160,000 original documents and around 5,700 personal other items including his urn. The last of the major Belgrade museums is the Museum of Vuk and Dositej, which showcases the lives, work and legacy of Vuk Stefanović Karadžić and Dositej Obradović, the 19th century reformer of the Serbian literary language and the first Serbian Minister of Education, respectively. Belgrade also houses the Museum of African Art, founded in 1977, which has a large collection of art from West Africa.

With around 95,000 copies of national and international films, the Yugoslav Film Archive is the largest in the region and among the 10 largest archives in the world. The institution also operates the Museum of Yugoslav Film Archive, with movie theatre and exhibition hall. The archive&#x27;s long-standing storage problems were finally solved in 2007, when a new modern depository was opened. The Yugoslav Film Archive also exhibits original Charlie Chaplin&#x27;s stick and one of the first movies by Auguste and Louis Lumière.

The Belgrade City Museum moved into a new building in downtown in 2006. The museum hosts a range of collections covering the history of urban life since prehistory. Belgrade City Museum also includes additional sites, such as Ivo Andrić Museum, Princess Ljubica&#x27;s Residence, Paja Jovanović Museum, Jovan Cvijić Museum. The Museum of Yugoslavia has collections from the Yugoslav era. Beside paintings, the most valuable are Moon rocks donated by Apollo 11 crew Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin and Michael Collins while visiting Belgrade in 1969 and from mission Apollo 17 donated by Richard Nixon in 1971. The museum also houses Joseph Stalin&#x27;s sabre with 260 brilliants and diamonds, donated by Stalin himself. The Museum of Science and Technology, founded in 1989, moved to the building of the first city&#x27;s power plant in Dorćol in 2005.

===Architecture===
Belgrade has wildly varying architecture, from the centre of Zemun, typical of a Central European town, to the more modern architecture and spacious layout of New Belgrade.

The oldest architecture is found in Kalemegdan Park. Outside of Kalemegdan, the oldest buildings date only from the 18th century, due to its geographic position and frequent wars and destructions.
The oldest public structure in Belgrade is a nondescript Turkish türbe, while the oldest house is a modest clay house on Dorćol, from late 18th century. Western influence began in the 19th century, when the city completely transformed from an oriental town to the contemporary architecture of the time, with influences from neoclassicism, romanticism, and academic art. Serbian architects took over the development from foreign builders in the late 19th century, producing the National Theatre, Stari Dvor, Cathedral Church and later, in the early 20th century, the House of the National Assembly and National Museum, influenced by art nouveau. Elements of Serbo-Byzantine Revival are present in buildings such as Vuk Foundation House, old Post Office in Kosovska street, and sacral architecture, such as St. Mark&#x27;s Church (based on the Gračanica monastery), and the Church of Saint Sava.
In the socialist period, housing was built quickly and cheaply for the huge influx of people fleeing the countryside following World War II, sometimes resulting in the brutalist architecture of the &quot;blokovi&quot; (&#x27;blocks&#x27;) of New Belgrade; a socrealism trend briefly ruled, resulting in buildings like the Trade Union Hall. However, in the mid-1950s, modernist trends took over, and still dominate the Belgrade architecture.
Belgrade has the second oldest sewer system in Europe. The Clinical Centre of Serbia spreads over 34 hectares and consists of about 50 buildings, while also has 3,150 beds considered to be the highest number in Europe, and among highest in the world.

===Tourism===

Lying on the main artery connecting Europe and Asia, as well as, eventually, the Orient Express, Belgrade has been a popular place for travellers through the centuries. 
In 1843, on Dubrovačka Street (today Kralj Petar Street ), Serbia&#x27;s &quot;knez&quot; Mihailo Obrenović built a large edifice which became the first hotel in Belgrade: &quot;Kod jelena&quot; (&#x27;at the deer&#x27;s&#x27;), in the neighbourhood of Kosančićev Venac. Many criticised the move at the time due to the cost and the size of the building, but it soon became the gathering point of the Principality&#x27;s wealthiest citizens. Colloquially, the building was also referred to as the &quot;staro zdanje&quot;, or the &#x27;old edifice&#x27;. It remained a hotel until 1903 before being demolished in 1938. After the &quot;staro zdanje&quot;, numerous hotels were built in the second half of the 19th century: &quot;Nacional&quot; and &quot;Grand&quot;, also in Kosančićev Venac, &quot;Srpski Kralj&quot;, &quot;Srpska Kruna&quot;, &quot;Grčka Kraljica&quot; near Kalemegdan, &quot;Balkan&quot; and &quot;Pariz&quot; in Terazije, &quot;London&quot;, etc.
As Belgrade became connected via steamboats and railway (after 1884), the number of visitors grew and new hotels were opened with luxurious commodities. In Savamala, the hotels &quot;Bosna&quot; and &quot;Bristol&quot; were opened. Other hotels included &quot;Solun&quot; and &quot;Orient&quot;, which was built near the Financial Park. Tourists who arrived by the Orient Express mostly stayed at the Petrograd Hotel in Wilson Square. Hotel &quot;Srpski Kralj&quot;, at the corner of Uzun Mirkova and Pariska Streets was considered the best hotel in Belgrade during the Interbellum. It was destroyed during World War II.

The historic areas and buildings of Belgrade are among the city&#x27;s premier attractions. They include Skadarlija, the National Museum and adjacent National Theatre, Zemun, Nikola Pašić Square, Terazije, Students&#x27; Square, the Kalemegdan Fortress, Knez Mihailova Street, the Parliament, the Church of Saint Sava, and the Old Palace. On top of this, there are many parks, monuments, museums, cafés, restaurants and shops on both sides of the river. The hilltop Avala Monument and Avala Tower offer views over the city. According to &quot;The Guardian&quot;, Dorćol is the one of top ten coolest suburbs in Europe.
The elite neighbourhood of Dedinje is situated near the Topčider and Košutnjak parks. The Dedinje Royal Compound which houses the former royal residences of (Kraljevski Dvor and Beli Dvor) is open for visitors. The palace has many valuable artworks. Nearby, Josip Broz Tito&#x27;s mausoleum, called &quot;The House of Flowers&quot;, documents the life of the former Yugoslav president.

Ada Ciganlija is a former island on the Sava River, and Belgrade&#x27;s biggest sports and recreational complex. Today it is connected with the right bank of the Sava via two causeways, creating an artificial lake. It is the most popular destination for Belgraders during the city&#x27;s hot summers. There are of long beaches and sports facilities for various sports including golf, football, basketball, volleyball, rugby union, baseball, and tennis. During summer there are between 200,000 and 300,000 bathers daily.

Belgrade is also known for tourist activities involving extreme sports such as bungee jumping, water skiing, and paintballing. There are numerous trails on the island, where it is possible to ride a bike, go for a walk, or go jogging. Apart from Ada, Belgrade has total of 16 islands on the rivers, many still unused. Among them, the Great War Island, at the confluence of Sava, stands out as an oasis of unshattered wildlife (especially birds). These areas, along with nearby Small War Island, are protected by the city&#x27;s government as a nature preserve. There are 37 protected natural resources in the Belgrade urban area, among which eight are geo-heritage sites, i.e. Straževica profile, Mašin Majdan-Topčider, Profile at the Kalemegdan Fortress, Abandoned quarry in Barajevo, Karagača valley, Artesian well in Ovča, Kapela loess profile, and Lake in Sremčica. Other 29 places are biodiversity sites.

Tourist income in 2016 amounted to nearly half a billion euros; with a visit of almost a million registered tourists. Of those, in 2019 more than 100,000 tourists arrived by 742 river cruisers. Average annual growth is between 13% and 14%.

As of 2018, there are three officially designated camp grounds in Belgrade. The oldest one is located in Batajnica, along the Batajnica Road. Named &quot;Dunav&quot;, it is one of the most visited campsites in the country. The second one is situated within the complex of the ethno-household &quot;Zornić&#x27;s House&quot; in the village of Baćevac, while the third is located in Ripanj, on the slopes of Avala mountain. In 2017 some 15,000 overnights were recorded in camps.

Belgrade is a common stop on the Rivers Route, European cycling route known as &quot;Danube Bike Trail&quot; in Serbia as well as on the Sultans Trail, a long-distance hiking footpath between Vienna and Istanbul.

===Nightlife===
Belgrade has a reputation for vibrant nightlife; many clubs that are open until dawn can be found throughout the city. The most recognisable nightlife features of Belgrade are the barges (&quot;splav&quot;) spread along the banks of the Sava and Danube Rivers.

Many weekend visitors—particularly from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Slovenia—prefer Belgrade nightlife to that of their own capitals due to its perceived friendly atmosphere, plentiful clubs and bars, cheap drinks, lack of significant language barriers, and a lack of night life regulation.
One of the most famous sites for alternative cultural happenings in the city is the SKC (Student Cultural Centre), located right across from Belgrade&#x27;s highrise landmark, the Belgrade Palace tower. Concerts featuring famous local and foreign bands are often held at the centre. SKC is also the site of various art exhibitions, as well as public debates and discussions.

A more traditional Serbian nightlife experience, accompanied by traditional music known as &quot;Starogradska&quot; (roughly translated as &quot;Old Town Music&quot;), typical of northern Serbia&#x27;s urban environments, is most prominent in Skadarlija, the city&#x27;s old bohemian neighbourhood where the poets and artists of Belgrade gathered in the 19th and early 20th centuries. Skadar Street (the centre of Skadarlija) and the surrounding neighbourhood are lined with some of Belgrade&#x27;s best and oldest traditional restaurants (called kafanas in Serbian), which date back to that period. At one end of the neighbourhood stands Belgrade&#x27;s oldest beer brewery, founded in the first half of the 19th century. One of the city&#x27;s oldest kafanas is the Znak pitanja (&#x27;?&#x27;).

&quot;The Times&quot; reported that Europe&#x27;s best nightlife can be found in Belgrade. In the Lonely Planet &quot;1000 Ultimate Experiences&quot; Guide of 2009, Belgrade was placed at the 1st spot among the top 10 party cities in the world.

===Fashion and design===
Since 1996, semiannual (autumn/winter and spring/summer seasons) fashion weeks are held citywide. Numerous Serbian and foreign designers and fashion brands have their shows during Belgrade Fashion Week. The festival, which collaborates with London Fashion Week, has helped launch the international careers of local talents such as George Styler and Ana Ljubinković. British fashion designer Roksanda Ilinčić, who was born in the city, also frequently presents her runway shows in Belgrade.

In addition to fashion, there are two major design shows held in Belgrade every year which attract international architects and industrial designers such as Karim Rashid, Daniel Libeskind, Patricia Urquiola, and Konstantin Grcic. Both the Mikser Festival and Belgrade Design Week feature lectures, exhibits and competitions. Furthermore, international designers like Sacha Lakic, Ana Kraš, Bojana Sentaler, and Marek Djordjevic are originally from Belgrade.

==Media==
Belgrade is the most important media hub in Serbia. The city is home to the main headquarters of the national broadcaster Radio Television Serbia (RTS), which is a public service broadcaster. The most popular commercial broadcaster is RTV Pink, a Serbian media multinational, known for its popular entertainment programmes. One of the most popular commercial broadcasters is B92, another media company, which has its own TV station, radio station, and music and book publishing arms, as well as the most popular website on the Serbian internet. Other TV stations broadcasting from Belgrade include 1Prva (formerly &quot;Fox televizija&quot;), Nova, N1 and others which only cover the greater Belgrade municipal area, such as Studio B.

High-circulation daily newspapers published in Belgrade include , &quot;Blic&quot;, &quot;Alo!&quot;, &quot;Kurir&quot; and &quot;Danas&quot;. There are two sporting dailies, &quot;Sportski žurnal&quot; and &quot;Sport&quot;, and one economic daily, &quot;Privredni pregled&quot;. A new free distribution daily, &quot;24 sata&quot;, was founded in the autumn of 2006. Also, Serbian editions of licensed magazines such as &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot;, &quot;Elle&quot;, &quot;Cosmopolitan&quot;, &quot;National Geographic&quot;, &quot;Men&#x27;s Health&quot;, &quot;Grazia&quot; and others have their headquarters in the city.

==Sport and recreation==

There are approximately one-thousand sports facilities in Belgrade, many of which are capable of serving all levels of sporting events.

Ada Ciganlija island, with its lake and beaches, is one of the most important recreational areas in the city. With a total of 8 km beaches, and a variety of bars, cafés, restaurants and sport facilities, Ada Ciganlija attracts many visitors, especially in summertime.

Košutnjak Park Forest has numerous running and bike trails, sports facilities for a variety of sports, and indoor and outdoor pools. It is a popular destination that is located only 2 km from Ada Ciganlija.


During the 1960s and 1970s Belgrade held a number of major international events such as the first ever World Aquatics Championships in 1973, 1976 European Football Championship and 1973 European Cup Final, European Athletics Championships in 1962 and European Indoor Games in 1969, European Basketball Championships in 1961 and 1975, European Volleyball Championship for men and women in 1975 and World Amateur Boxing Championships in 1978.

Since the early 2000s Belgrade again hosts major sporting events nearly every year. Some of these include EuroBasket 2005, European Handball Championship (men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s) in 2012, World Handball Championship for women in 2013, European Volleyball Championships for men in 2005 for men and 2011 for women, the 2006 and 2016 European Water Polo Championship, the European Youth Olympic Festival 2007 and the 2009 Summer Universiade. More recently, Belgrade hosted European Athletics Indoor Championships in 2017 and the basketball EuroLeague Final Four tournaments in 2018 and 2022. Global and continental championships in other sports such as tennis, futsal, judo, karate, wrestling, rowing, kickboxing, table tennis, and chess have also been held in recent years.

The city is home to Serbia&#x27;s two biggest and most successful football clubs, Red Star Belgrade and Partizan Belgrade. Red Star won the UEFA Champions League (&quot;European Cup&quot;) in 1991, and Partizan was runner-up in 1966. The two major stadiums in Belgrade are &quot;Marakana&quot; (Red Star Stadium) and Partizan Stadium. The Eternal derby is between Red Star and Partizan.

With a capacity of 19,384 spectators,Belgrade Arena is one of the largest indoor arenas in Europe. It is used for major sporting events and large concerts. In May 2008, it was the venue for the 53rd Eurovision Song Contest.Aleksandar Nikolić Hall is the main venue of basketball clubs KK Partizan, the European champion of 1992, and KK Crvena Zvezda.
In recent years, Belgrade has also given rise to several world-class tennis players such as Ana Ivanovic, Jelena Janković and Novak Djokovic. Ivanovic and Djokovic are the first female and male Belgraders, respectively, to win Grand Slam singles titles and been ATP number 1 with Jelena Janković. The Serbian national team won the 2010 Davis Cup, beating the French team in the finals played in the Belgrade Arena.

The Belgrade Marathon is held annually since 1988. Belgrade was a candidate to host the 1992 and the 1996 Summer Olympic Games.

==Education==
Belgrade has two state universities and several private institutions of higher education. The University of Belgrade, founded in 1808 as a &quot;grande école&quot;, is the oldest institution of higher learning in Serbia. Having developed with much of the rest of the city in the 19th century, several university buildings are recognised as forming a constituent part of Belgrade&#x27;s architecture and cultural heritage. With enrolment numbers of nearly 90,000 students, the university is one of Europe&#x27;s largest.

The city is also home to 195 primary (elementary) schools and 85 secondary schools. The primary school system has 162 regular schools, 14 special schools, 15 art schools, and 4 adult schools, while the secondary school system has 51 vocational schools, 21 gymnasiums, 8 art schools and 5 special schools. The 230,000 pupils are managed by 22,000 employees in over 500 buildings, covering around .

==Transportation==

Belgrade has an extensive public transport system consisting of buses (118 urban lines and more than 300 suburban lines), trams (12 lines), trolleybuses (8 lines) and S-Train BG Voz (6 lines). Buses, trolleybuses and trams are run by GSP Beograd and SP Lasta in cooperation with private companies on some bus routes. The S-train network, BG Voz, run by city government in cooperation with Serbian Railways, is a part of the integrated transport system, and has three lines (Batajnica-Ovča and Ovča-Resnik and Belgrade centre-Mladenovac), with more announced. tickets may be purchased either via SMS or in physical paper form via the system. Daily connections link the capital to other towns in Serbia and many other European destinations through the city&#x27;s central bus station. Since January 2025 all public transport in Belgrade is free.

Beovoz was the suburban/commuter railway network that provided mass-transit services in the city, similar to Paris&#x27;s RER and Toronto&#x27;s GO Transit. The main usage of system was to connect the suburbs with the city centre. Beovoz was operated by Serbian Railways. However, this system was abolished back in 2013, mostly due to introduction of more efficient BG Voz. Belgrade is one of the last big European capitals and cities with over a million people to have no metro or subway or other rapid transit system. As of November 2021, the Belgrade Metro is currently under construction, which will have 2 lines. The first line is expected to be operational by August 2028.

The new Belgrade Centre railway station is the hub for almost all national and international trains. The high-speed rail that connects Belgrade with Novi Sad started its service on 19 March 2022. The extension towards Subotica and Budapest is under construction, and there are plans for a southwards extension towards Niš and North Macedonia.

The city is placed along the Pan-European corridors X and VII. The motorway system provides for easy access to Novi Sad and Budapest to the north, Niš to the south, and Zagreb to the west. Expressway is also toward Pančevo and new Expressway construction toward Obrenovac (Montenegro) is scheduled for March 2017. Belgrade bypass is connecting the E70 and E75 motorways and is under construction.

Situated at the confluence of two major rivers, the Danube and the Sava, Belgrade has 11 bridges, the most important of which are Branko&#x27;s Bridge, Gazela Bridge, Ada Bridge and Pupin Bridge, the first two of which connect the core of the city to New Belgrade. In addition, an &#x27;inner magistral semi-ring&#x27; is almost done and includes a new Ada bridge across the Sava river (opened in 2012) and a new Pupin bridge (opened in 2014) across the Danube river, which ease commuting within the city and unload traffic from the Gazela Bridge and Branko&#x27;s Bridge.

The Port of Belgrade is on the Danube, and allows the city to receive goods by river. The city is also served by Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport, west of the city centre, near Surčin. At its peak in 1986, almost 3 million passengers travelled through the airport, though that number dwindled to a trickle in the 1990s. Following renewed growth in 2000, the number of passengers reached approximately 2 million in 2004 and 2005, over 2.6 million passengers in 2008, reaching over 3 million passengers. A record with over 4 million passengers was broken in 2014, when Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport became the second fastest growing major airport in Europe. The numbers continued to grow steadily and the all-time peak of over 6 million passengers was reached in 2019.

==International relations==
===Twin towns – sister cities===

List of Belgrade&#x27;s sister and twin cities:
* Coventry, UK, since 1957
* Chicago, US, since 2005
* Ljubljana, Slovenia, since 2010
* Skopje, North Macedonia, since 2012
* Caruaru, Brazil, since 2010
* Shanghai, China, since 2018
* Banja Luka, Bosnia and Herzegovina, since 2020

===Partner cities===
Other friendships and cooperations, protocols, memorandums:

* Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, since 2018, Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation
* Rabat, Morocco, since 2017, Partnership and Cooperation Agreement
* Seoul, South Korea, since 2017, Memorandum of Understanding on Friendly Exchanges and Cooperation
* Astana, Kazakhstan, since 2016, Agreement on Cooperation
* Tehran, Iran, since 2016, Agreement on Cooperation
* Corfu, Greece, since 2010, Protocol on Cooperation
* Shenzhen, China, since 2009, Agreement on Cooperation
* Zagreb, Croatia, since 2003, Letter of Intent
* Kyiv, Ukraine, since 2002, Agreement on Cooperation
* Algiers, Algeria, since 1991 declaration of mutual interests
* Tel Aviv, Israel, since 1990, Agreement on Cooperation
* Bucharest, Romania, since 1999, Agreement on Cooperation
* Beijing, China, since 1980, Agreement on Cooperation
* Rome, Italy, since 1971, Agreement on Friendship and Cooperation
* Athens, Greece, since 1966, Agreement on Friendship and Cooperation
Some of the city&#x27;s municipalities are also twinned to small cities or districts of other big cities; for details see their respective articles.

Belgrade has received various domestic and international honours, including the French Légion d&#x27;honneur (proclaimed 21 December 1920; Belgrade is one of four cities outside France, alongside Liège, Luxembourg and Volgograd, to receive this honour), the Czechoslovak War Cross (awarded 8 October 1925), the Yugoslavian Order of the Karađorđe&#x27;s Star (awarded 18 May 1939) and the Yugoslavian Order of the People&#x27;s Hero (proclaimed on 20 October 1974, the 30th anniversary of the overthrow of Nazi German occupation during World War II). All of these decorations were received for the war efforts during World War I and World War II. In 2006, &quot;Financial Times&quot;&#x27; magazine &quot;Foreign Direct Investment&quot; awarded Belgrade the title of &quot;City of the Future of Southern Europe&quot;.

==See also==
*List of people from Belgrade
*List of cities and towns on the Danube River
*List of metropolitan areas in Europe

==Notes==

==References==
==Sources==
*
*
*
==External links==
*Tourist Organisation of Belgrade</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="0" end="8" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="16" end="23" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q210516" start="28" end="40" title="List of cities in Serbia" label="largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="44" end="50" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="73" end="83" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="91" end="95" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="100" end="106" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="143" end="158" title="Pannonian Basin" label="Pannonian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="167" end="183" title="Balkan Peninsula" label="Balkan Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="294" end="326" title="Balkans#Urbanization" label="major cities of Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q112274402" start="335" end="379" title="List of cities and towns on Danube river" label="third most populous city on the Danube river"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862380" start="405" end="451" title="List of oldest continuously inhabited cities" label="oldest continuously inhabited cities in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="517" end="523" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q831336" start="529" end="542" title="Vinča culture" label="Vinča culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q144964" start="617" end="623" title="Thracians" label="Thraco"/>
<link wikidata="Q212853" start="624" end="631" title="Dacians" label="Dacians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="672" end="677" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309687" start="712" end="720" title="Singidunum" label="Singidūn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362302" start="735" end="758" title="Roman Serbia" label="conquered by the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="778" end="786" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942" start="805" end="816" title="Town privileges" label="city rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="863" end="868" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="926" end="942" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="948" end="963" title="Frankish Empire" label="Frankish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="969" end="985" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="995" end="1013" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q615450" start="1047" end="1059" title="List of Serbian monarchs" label="Serbian king"/>
<link wikidata="Q290786" start="1060" end="1075" title="Stefan Dragutin of Serbia" label="Stefan Dragutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q878319" start="1119" end="1136" title="Serbian Despotate" label="Serbian Despotate"/>
<link wikidata="Q336531" start="1157" end="1173" title="Stefan Lazarević" label="Stefan Lazarević"/>
<link wikidata="Q342130" start="1198" end="1213" title="Đurađ Branković" label="Đurađ Branković"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1313" end="1327" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q244980" start="1339" end="1352" title="Siege of Belgrade (1456)" label="siege in 1456"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813999" start="1485" end="1504" title="Sanjak of Smederevo" label="Sanjak of Smederevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="1543" end="1551" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q786171" start="1615" end="1636" title="Ottoman–Habsburg wars" label="Ottoman–Habsburg wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092429" start="1653" end="1671" title="Serbian Revolution" label="Serbian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q189419" start="1734" end="1751" title="Zemun" label="Northern Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="1778" end="1786" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="1906" end="1943" title="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1950" end="1961" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="1991" end="2001" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985477" start="2011" end="2019" title="Creation of Yugoslavia" label="creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422929" start="2206" end="2218" title="primate city" label="primate city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293536" start="2241" end="2262" title="Administrative divisions of Serbia" label="administrative status"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="2503" end="2514" title="Global city" label="Global City"/>
<link wikidata="Q12752817" start="2540" end="2576" title="Clinical Centre of Serbia" label="University Clinical Centre of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q96389481" start="2613" end="2644" title="List of hospitals by capacity" label="largest capacities in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q330385" start="2650" end="2670" title="Church of Saint Sava" label="Church of Saint Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624973" start="2683" end="2716" title="List of largest Eastern Orthodox church buildings" label="largest Orthodox church buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q33277" start="2726" end="2740" title="Belgrade Arena" label="Belgrade Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623995" start="2753" end="2793" title="List of indoor arenas in Europe" label="largest capacity indoor arenas in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221264" start="2851" end="2882" title="Danube River Conference of 1948" label="Danube River Conference of 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="2894" end="2921" title="Non-Aligned Movement Summit" label="Non-Aligned Movement Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="2963" end="2967" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="2985" end="3008" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q10155" start="3010" end="3014" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q273469" start="3060" end="3093" title="FINA World Aquatics Championships" label="FINA World Aquatics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q210160" start="3095" end="3099" title="1973 World Aquatics Championships" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="3102" end="3111" title="UEFA European Championship" label="UEFA Euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q188548" start="3113" end="3117" title="UEFA Euro 1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q188158" start="3120" end="3138" title="Universiade" label="Summer Universiade"/>
<link wikidata="Q873729" start="3140" end="3144" title="2009 Summer Universiade" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q193141" start="3150" end="3160" title="EuroBasket" label="EuroBasket"/>
<link wikidata="Q76562" start="3174" end="3178" title="EuroBasket 1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q425751" start="3180" end="3184" title="EuroBasket 1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q750083" start="3186" end="3190" title="EuroBasket 2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q108084471" start="3273" end="3282" title="Expo 2027" label="Expo 2027"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142470" start="3315" end="3334" title="Lithic reduction" label="Chipped stone tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q189419" start="3344" end="3349" title="Zemun" label="Zemun"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="3402" end="3418" title="hunter-gatherer" label="nomadic foragers"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="3426" end="3438" title="Palaeolithic" label="Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="3443" end="3453" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q259118" start="3487" end="3506" title="Mousterian" label="Mousterian industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="3520" end="3532" title="Neanderthals" label="Neanderthals"/>
<link wikidata="Q221901" start="3560" end="3571" title="Aurignacian" label="Aurignacian"/>
<link wikidata="Q756905" start="3576" end="3586" title="Gravettian" label="Gravettian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="3771" end="3780" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483547" start="3781" end="3797" title="Starčevo culture" label="Starčevo culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068137" start="3931" end="3939" title="Starčevo" label="Starčevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q831336" start="3983" end="3996" title="Vinča culture" label="Vinča culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560333" start="4150" end="4165" title="Vinča-Belo Brdo" label="Vinča-Belo Brdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862380" start="4247" end="4283" title="List of cities by time of continuous habitation" label="settlements by continuous habitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q831336" start="4412" end="4425" title="Lady of Vinča" label="Lady of Vinča"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="4446" end="4463" title="Copper Age" label="copper metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18175774" start="4481" end="4494" title="proto-writing" label="proto-writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="4523" end="4528" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="4537" end="4544" title="Minoans" label="Minoans"/>
<link wikidata="Q20818855" start="4558" end="4577" title="Old European script" label="Old European script"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="4923" end="4927" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="4932" end="4938" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q176758" start="5017" end="5022" title="Jason" label="Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q165510" start="5031" end="5040" title="Argonauts" label="Argonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211873" start="5099" end="5118" title="Prehistory of Southeastern Europe" label="Paleo-Balkan tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q144964" start="5134" end="5143" title="Thracians" label="Thracians"/>
<link wikidata="Q212853" start="5152" end="5159" title="Dacians" label="Dacians"/>
<link wikidata="Q830912" start="5303" end="5318" title="Gallic invasion of Balkans" label="Celtic invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q540432" start="5334" end="5343" title="Scordisci" label="Scordisci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="5500" end="5509" title="Roman Empire" label="romanised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309687" start="5516" end="5526" title="Singidunum" label="Singidunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q213468" start="5616" end="5626" title="municipium" label="municipium"/>
<link wikidata="Q756780" start="5694" end="5701" title="Colonia (Roman)" label="colonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="5786" end="5801" title="Roman Emperor" label="Emperor of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="5802" end="5815" title="Constantine I" label="Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="5831" end="5852" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q129259" start="5882" end="5889" title="Naissus" label="Naissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="6075" end="6087" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="6117" end="6144" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="traditional Roman religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q33941" start="6167" end="6186" title="Julian the Apostate" label="Julian the Apostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="6239" end="6255" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q189419" start="6312" end="6328" title="Zemun" label="Taurunum (Zemun)"/>
<link wikidata="Q36724" start="6456" end="6470" title="Attila the Hun" label="Attila the Hun"/>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="6496" end="6515" title="Theodoric the Great" label="Theodoric the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="6574" end="6584" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q201706" start="6619" end="6625" title="Gepids" label="Gepids"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="6726" end="6732" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q753824" start="6737" end="6746" title="Illyricum (Roman province)" label="Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="6811" end="6816" title="Avars (Carpathians)" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q45115" start="6824" end="6831" title="Bayan I" label="Bayan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q463903" start="6960" end="6984" title="De Administrando Imperio" label="De Administrando Imperio"/>
<link wikidata="Q25393785" start="7004" end="7015" title="White Serbs" label="White Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q335954" start="7086" end="7095" title="strategos" label="strategos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41852" start="7209" end="7218" title="Heraclius" label="Heraclius"/>
<link wikidata="Q276527" start="7238" end="7250" title="Khan Omurtag" label="Khan Omurtag"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="7428" end="7443" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="Bulgarian ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q311057" start="7444" end="7451" title="Boris I" label="Boris I"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="7741" end="7747" title="Danube Bulgar Khanate" label="Bulgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="7845" end="7861" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="7876" end="7894" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="7904" end="7920" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41833" start="7922" end="7930" title="Basil II" label="Basil II"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="8010" end="8015" title="First Crusade" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q51654" start="8024" end="8038" title="Second Crusade" label="Second Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="8078" end="8091" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="8093" end="8113" title="Frederick Barbarossa" label="Frederick Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="8130" end="8139" title="Third Crusade" label="crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q290786" start="8168" end="8183" title="Stefan Dragutin of Serbia" label="Stefan Dragutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q158038" start="8241" end="8261" title="Stephen V of Hungary" label="Stephen V of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412664" start="8308" end="8325" title="Kingdom of Syrmia" label="Kingdom of Syrmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q615450" start="8444" end="8456" title="List of Serbian monarchs" label="Serbian king"/>
<link wikidata="Q939570" start="8506" end="8520" title="Battle of Maritsa" label="Maritsa (1371)"/>
<link wikidata="Q179288" start="8525" end="8544" title="Battle of Kosovo" label="Kosovo field (1389)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="8610" end="8624" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q878319" start="8687" end="8704" title="Serbian Despotate" label="Serbian Despotate"/>
<link wikidata="Q336531" start="8762" end="8778" title="Stefan Lazarević" label="Stefan Lazarević"/>
<link wikidata="Q310197" start="8806" end="8825" title="Lazar Hrebeljanović" label="Lazar Hrebeljanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443649" start="8897" end="8916" title="Despot Stefan Tower" label="Despot&amp;#x27;s tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q342130" start="9266" end="9281" title="Đurađ Branković" label="Đurađ Branković"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="9309" end="9323" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Hungarian king"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588696" start="9330" end="9339" title="Smederevo fortress" label="Smederevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q878319" start="9407" end="9424" title="Serbian Despotate" label="Serbian Despotate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12756567" start="9478" end="9509" title="Siege of Belgrade (1440)" label="unsuccessfully besieged in 1440"/>
<link wikidata="Q244980" start="9633" end="9652" title="Siege of Belgrade (1456)" label="besieged it in 1456"/>
<link wikidata="Q242688" start="9711" end="9723" title="John Hunyadi" label="John Hunyadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q244980" start="9760" end="9769" title="noon bell" label="noon bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q160369" start="9787" end="9805" title="Pope Callixtus III" label="Pope Callixtus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="9909" end="9916" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="10052" end="10076" title="Suleiman the Magnificent" label="Suleiman the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="10243" end="10251" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734907" start="10298" end="10313" title="Belgrade forest" label="Belgrade forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813999" start="10350" end="10370" title="Pashalik of Belgrade" label="Pashalik of Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="10515" end="10529" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q527449" start="10555" end="10575" title="Ottoman architecture" label="Ottoman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q205653" start="10641" end="10649" title="Oriental" label="Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153261" start="10680" end="10694" title="Banat Uprising" label="Serb rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811" start="10740" end="10752" title="Grand vizier" label="Grand Vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q717115" start="10753" end="10764" title="Sinan Pasha" label="Sinan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="10777" end="10782" title="relic" label="relic"/>
<link wikidata="Q138465" start="10787" end="10797" title="Saint Sava" label="Saint Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q962949" start="10828" end="10842" title="Vračar plateau" label="Vračar plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q330385" start="10869" end="10889" title="church of Saint Sava" label="church of Saint Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="10944" end="10953" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q699902" start="10967" end="10976" title="Siege of Belgrade (1688)" label="1688–1690"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603851" start="10978" end="10987" title="Kingdom of Serbia (1718–39)" label="1717–1739"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509870" start="10989" end="10998" title="Siege of Belgrade (1789)" label="1789–1791"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="11015" end="11033" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q57628" start="11034" end="11055" title="Maximilian II Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria" label="Maximilian of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q152428" start="11060" end="11075" title="Prince Eugene of Savoy" label="Eugene of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="11081" end="11094" title="field marshal" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q440276" start="11095" end="11124" title="Baron Ernst Gideon von Laudon" label="Baron Ernst Gideon von Laudon"/>
<link wikidata="Q470265" start="11276" end="11300" title="Great Serbian Migrations" label="Great Serbian Migrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278525" start="11354" end="11372" title="Serbian Patriarchs" label="Serbian Patriarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="11471" end="11480" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="11485" end="11493" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219760" start="11696" end="11702" title="bazaar" label="bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q368689" start="11883" end="11905" title="First Serbian Uprising" label="First Serbian Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q18871" start="12197" end="12202" title="Ottoman Porte" label="Porte"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851282" start="12485" end="12502" title="Milenko Stojković" label="Milenko Stojković"/>
<link wikidata="Q243585" start="12667" end="12690" title="Second Serbian Uprising" label="Second Serbian Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="13200" end="13213" title="Neoclassicism" label="neoclassicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="13218" end="13225" title="baroque" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265998" start="13299" end="13326" title="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Belgrade" label="St Michael&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="13478" end="13489" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192068" start="13656" end="13667" title="Eclecticism" label="eclecticist"/>
<link wikidata="Q434252" start="13737" end="13754" title="Mihailo Obrenović" label="Mihailo Obrenović"/>
<link wikidata="Q684030" start="13780" end="13802" title="Principality of Serbia" label="Principality of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167394" start="13808" end="13818" title="Kragujevac" label="Kragujevac"/>
<link wikidata="Q12957594" start="14534" end="14584" title="Exodus of Muslims from Serbia (1862)" label="disappearance of the city&amp;#x27;s Muslim population"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412616" start="14826" end="14849" title="Čukur Fountain incident" label="Čukur Fountain incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q599868" start="15057" end="15067" title="Kalemegdan" label="Kalemegdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11031141" start="15307" end="15325" title="Emilijan Josimović" label="Emilijan Josimović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256511" start="15504" end="15513" title="grid plan" label="grid plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970746" start="16429" end="16448" title="Anka Konstantinović" label="Anka Konstantinović"/>
<link wikidata="Q684030" start="16512" end="16524" title="Principality of Serbia" label="Principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="16590" end="16607" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Kingdom of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q129259" start="16821" end="16824" title="Niš" label="Niš"/>
<link wikidata="Q189419" start="17103" end="17108" title="Zemun" label="Zemun"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="17134" end="17149" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q55965" start="17304" end="17320" title="Auguste and Louis Lumière" label="Lumière brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q159211" start="17680" end="17696" title="Austro-Hungarian Navy" label="Austro-Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q137823" start="17697" end="17705" title="Monitor (warship)" label="monitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q682645" start="17764" end="17785" title="Austro-Hungarian Army" label="Austro-Hungarian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q93364" start="17800" end="17814" title="Oskar Potiorek" label="Oskar Potiorek"/>
<link wikidata="Q841559" start="17865" end="17879" title="Serbian Campaign (World War I)" label="Serbian troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q313133" start="17894" end="17908" title="Radomir Putnik" label="Radomir Putnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q313422" start="18014" end="18020" title="German Army (German Empire)" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q76909" start="18076" end="18096" title="August von Mackensen" label="August von Mackensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="18166" end="18179" title="French Army" label="French troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q360859" start="18229" end="18258" title="Louis Franchet d&amp;#x27;Espèrey" label="Louis Franchet d&amp;#x27;Espèrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="18273" end="18305" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="Crown Prince Alexander of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="18388" end="18395" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q170287" start="18399" end="18407" title="Subotica" label="Subotica"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="18557" end="18578" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998182" start="18615" end="18624" title="Subdivisions of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="banovinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189419" start="18653" end="18658" title="Zemun" label="Zemun"/>
<link wikidata="Q205432" start="18663" end="18670" title="Pančevo" label="Pančevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286851" start="19082" end="19096" title="Pančevo Bridge" label="Pančevo Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307896" start="19150" end="19171" title="King Alexander Bridge" label="King Alexander Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q958056" start="19236" end="19255" title="Belgrade Grand Prix" label="Belgrade Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="19266" end="19289" title="Grand Prix motor racing" label="Grand Prix motor racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409017" start="19352" end="19369" title="Belgrade Fortress" label="Belgrade Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q174277" start="19424" end="19438" title="Tazio Nuvolari" label="Tazio Nuvolari"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="19514" end="19520" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q313128" start="19521" end="19538" title="Prince Paul of Yugoslavia" label="Crown Prince Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q153122" start="19550" end="19565" title="Tripartite Pact" label="Tripartite Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="19579" end="19590" title="Axis powers of World War II" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="19763" end="19779" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q219017" start="19815" end="19828" title="Dušan Simović" label="Dušan Simović"/>
<link wikidata="Q223183" start="19845" end="19858" title="Peter II of Yugoslavia" label="King Peter II"/>
<link wikidata="Q472100" start="19917" end="19931" title="Operation Retribution (1941)" label="heavily bombed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="19939" end="19948" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="20014" end="20021" title="Invasion of Yugoslavia" label="invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="20025" end="20031" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="20033" end="20040" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845565" start="20042" end="20051" title="Hungary between the two world wars" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349640" start="20057" end="20066" title="Military history of Bulgaria during World War II" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753412" start="20158" end="20175" title="Fritz Klingenberg" label="Fritz Klingenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="20280" end="20291" title="German Army (Wehrmacht)" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589262" start="20344" end="20356" title="Nedić regime" label="Nedić regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="20454" end="20482" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="20535" end="20542" title="Ustashe" label="Ustashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278544" start="20566" end="20583" title="Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia" label="Genocide of Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284503" start="20753" end="20769" title="History of the Jews in Serbia" label="Jewish community"/>
<link wikidata="Q84450" start="20825" end="20836" title="Franz Böhme" label="Franz Böhme"/>
<link wikidata="Q701914" start="20849" end="20876" title="Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia" label="Military Governor of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q375916" start="21074" end="21083" title="judenfrei" label="judenfrei"/>
<link wikidata="Q24268097" start="21144" end="21159" title="Žarko Todorović" label="Žarko Todorović"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="21207" end="21216" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21280" end="21299" title="Allied bombing of Yugoslavia in World War II#1944 Easter bombing" label="Belgrade was bombed"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="21317" end="21329" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="21348" end="21354" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="21429" end="21447" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="21448" end="21454" title="Orthodox Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="21558" end="21566" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="21585" end="21603" title="Partisans (Yugoslavia)" label="Yugoslav Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="21635" end="21650" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="21666" end="21710" title="Federal People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Federal People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="21741" end="21781" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="21977" end="21995" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="renewed Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252098" start="22064" end="22076" title="New Belgrade" label="New Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="22408" end="22428" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q127955" start="22470" end="22499" title="Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport" label="Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262622" start="22605" end="22616" title="Ušće Towers" label="Ušće Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145536" start="22713" end="22730" title="Hotel Jugoslavija" label="Hotel Jugoslavija"/>
<link wikidata="Q12336800" start="24275" end="24297" title="1968 student demonstrations in Belgrade" label="major student protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274624" start="25275" end="25287" title="Branko Pešić" label="Branko Pešić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110883" start="25840" end="25857" title="1972 Yugoslav smallpox outbreak" label="smallpox outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="25886" end="25894" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="25898" end="25904" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="26011" end="26063" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q318161" start="26097" end="26113" title="Helsinki Accords" label="Helsinki Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="26154" end="26179" title="UNESCO General Conference" label="UNESCO General Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565426" start="26222" end="26229" title="Death and state funeral of Josip Broz Tito" label="funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q160016" start="26315" end="26344" title="Member states of the United Nations" label="members of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621420" start="26406" end="26433" title="List of largest funerals" label="largest funerals in history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585350" start="26482" end="26504" title="March 9, 1991 protest" label="massive demonstrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q162740" start="26512" end="26525" title="Vuk Drašković" label="Vuk Drašković"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="26556" end="26574" title="Slobodan Milošević" label="Slobodan Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q12956172" start="26837" end="26854" title="1991–1992 anti-war protests in Belgrade" label="anti-war protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q175653" start="26960" end="26977" title="Siege of Sarajevo" label="besieged Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q703238" start="26979" end="27011" title="1996–1997 protests in Serbia" label="Further anti-government protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q157131" start="27171" end="27183" title="Zoran Đinđić" label="Zoran Đinđić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264923" start="27204" end="27221" title="mayor of Belgrade" label="mayor of Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="27267" end="27301" title="League of Communists of Yugoslavia" label="League of Communists of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q752521" start="27329" end="27354" title="Socialist Party of Serbia" label="Socialist Party of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="27377" end="27387" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q155723" start="27393" end="27405" title="NATO bombing of Yugoslavia" label="NATO bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q366507" start="27515" end="27518" title="Radio Television of Serbia" label="RTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145536" start="27540" end="27557" title="Hotel Jugoslavija" label="Hotel Jugoslavija"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262622" start="27563" end="27589" title="Ušće Tower" label="Central Committee building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258275" start="27591" end="27602" title="Avala Tower" label="Avala Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418042" start="27612" end="27627" title="NATO Bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade" label="Chinese embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="27779" end="27792" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="Yugoslav Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="27838" end="27845" title="refugee" label="refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145466" start="27851" end="27878" title="internally displaced person" label="internally displaced person"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722557" start="27971" end="27998" title="2000 Yugoslavian general election" label="2000 presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q640607" start="28130" end="28160" title="Overthrow of Slobodan Milošević" label="ousting of president Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q703058" start="28178" end="28183" title="Otpor" label="Otpor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839982" start="28223" end="28242" title="Belgrade Waterfront" label="Belgrade Waterfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285499" start="28291" end="28311" title="Government of Serbia" label="Government of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="28320" end="28327" title="United Arab Emirati" label="Emirati"/>
<link wikidata="Q60752215" start="28337" end="28359" title="Eagle Hills Properties" label="Eagle Hills Properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224747" start="28581" end="28595" title="Belgrade Tower" label="Belgrade Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839982" start="28814" end="28833" title="Belgrade Waterfront" label="Belgrade Waterfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q252098" start="28917" end="28929" title="New Belgrade" label="Novi Beograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q24898065" start="29031" end="29049" title="Belgrade IT sector" label="Belgrade IT sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="29405" end="29420" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="29443" end="29453" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="29461" end="29467" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="29472" end="29476" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409017" start="29518" end="29528" title="Belgrade Fortress" label="Kalemegdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q252098" start="29665" end="29677" title="New Belgrade" label="New Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q189419" start="29749" end="29754" title="Zemun" label="Zemun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199875" start="29821" end="29828" title="Krnjača" label="Krnjača"/>
<link wikidata="Q957036" start="29830" end="29835" title="Kotež" label="Kotež"/>
<link wikidata="Q712322" start="29840" end="29845" title="Borča" label="Borča"/>
<link wikidata="Q205432" start="29880" end="29887" title="Pančevo" label="Pančevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200401" start="30150" end="30161" title="Torlak (Belgrade)" label="Torlak hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q790075" start="30184" end="30189" title="Avala" label="Avala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288526" start="30197" end="30203" title="Kosmaj" label="Kosmaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q656586" start="30297" end="30311" title="alluvial plain" label="alluvial plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131303" start="30317" end="30325" title="loam" label="loessial"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="30326" end="30333" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567542" start="30387" end="30399" title="mass wasting" label="mass wasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423776" start="30659" end="30673" title="Downhill creep" label="Downhill creep"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="30733" end="30737" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131303" start="30741" end="30745" title="loam" label="loam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192902" start="30811" end="30820" title="Karaburma" label="Karaburma"/>
<link wikidata="Q231352" start="30822" end="30830" title="Zvezdara" label="Zvezdara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865401" start="30832" end="30840" title="Višnjica, Serbia" label="Višnjica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638676" start="30842" end="30847" title="Vinča" label="Vinča"/>
<link wikidata="Q149706" start="30852" end="30859" title="Ritopek" label="Ritopek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050835" start="30887" end="30891" title="Umka" label="Umka"/>
<link wikidata="Q948346" start="31097" end="31111" title="Terazijska Terasa" label="Terazije slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474459" start="31140" end="31148" title="Savamala" label="Savamala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287997" start="31195" end="31203" title="Pobednik" label="Pobednik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265998" start="31234" end="31250" title="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Belgrade" label="Cathedral Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882582" start="31286" end="31293" title="Banjica" label="Banjica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872586" start="31298" end="31309" title="Autokomanda" label="Autokomanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q22723" start="31455" end="31460" title="loess" label="loess"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081396" start="31477" end="31483" title="Gardoš" label="Gardoš"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081377" start="31485" end="31492" title="Ćukovac" label="Ćukovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139407" start="31497" end="31506" title="Kalvarija (Zemun)" label="Kalvarija"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037696" start="31687" end="31695" title="Mirijevo" label="Mirijevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="31950" end="31979" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="31996" end="32021" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="32055" end="32080" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q37602" start="32820" end="32824" title="Hail" label="Hail"/>
<link wikidata="Q124883151" start="33662" end="33698" title="2024 Belgrade City Assembly election" label="2024 Belgrade City Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q253586" start="33714" end="33739" title="Serbian Progressive Party" label="Serbian Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q752521" start="33782" end="33807" title="Socialist Party of Serbia" label="Socialist Party of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q281986" start="33836" end="33852" title="Democratic Party (Serbia)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q835586" start="34053" end="34080" title="Prime Minister of Serbia" label="President of the Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q889830" start="34089" end="34114" title="President of Serbia" label="President of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="34190" end="34199" title="executive (government)" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="34201" end="34212" title="legislative" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="34214" end="34223" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="34301" end="34319" title="diplomatic mission" label="diplomatic mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q920222" start="34340" end="34357" title="National Assembly (Serbia)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285499" start="34379" end="34399" title="Government of Serbia" label="Government of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608414" start="34424" end="34437" title="Supreme Court (Serbia)" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560961" start="34446" end="34466" title="Constitutional Court of Serbia" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="35014" end="35018" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q261430" start="35034" end="35042" title="Šumadija" label="Šumadija"/>
<link wikidata="Q189419" start="35073" end="35078" title="Zemun" label="Zemun"/>
<link wikidata="Q252098" start="35080" end="35092" title="New Belgrade" label="Novi Beograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q594610" start="35098" end="35104" title="Surčin" label="Surčin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309492" start="35151" end="35157" title="Syrmia" label="Syrmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q973673" start="35189" end="35197" title="Palilula (Belgrade)" label="Palilula"/>
<link wikidata="Q261430" start="35235" end="35243" title="Šumadija" label="Šumadija"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="35248" end="35253" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q712322" start="35424" end="35429" title="Borča" label="Borča"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008404" start="35431" end="35435" title="Ovča" label="Ovča"/>
<link wikidata="Q594610" start="35437" end="35443" title="Surčin" label="Surčin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="35747" end="35754" title="Urban sprawl" label="sprawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q770624" start="35805" end="35810" title="Opovo" label="Opovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070018" start="35812" end="35819" title="Pećinci" label="Pećinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q584694" start="35823" end="35835" title="Stara Pazova" label="Stara Pazova"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="36028" end="36033" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361508" start="36083" end="36087" title="Romani people in Serbia" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060433" start="36098" end="36107" title="Yugoslavs in Serbia" label="Yugoslavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q851126" start="36118" end="36124" title="Gorani people" label="Gorani"/>
<link wikidata="Q11239222" start="36134" end="36146" title="Montenegrins of Serbia" label="Montenegrins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400599" start="36156" end="36164" title="Russians in Serbia" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290108" start="36174" end="36180" title="Croats of Serbia" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q843856" start="36190" end="36201" title="Macedonians in Serbia" label="Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137457" start="36215" end="36229" title="Muslims (South-Slavic ethnic group)" label="ethnic Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="36378" end="36385" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="36387" end="36405" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia-Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="36410" end="36416" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="36437" end="36450" title="Yugoslav wars" label="Yugoslav wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="36515" end="36542" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="36685" end="36699" title="Han Chinese" label="Chinese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906894" start="36777" end="36785" title="Blocks (New Belgrade)" label="Block 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q252098" start="36789" end="36801" title="New Belgrade" label="New Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366180" start="36859" end="36876" title="Middle Easterners" label="Middle Easterners"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="36890" end="36895" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="36897" end="36901" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="36903" end="36909" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="36914" end="36918" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q201111" start="37085" end="37095" title="Aromanians" label="Aromanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="37097" end="37103" title="Czechs" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="37105" end="37111" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="37113" end="37120" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="37122" end="37132" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="37134" end="37138" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="37140" end="37145" title="Turkish people" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="37147" end="37156" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="37161" end="37168" title="Russians" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q152538" start="37169" end="37182" title="White émigrés" label="White émigrés"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008404" start="37288" end="37292" title="Ovča" label="Ovča"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909457" start="37312" end="37320" title="Boljevci" label="Boljevci"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="37376" end="37385" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q171336" start="37390" end="37397" title="Slovaks" label="Slovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="37700" end="37716" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="37841" end="37852" title="Protestantism" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284503" start="37884" end="37900" title="History of the Jews in Serbia" label="Jewish community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37945" end="37960" title="History of Serbia#Serbia in World War I" label="Nazi occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="38109" end="38117" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q190209" start="38182" end="38189" title="Kalmyks" label="Kalmyks"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="38241" end="38258" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283807" start="38392" end="38407" title="Belgrade pagoda" label="Belgrade pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066984" start="38518" end="38534" title="financial centre" label="financial centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="38549" end="38565" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194664" start="38638" end="38650" title="National Bank of Serbia" label="Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q252098" start="39139" end="39151" title="New Belgrade" label="New Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q738570" start="39174" end="39199" title="Central business district" label="Central business district"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="39211" end="39230" title="Southeastern Europe" label="Southeastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278216" start="39327" end="39338" title="Sava Centar" label="Sava Centar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828742" start="39398" end="39419" title="Airport City Belgrade" label="Airport City Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q550050" start="39580" end="39603" title="Belgrade Stock Exchange" label="Belgrade Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="39712" end="39734" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="39743" end="39759" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="39761" end="39770" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q14628995" start="39778" end="39803" title="Microsoft Development Center Serbia" label="Development Center Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152864" start="40005" end="40009" title="Asus" label="Asus"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="40011" end="40016" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30873" start="40018" end="40022" title="Dell" label="Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="40024" end="40030" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959629" start="40032" end="40039" title="Nutanix" label="Nutanix"/>
<link wikidata="Q524989" start="40041" end="40044" title="NCR Corporation" label="NCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050635" start="40106" end="40113" title="Nordeus" label="Nordeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608013" start="40115" end="40129" title="ComTrade Group" label="ComTrade Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6850204" start="40131" end="40137" title="Mikroelektronika" label="MicroE"/>
<link wikidata="Q19520569" start="40139" end="40152" title="FishingBooker" label="FishingBooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q12727645" start="40158" end="40164" title="Endava d.o.o." label="Endava"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589283" start="40204" end="40227" title="Mihajlo Pupin Institute" label="Mihajlo Pupin Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099119" start="40236" end="40239" title="Ivo Lola Ribar Institute" label="ILR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252236" start="40356" end="40368" title="Voja Antonić" label="Voja Antonić"/>
<link wikidata="Q54322577" start="40373" end="40393" title="Veselin Jevrosimović" label="Veselin Jevrosimović"/>
<link wikidata="Q721830" start="40691" end="40705" title="pay television" label="pay television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146061" start="40730" end="40753" title="Cushman &amp;amp; Wakefield" label="Cushman &amp;amp; Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420986" start="40755" end="40769" title="Knez Mihajlova" label="Knez Mihajlova"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="41130" end="41145" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="41257" end="41260" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557895" start="41397" end="41410" title="FEST (Belgrade)" label="Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q818579" start="41412" end="41428" title="Belgrade International Theatre Festival" label="Theatre Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41430" end="41445" title="Belgrade Summer Festival" label="Summer Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070610" start="41447" end="41452" title="Belgrade Music Festival" label="BEMUS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41454" end="41483" title="Belgrade Early Music Festival" label="Belgrade Early Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q282730" start="41485" end="41494" title="Belgrade Book Fair" label="Book Fair"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41496" end="41519" title="Belgrade Choir Festival" label="Belgrade Choir Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q10155" start="41521" end="41549" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2008" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q737804" start="41559" end="41568" title="Belgrade Beer Fest" label="Beer Fest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255251" start="41608" end="41617" title="EuroPride" label="Europride"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="41702" end="41713" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q47561" start="41729" end="41739" title="Ivo Andrić" label="Ivo Andrić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247865" start="41774" end="41797" title="The Bridge on the Drina" label="The Bridge on the Drina"/>
<link wikidata="Q315136" start="41859" end="41874" title="Branislav Nušić" label="Branislav Nušić"/>
<link wikidata="Q31215" start="41876" end="41891" title="Miloš Crnjanski" label="Miloš Crnjanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262563" start="41893" end="41907" title="Borislav Pekić" label="Borislav Pekić"/>
<link wikidata="Q157204" start="41909" end="41922" title="Milorad Pavić (writer)" label="Milorad Pavić"/>
<link wikidata="Q315677" start="41927" end="41941" title="Meša Selimović" label="Meša Selimović"/>
<link wikidata="Q722555" start="42004" end="42017" title="Charles Simic" label="Charles Simic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47496" start="42019" end="42035" title="Marina Abramović" label="Marina Abramović"/>
<link wikidata="Q258199" start="42040" end="42063" title="Milovan Destil Marković" label="Milovan Destil Marković"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331652" start="42074" end="42101" title="Cinema of Serbia" label="Serbia&amp;#x27;s film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557895" start="42124" end="42128" title="FEST (Belgrade)" label="FEST"/>
<link wikidata="Q646528" start="42338" end="42355" title="New wave music in Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslav new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q432679" start="42370" end="42379" title="VIS Idoli" label="VIS Idoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q432683" start="42381" end="42397" title="Ekatarina Velika" label="Ekatarina Velika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276461" start="42399" end="42413" title="Šarlo Akrobata" label="Šarlo Akrobata"/>
<link wikidata="Q432687" start="42418" end="42436" title="Električni Orgazam" label="Električni Orgazam"/>
<link wikidata="Q167160" start="42502" end="42514" title="Riblja Čorba" label="Riblja Čorba"/>
<link wikidata="Q804090" start="42516" end="42536" title="Bajaga i Instruktori" label="Bajaga i Instruktori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288404" start="42541" end="42554" title="Partibrejkers" label="Partibrejkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135801" start="42587" end="42602" title="Serbian hip hop" label="Serbian hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q818585" start="42628" end="42647" title="Beogradski Sindikat" label="Beogradski Sindikat"/>
<link wikidata="Q798664" start="42649" end="42657" title="Bad Copy" label="Bad Copy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605565" start="42659" end="42664" title="Škabo" label="Škabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750872" start="42666" end="42673" title="Marčelo" label="Marčelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847119" start="42811" end="42827" title="National Theatre in Belgrade" label="National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593509" start="42829" end="42848" title="Theatre on Terazije" label="Theatre on Terazije"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107134" start="42850" end="42872" title="Yugoslav Drama Theatre" label="Yugoslav Drama Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42874" end="42890" title="Zvezdara Theatre" label="Zvezdara Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277048" start="42896" end="42907" title="Atelje 212" label="Atelier 212"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132636" start="42913" end="42949" title="Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts" label="Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q945496" start="42992" end="43018" title="National Library of Serbia" label="National Library of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q683389" start="43084" end="43111" title="Belgrade University Library" label="Belgrade University Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847119" start="43151" end="43167" title="National Theatre in Belgrade" label="National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157542" start="43172" end="43195" title="Madlenianum Opera and Theatre" label="Madlenianum Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q226701" start="43251" end="43267" title="Marija Šerifović" label="Marija Šerifović"/>
<link wikidata="Q10153" start="43275" end="43303" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2007" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q10155" start="43336" end="43340" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q557141" start="43368" end="43384" title="public sculpture" label="public sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277393" start="43459" end="43474" title="National Museum of Serbia" label="National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q130531" start="43685" end="43690" title="Hieronymus Bosch" label="Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q512863" start="43692" end="43707" title="Juan de Flandes" label="Juan de Flandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="43709" end="43715" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9319" start="43717" end="43727" title="Tintoretto" label="Tintoretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599" start="43729" end="43735" title="Peter Paul Rubens" label="Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="43737" end="43744" title="Cézanne" label="Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q186202" start="43746" end="43758" title="Giovanni Battista Tiepolo" label="G.B. Tiepolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="43760" end="43766" title="Pierre-Auguste Renoir" label="Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="43768" end="43773" title="Claude Monet" label="Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q82445" start="43775" end="43782" title="Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec" label="Lautrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589" start="43784" end="43791" title="Henri Matisse" label="Matisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="43793" end="43800" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q37693" start="43802" end="43809" title="Paul Gauguin" label="Gauguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q93284" start="43811" end="43818" title="Marc Chagall" label="Chagall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="43820" end="43828" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q151803" start="43830" end="43838" title="Piet Mondrian" label="Mondrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41469" start="43865" end="43887" title="Miroslav&amp;#x27;s Gospel" label="Miroslav&amp;#x27;s Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291533" start="43893" end="43912" title="Ethnographic Museum (Belgrade)" label="Ethnographic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="44053" end="44070" title="former Yugoslavia" label="former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290510" start="44077" end="44103" title="Museum of Contemporary Art (Belgrade)" label="Museum of Contemporary Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q726025" start="44448" end="44462" title="Sava Šumanović" label="Sava Šumanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q264453" start="44464" end="44480" title="Nadežda Petrović" label="Nadežda Petrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q838985" start="44482" end="44496" title="Petar Dobrović" label="Petar Dobrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q447732" start="44498" end="44520" title="Milena Pavlović-Barili" label="Milena Pavlović-Barili"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985710" start="44522" end="44536" title="Milan Konjović" label="Milan Konjović"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074304" start="44538" end="44551" title="Zora Petrović" label="Zora Petrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283347" start="44553" end="44573" title="Đorđe Andrejević Kun" label="Đorđe Andrejević Kun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978366" start="44575" end="44594" title="Vladimir Veličković" label="Vladimir Veličković"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260743" start="44596" end="44609" title="Petar Lubarda" label="Petar Lubarda"/>
<link wikidata="Q81317" start="44611" end="44626" title="Krsto Hegedušić" label="Krsto Hegedušić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317365" start="44628" end="44640" title="Mića Popović" label="Mića Popović"/>
<link wikidata="Q313828" start="44642" end="44656" title="Ivan Meštrović" label="Ivan Meštrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q594440" start="44658" end="44675" title="Antun Augustinčić" label="Antun Augustinčić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257146" start="44677" end="44690" title="Toma Rosandić" label="Toma Rosandić"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086586" start="44692" end="44703" title="Olga Jevrić" label="Olga Jevrić"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086583" start="44705" end="44716" title="Olga Jančić" label="Olga Jančić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258708" start="44718" end="44731" title="Lojze Dolinar" label="Lojze Dolinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q47496" start="44883" end="44899" title="Marina Abramović" label="Marina Abramović"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="44997" end="45011" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338260" start="45278" end="45300" title="Museum of Applied Arts, Belgrade" label="Museum of Applied Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q653054" start="45373" end="45377" title="International Council of Museums" label="ICOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281959" start="45384" end="45399" title="Military Museum (Belgrade)" label="Military Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="45628" end="45645" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Yugoslav Partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539582" start="45660" end="45690" title="Museum of Aviation in Belgrade" label="Museum of Aviation in Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q127955" start="45704" end="45733" title="Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport" label="Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273" start="45874" end="45883" title="Fiat G.50" label="Fiat G.50"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="45937" end="45941" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q184491" start="45964" end="45969" title="F-117 Nighthawk" label="F-117"/>
<link wikidata="Q100026" start="45974" end="45978" title="F-16 Fighting Falcon" label="F-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q613201" start="45985" end="46004" title="Nikola Tesla Museum" label="Nikola Tesla Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9036" start="46055" end="46067" title="Nikola Tesla" label="Nikola Tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q163343" start="46097" end="46107" title="Tesla (unit)" label="Tesla unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775086" start="46265" end="46290" title="Museum of Vuk and Dositej" label="Museum of Vuk and Dositej"/>
<link wikidata="Q202815" start="46338" end="46361" title="Vuk Stefanović Karadžić" label="Vuk Stefanović Karadžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q347659" start="46366" end="46383" title="Dositej Obradović" label="Dositej Obradović"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291222" start="46528" end="46549" title="Museum of African Art, Serbia" label="Museum of African Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860466" start="46690" end="46711" title="Yugoslav Film Archive" label="Yugoslav Film Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860466" start="47020" end="47041" title="Yugoslav Film Archive" label="Yugoslav Film Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="47065" end="47080" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55965" start="47125" end="47150" title="Auguste and Louis Lumière" label="Auguste and Louis Lumière"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403321" start="47157" end="47177" title="Belgrade City Museum" label="Belgrade City Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306134" start="47379" end="47396" title="Museum of Ivo Andrić" label="Ivo Andrić Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338245" start="47398" end="47431" title="Princess Ljubica&amp;#x27;s Residence" label="Princess Ljubica&amp;#x27;s Residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q60748718" start="47433" end="47454" title="Museum of Paja Jovanović" label="Paja Jovanović Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395759" start="47456" end="47475" title="Jovan Cvijić House" label="Jovan Cvijić Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338290" start="47481" end="47501" title="Museum of Yugoslavia" label="Museum of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="47581" end="47585" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="47603" end="47612" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="47618" end="47632" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252" start="47634" end="47645" title="Buzz Aldrin" label="Buzz Aldrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104859" start="47650" end="47665" title="Michael Collins (astronaut)" label="Michael Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="47715" end="47724" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="47736" end="47749" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="47782" end="47795" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47874" end="47906" title="Museum of Science and Technology (Belgrade)" label="Museum of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q189419" start="48084" end="48089" title="Zemun" label="Zemun"/>
<link wikidata="Q252098" start="48182" end="48194" title="Novi Beograd" label="New Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q838159" start="48459" end="48464" title="türbe" label="türbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396145" start="48515" end="48521" title="Dorćol" label="Dorćol"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="48718" end="48731" title="neoclassicism" label="neoclassicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="48733" end="48744" title="romanticism" label="romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189458" start="48750" end="48762" title="academic art" label="academic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847119" start="48871" end="48887" title="National Theatre in Belgrade" label="National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288132" start="48889" end="48899" title="Stari dvor" label="Stari Dvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265998" start="48901" end="48917" title="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s Cathedral (Belgrade)" label="Cathedral Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590792" start="48960" end="48990" title="House of the National Assembly, Belgrade" label="House of the National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277393" start="48995" end="49010" title="National Museum of Serbia" label="National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="49026" end="49037" title="art nouveau" label="art nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501300" start="49051" end="49074" title="Serbo-Byzantine Revival" label="Serbo-Byzantine Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075594" start="49108" end="49128" title="Vuk Foundation House" label="Vuk Foundation House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254795" start="49199" end="49221" title="St. Mark&amp;#x27;s Church, Belgrade" label="St. Mark&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137661" start="49236" end="49255" title="Gračanica monastery" label="Gračanica monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q330385" start="49266" end="49286" title="Church of Saint Sava" label="Church of Saint Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q994776" start="49456" end="49478" title="brutalist architecture" label="brutalist architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906894" start="49486" end="49505" title="Blocks (New Belgrade)" label="&amp;quot;blokovi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q252098" start="49530" end="49542" title="New Belgrade" label="New Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q180902" start="49546" end="49556" title="socrealism" label="socrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565167" start="49610" end="49626" title="Dom Sindikata" label="Trade Union Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="49655" end="49664" title="modernism" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12752817" start="49788" end="49813" title="Clinical Centre of Serbia" label="Clinical Centre of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q96389481" start="49958" end="49978" title="List of hospitals by capacity" label="highest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q191985" start="50077" end="50091" title="Orient Express" label="Orient Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q273613" start="50245" end="50249" title="knez (title)" label="knez"/>
<link wikidata="Q434252" start="50256" end="50273" title="Mihailo Obrenović" label="Mihailo Obrenović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449384" start="50419" end="50435" title="Kosančićev Venac" label="Kosančićev Venac"/>
<link wikidata="Q48780610" start="51015" end="51029" title="Grčka Kraljica" label="Grčka Kraljica"/>
<link wikidata="Q948346" start="51097" end="51105" title="Terazije" label="Terazije"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669759" start="51113" end="51119" title="London, Belgrade" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q30622868" start="51453" end="51467" title="Financial Park" label="Financial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q191985" start="51497" end="51511" title="Orient Express" label="Orient Express"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51552" end="51565" title="Savamala#Sava Square" label="Wilson Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="51702" end="51713" title="Interbellum" label="Interbellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264635" start="51859" end="51869" title="Skadarlija" label="Skadarlija"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277393" start="51875" end="51890" title="National Museum of Serbia" label="National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847119" start="51904" end="51920" title="National Theatre in Belgrade" label="National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q189419" start="51922" end="51927" title="Zemun" label="Zemun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453036" start="51929" end="51948" title="Nikola Pašić Square" label="Nikola Pašić Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q288915" start="51960" end="51981" title="Studentski Trg" label="Students&amp;#x27; Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409017" start="51987" end="52006" title="Belgrade Fortress" label="Kalemegdan Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420986" start="52008" end="52029" title="Knez Mihailova" label="Knez Mihailova Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q920222" start="52035" end="52045" title="Parliament of Serbia" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q330385" start="52051" end="52071" title="Temple of Saint Sava" label="Church of Saint Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288132" start="52081" end="52091" title="The Old Palace" label="Old Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187994" start="52220" end="52234" title="Monument to the Unknown Hero" label="Avala Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258275" start="52239" end="52250" title="Avala Tower" label="Avala Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396145" start="52317" end="52323" title="Dorćol" label="Dorćol"/>
<link wikidata="Q646175" start="52400" end="52407" title="Dedinje" label="Dedinje"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065016" start="52429" end="52437" title="Topčider" label="Topčider"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107151" start="52442" end="52451" title="Košutnjak" label="Košutnjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990524" start="52463" end="52485" title="Dedinje Royal Compound" label="Dedinje Royal Compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520647" start="52531" end="52546" title="Kraljevski Dvor" label="Kraljevski Dvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q815579" start="52551" end="52560" title="Beli dvor" label="Beli Dvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="52631" end="52646" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q734539" start="52678" end="52698" title="House of Flowers (mausoleum)" label="The House of Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321302" start="52760" end="52773" title="Ada Ciganlija" label="Ada Ciganlija"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="52800" end="52810" title="Sava" label="Sava River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="53144" end="53152" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="53178" end="53189" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193847" start="53360" end="53374" title="bungee jumping" label="bungee jumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q472827" start="53376" end="53388" title="water skiing" label="water skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192832" start="53394" end="53403" title="paintball" label="paintball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548278" start="53615" end="53631" title="Great War Island" label="Great War Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q267362" start="53758" end="53774" title="Small War Island" label="Small War Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="53825" end="53840" title="nature preserve" label="nature preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q25457377" start="53852" end="53882" title="List of natural monuments in Belgrade" label="37 protected natural resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082567" start="53958" end="53968" title="Straževica" label="Straževica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065016" start="53991" end="53999" title="Topčider" label="Topčider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409017" start="54016" end="54035" title="Kalemegdan Fortress" label="Kalemegdan Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q807231" start="54057" end="54065" title="Barajevo" label="Barajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008404" start="54101" end="54105" title="Ovča" label="Ovča"/>
<link wikidata="Q22723" start="54114" end="54119" title="loess" label="loess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024086" start="54141" end="54149" title="Sremčica" label="Sremčica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="54249" end="54253" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q832778" start="54483" end="54495" title="camp grounds" label="camp grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q791287" start="54538" end="54547" title="Batajnica" label="Batajnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131643" start="54775" end="54782" title="Baćevac" label="Baćevac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176717" start="54814" end="54820" title="Ripanj" label="Ripanj"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060537" start="54944" end="54956" title="EV6 The Rivers Route" label="Rivers Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q353027" start="54967" end="54980" title="Long-distance cycling route" label="cycling route"/>
<link wikidata="Q699630" start="55048" end="55061" title="Sultans Trail" label="Sultans Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="55103" end="55109" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="55114" end="55122" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="55195" end="55200" title="Nightclub" label="clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="55443" end="55465" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="55467" end="55474" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="55479" end="55487" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q818589" start="55882" end="55903" title="Beograđanka" label="Belgrade Palace tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602145" start="56175" end="56187" title="Starogradska muzika" label="Starogradska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264635" start="56321" end="56331" title="Skadarlija" label="Skadarlija"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="56353" end="56361" title="Bohemianism" label="bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766008" start="56625" end="56631" title="kafana" label="kafana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048853" start="56846" end="56858" title="Znak pitanja" label="Znak pitanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="56883" end="56892" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q17957" start="56975" end="56988" title="Lonely Planet" label="Lonely Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q253946" start="57213" end="57225" title="fashion week" label="fashion week"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639298" start="57328" end="57349" title="Belgrade Fashion Week" label="Belgrade Fashion Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446735" start="57389" end="57408" title="London Fashion Week" label="London Fashion Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q50377035" start="57479" end="57492" title="George Styler" label="George Styler"/>
<link wikidata="Q51955227" start="57497" end="57512" title="Ana Ljubinković" label="Ana Ljubinković"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360083" start="57539" end="57555" title="Roksanda Ilinčić" label="Roksanda Ilinčić"/>
<link wikidata="Q718039" start="57796" end="57808" title="Karim Rashid" label="Karim Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q154538" start="57810" end="57826" title="Daniel Libeskind" label="Daniel Libeskind"/>
<link wikidata="Q432294" start="57828" end="57845" title="Patricia Urquiola" label="Patricia Urquiola"/>
<link wikidata="Q96612" start="57851" end="57867" title="Konstantin Grcic" label="Konstantin Grcic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55623116" start="57878" end="57893" title="Mikser Festival" label="Mikser Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605158" start="57898" end="57918" title="Belgrade Design Week" label="Belgrade Design Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460899" start="58006" end="58017" title="Sacha Lakic" label="Sacha Lakic"/>
<link wikidata="Q50505213" start="58019" end="58027" title="Ana Kraš" label="Ana Kraš"/>
<link wikidata="Q47452034" start="58029" end="58044" title="Bojana Sentaler" label="Bojana Sentaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q51792374" start="58050" end="58066" title="Marek Djordjevic" label="Marek Djordjevic"/>
<link wikidata="Q366507" start="58230" end="58259" title="Radio Television of Serbia" label="Radio Television Serbia (RTS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q366630" start="58343" end="58351" title="RTV Pink" label="RTV Pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q366601" start="58483" end="58486" title="B92" label="B92"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221415" start="58706" end="58711" title="Prva Srpska Televizija" label="1Prva"/>
<link wikidata="Q61127053" start="58751" end="58755" title="Nova.rs" label="Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378741" start="58757" end="58759" title="N1 (television)" label="N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q366550" start="58833" end="58841" title="RTV Studio B" label="Studio B"/>
<link wikidata="Q883987" start="58916" end="58920" title="Blic" label="Blic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734078" start="58934" end="58938" title="Alo!" label="Alo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284918" start="58952" end="58957" title="Kurir" label="Kurir"/>
<link wikidata="Q671543" start="58974" end="58979" title="Danas (newspaper)" label="Danas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494184" start="59025" end="59040" title="Sportski žurnal" label="Sportski žurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5206155" start="59057" end="59062" title="DSL Sport" label="Sport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59100" end="59117" title="Privredni pregled" label="Privredni pregled"/>
<link wikidata="Q217316" start="59162" end="59169" title="24 sata (Serbia)" label="24 sata"/>
<link wikidata="Q654606" start="59271" end="59291" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q154020" start="59305" end="59309" title="Elle (magazine)" label="Elle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174378" start="59323" end="59335" title="Cosmopolitan Serbia" label="Cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="59349" end="59368" title="National Geographic (magazine)" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q384671" start="59382" end="59399" title="Men&amp;#x27;s Health" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544126" start="59413" end="59419" title="Grazia" label="Grazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321302" start="59638" end="59651" title="Ada Ciganlija" label="Ada Ciganlija"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107151" start="59907" end="59916" title="Košutnjak" label="Košutnjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q210160" start="60251" end="60255" title="1973 World Aquatics Championships" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q188548" start="60257" end="60292" title="UEFA Euro 1976" label="1976 European Football Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q642893" start="60297" end="60320" title="1972–73 European Cup" label="1973 European Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500262" start="60358" end="60362" title="1962 European Athletics Championships" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q772787" start="60367" end="60388" title="European Athletics Indoor Championships" label="European Indoor Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q76562" start="60435" end="60439" title="EuroBasket 1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q425751" start="60444" end="60448" title="EuroBasket 1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q223305" start="60487" end="60490" title="1975 Men&amp;#x27;s European Volleyball Championship" label="men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064890" start="60495" end="60500" title="1975 Women&amp;#x27;s European Volleyball Championship" label="women"/>
<link wikidata="Q895729" start="60551" end="60555" title="1978 World Amateur Boxing Championships" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q750083" start="60664" end="60679" title="EuroBasket 2005" label="EuroBasket 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q719443" start="60713" end="60723" title="2012 European Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="men&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q73097" start="60728" end="60740" title="2012 European Women&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="women&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q601603" start="60751" end="60778" title="2013 World Women&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="World Handball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074612" start="60843" end="60847" title="2005 European Volleyball Championship" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q898107" start="60860" end="60864" title="2011 Women&amp;#x27;s European Volleyball Championship" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q935708" start="60894" end="60926" title="European Water Polo Championship" label="European Water Polo Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134131" start="60932" end="60963" title="European Youth Olympic Festival" label="European Youth Olympic Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q188158" start="60977" end="61000" title="Universiade" label="2009 Summer Universiade"/>
<link wikidata="Q772787" start="61033" end="61072" title="European Athletics Indoor Championships" label="European Athletics Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411948" start="61100" end="61121" title="EuroLeague Final Four" label="EuroLeague Final Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="61213" end="61219" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q171401" start="61221" end="61227" title="futsal" label="futsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="61229" end="61233" title="judo" label="judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="61235" end="61241" title="karate" label="karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42486" start="61243" end="61252" title="wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="61254" end="61260" title="rowing (sport)" label="rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178678" start="61262" end="61272" title="kickboxing" label="kickboxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="61274" end="61286" title="table tennis" label="table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="61292" end="61297" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="61402" end="61410" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q173009" start="61418" end="61435" title="Red Star Belgrade" label="Red Star Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q188656" start="61440" end="61457" title="FK Partizan" label="Partizan Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="61476" end="61497" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q118823" start="61528" end="61532" title="1990–91 European Cup" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q573225" start="61564" end="61568" title="1965–66 European Cup" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q478000" start="61631" end="61647" title="Red Star Stadium" label="Red Star Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123407" start="61653" end="61669" title="Partizan Stadium" label="Partizan Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657120" start="61675" end="61688" title="Eternal derby (Serbia)" label="Eternal derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q33277" start="61761" end="61775" title="Belgrade Arena" label="Belgrade Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q10155" start="61918" end="61946" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2008" label="53rd Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q367802" start="61947" end="61970" title="Aleksandar Nikolić Hall" label="Aleksandar Nikolić Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="61992" end="62002" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q912247" start="62009" end="62020" title="KK Partizan" label="KK Partizan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132627" start="62057" end="62073" title="KK Crvena Zvezda" label="KK Crvena Zvezda"/>
<link wikidata="Q30758" start="62167" end="62179" title="Ana Ivanovic" label="Ana Ivanovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15269" start="62181" end="62196" title="Jelena Janković" label="Jelena Janković"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="62201" end="62215" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="62302" end="62312" title="Grand Slam (tennis)" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q583537" start="62337" end="62349" title="List of ATP number 1 ranked singles tennis players" label="ATP number 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q15269" start="62355" end="62370" title="Jelena Janković" label="Jelena Janković"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619799" start="62406" end="62420" title="2010 Davis Cup World Group" label="2010 Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q33277" start="62474" end="62488" title="Belgrade Arena" label="Belgrade Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q815553" start="62495" end="62512" title="Belgrade Marathon" label="Belgrade Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="62597" end="62617" title="Summer Olympic Games" label="Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q240631" start="62728" end="62750" title="University of Belgrade" label="University of Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q847027" start="62773" end="62797" title="Grandes écoles" label="&amp;quot;grande école&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q210272" start="63037" end="63054" title="cultural heritage" label="cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q212105" start="63293" end="63300" title="Special education" label="special"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="63411" end="63421" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="63713" end="63723" title="trolleybus" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q95723" start="63740" end="63747" title="S-Train" label="S-Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877040" start="63748" end="63754" title="BG Voz" label="BG Voz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8227578" start="63807" end="63818" title="GSP Beograd" label="GSP Beograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459975" start="63823" end="63831" title="Lasta Beograd" label="SP Lasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q95723" start="63894" end="63901" title="S-train" label="S-train"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877040" start="63911" end="63917" title="BG Voz" label="BG Voz"/>
<link wikidata="Q83878" start="63962" end="63978" title="Serbian Railways" label="Serbian Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882636" start="64335" end="64354" title="Belgrade Bus Station" label="central bus station"/>
<link wikidata="Q818602" start="64418" end="64424" title="Beovoz" label="Beovoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q14626453" start="64433" end="64458" title="regional rail" label="suburban/commuter railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="64481" end="64493" title="mass-transit" label="mass-transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q216125" start="64540" end="64543" title="Réseau Express Régional" label="RER"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357727" start="64563" end="64573" title="GO Transit" label="GO Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83878" start="64672" end="64688" title="Serbian Railways" label="Serbian Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="64916" end="64929" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277337" start="64963" end="64977" title="Belgrade Metro" label="Belgrade Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q115753" start="65106" end="65137" title="Belgrade Centre railway station" label="Belgrade Centre railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="65203" end="65218" title="high-speed rail" label="high-speed rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630" start="65247" end="65255" title="Novi Sad" label="Novi Sad"/>
<link wikidata="Q170287" start="65316" end="65324" title="Subotica" label="Subotica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="65329" end="65337" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q129259" start="65416" end="65419" title="Niš" label="Niš"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="65424" end="65439" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q671469" start="65471" end="65493" title="Pan-European corridors" label="Pan-European corridors"/>
<link wikidata="Q659418" start="65494" end="65495" title="Pan-European Corridor X" label="X"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630" start="65553" end="65561" title="Novi Sad" label="Novi Sad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="65566" end="65574" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q129259" start="65589" end="65592" title="Niš" label="Niš"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="65611" end="65617" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q815562" start="65756" end="65771" title="Belgrade bypass" label="Belgrade bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q788420" start="65790" end="65793" title="E70 in Serbia" label="E70"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322442" start="65798" end="65801" title="E75 in Serbia" label="E75"/>
<link wikidata="Q898731" start="65970" end="65991" title="Branko&amp;#x27;s Bridge" label="Branko&amp;#x27;s Bridge,"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289617" start="65992" end="66005" title="Gazela Bridge" label="Gazela Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272855" start="66007" end="66017" title="Ada Bridge" label="Ada Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397334" start="66022" end="66034" title="Pupin Bridge" label="Pupin Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q252098" start="66091" end="66103" title="New Belgrade" label="New Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q48442" start="66319" end="66328" title="commuting" label="commuting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290818" start="66418" end="66434" title="Port of Belgrade" label="Port of Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q127955" start="66527" end="66556" title="Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport" label="Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q594610" start="66588" end="66594" title="Surčin" label="Surčin"/>
<link wikidata="Q127955" start="66987" end="67007" title="Nikola Tesla Airport" label="Nikola Tesla Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="67291" end="67299" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="67318" end="67325" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="67344" end="67353" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="67378" end="67384" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q622830" start="67416" end="67423" title="Caruaru" label="Caruaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="67446" end="67454" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q131127" start="67476" end="67486" title="Banja Luka" label="Banja Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="67608" end="67616" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="67699" end="67704" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="67767" end="67772" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520" start="67867" end="67873" title="Astana" label="Astana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="67926" end="67932" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q205832" start="67979" end="67984" title="Corfu (city)" label="Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="68032" end="68040" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="68088" end="68094" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="68136" end="68140" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="68190" end="68197" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="68253" end="68261" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="68310" end="68319" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="68369" end="68376" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="68424" end="68428" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="68491" end="68497" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="68796" end="68817" title="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur" label="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="68905" end="68910" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="68912" end="68922" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q914" start="68927" end="68936" title="Volgograd" label="Volgograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856938" start="68967" end="68989" title="Czechoslovak War Cross 1918" label="Czechoslovak War Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545753" start="69032" end="69066" title="Order of the Karađorđe&amp;#x27;s Star" label="Order of the Karađorđe&amp;#x27;s Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262166" start="69109" end="69140" title="Order of the People&amp;#x27;s Hero" label="Order of the People&amp;#x27;s Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="69214" end="69225" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi German"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="69370" end="69385" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425303" start="69413" end="69438" title="FDi magazine" label="Foreign Direct Investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863993" start="69541" end="69569" title="List of people from Belgrade" label="List of people from Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q112274402" start="69571" end="69615" title="List of cities and towns on the Danube River" label="List of cities and towns on the Danube River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030300" start="69617" end="69653" title="List of metropolitan areas in Europe" label="List of metropolitan areas in Europe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55906" wikidata="Q1435" url="?curid=55906" title="Zagreb">
<text>Zagreb ( ) is the capital and largest city of Croatia. It is in the north of the country, along the Sava river, at the southern slopes of the Medvednica mountain. Zagreb stands near the international border between Croatia and Slovenia at an elevation of approximately above sea level. At the 2021 census, the city itself had a population of 767,131, while the population of Zagreb metropolitan area is 1,086,528.

The oldest settlement in the vicinity of the city was the Roman Andautonia, in today&#x27;s Šćitarjevo. The historical record of the name &quot;Zagreb&quot; dates from 1134, in reference to the foundation of the settlement at Kaptol in 1094. Zagreb became a free royal city in 1242. In 1851, Janko Kamauf became Zagreb&#x27;s first mayor. Zagreb has special status as a Croatian administrative division—it comprises a consolidated city-county (but separate from Zagreb County), and is administratively subdivided into 17 city districts. Most of the city districts lie at a low elevation along the valley of the river Sava, but northern and northeastern city districts, such as Podsljeme and Sesvete districts are situated in the foothills of the Medvednica mountain, making the city&#x27;s geographical image quite diverse. The city extends over east-west and around north-south. Zagreb ranks as a global city, with a &#x27;Beta-&#x27; rating from the Globalization and World Cities Research Network.

The transport connections, the concentration of industry, scientific, and research institutions and industrial tradition underlie its leading economic position in Croatia. Zagreb is the seat of the central government, administrative bodies, and almost all government ministries. Almost all of the largest Croatian companies, media, and scientific institutions have their headquarters in the city. Zagreb is the most important transport hub in Croatia: here Central Europe, the Mediterranean and Southeast Europe meet, making the Zagreb area the centre of the road, rail and air networks of Croatia. It is a city known for its diverse economy, high quality of living, museums, sporting, and entertainment events. Major branches of Zagreb&#x27;s economy include high-tech industries and the service sector.

==Name==
The etymology of the name &quot;Zagreb&quot; is unclear. It was used for the united city only from 1852, but it had been in use as the name of the Zagreb Diocese since the 12th century and was increasingly used for the city in the 17th century.
The name is first recorded in a charter by Felician, Archbishop of Esztergom, dated 1134, mentioned as .

The name is probably derived from Proto-Slavic word which means &quot;hill&quot; or &quot;uplift&quot;. An Old Croatian reconstructed name is manifested through the city&#x27;s former German name, Agram. Some linguists (&quot;e.g.&quot; Nada Klaić, Miroslav Kravar) propose a metathesis of *&quot;Zabreg&quot;, which would originate from Old Slavic &quot;breg&quot; (see Proto-Slavic ) in the sense of &quot;riverbank&quot;, referring to River Sava. This metathesis has been attested in Kajkavian, but the meaning of &quot;riverbank&quot; is lost in modern Croatian and folk etymology associates it instead with &quot;breg&quot; &quot;hill&quot;, ostensibly referring to Medvednica. Hungarian linguist Gyula Décsy similarly uses metathesis to construct *&quot;Chaprakov(o)&quot;, a putative Slavicisation of a Hungarian hypocorism for &quot;Cyprian&quot;, similar to the etymology of Csepreg, Hungary. The most likely derivation is *&quot;Zagrębъ&quot; in the sense of &quot;embankment&quot; or &quot;rampart&quot;, &quot;i.e.&quot; remains of the 1st millennium fortifications on Grič.

In Middle Latin and Modern Latin, Zagreb is known as &quot;Agranum&quot; (the name of an unrelated Arabian city in Strabo), &quot;Zagrabia&quot; or &quot;Mons Graecensis&quot; (also &quot;Mons Crecensis&quot;, in reference to Grič (Gradec)).

The most common folk etymology of the name of the city has been from the verb stem &quot;za-grab-&quot;, meaning &quot;to scoop&quot; or &quot;to dig&quot;. A folk legend illustrating this derivation, attested but discarded as a serious etymology by Ivan Tkalčić,
ties the name to a drought of the early 14th century, during which Augustin Kažotić (c. 1260–1323) is said to have dug a well which miraculously produced water.
In another legend, a city governor is thirsty and orders a girl named Manda to &quot;scoop&quot; water from the Manduševac well (nowadays a fountain in Ban Jelačić Square), using the imperative: &quot;Zagrabi, Mando!&quot; (&quot;Scoop, Manda!&quot;).

==History==
The oldest known settlement located near present-day Zagreb, the Roman town of Andautonia, now Ščitarjevo, existed between the 1st and the 5th centuries AD.
The first recorded appearance of the name &quot;Zagreb&quot; dates from 1094, at which time the city existed as two different city centers: the smaller, eastern Kaptol, inhabited mainly by clergy and housing Zagreb Cathedral, and the larger, western Gradec, inhabited mainly by craftsmen and merchants. In 1851 the Ban of Croatia, Josip Jelačić, united Gradec and Kaptol; the name of the main city square, Ban Jelačić Square honors him.

While Croatia formed part of Yugoslavia (1918 to 1991), Zagreb remained an important economic centre of that country, and was the second largest city. After Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia in 1991, the Parliament of the Republic of Croatia () proclaimed Zagreb as the capital of the Republic of Croatia.

===Early Zagreb===
The history of Zagreb dates as far back as 1094 when the Hungarian King Ladislaus, returning from his campaign against the Kingdom of Croatia, founded a diocese. Alongside the bishop&#x27;s see, the canonical settlement Kaptol developed north of Zagreb Cathedral, as did the fortified settlement Gradec on the neighbouring hill, with the border between the two formed by the Medveščak stream. Today the latter is Zagreb&#x27;s Upper Town (Gornji Grad) and is one of the best-preserved urban nuclei in Croatia. Both settlements came under Mongol attack in 1242. As a sign of gratitude for offering him a safe haven from the Mongols, the Croatian and Hungarian King Béla IV granted Gradec the Golden Bull of 1242, which gave its citizens exemption from county rule and autonomy, as well as their own judicial system.

=== The relationship between Kaptol and Gradec throughout history ===
The development of Kaptol began in 1094 after the foundation of the diocese, while the growth of Gradec began after the Golden Bull was issued in 1242. In the history of the city of Zagreb, there have been numerous conflicts between Gradec and Kaptol, mainly due to disputed issues of rent collection and due to disputed properties.

The first known conflicts took place in the middle of the 13th century and continued with interruptions until 1667. Because of the conflict, it was recorded that the Bishop of Kaptol excommunicated the residents of Gradec twice.

In the conflicts between Gradec and Kaptol, there were several massacres of the citizens, destruction of houses and looting of citizens. In 1850, Gradec and Kaptol, with surrounding settlements, were united into a single settlement, today&#x27;s city of Zagreb.

===16th to 18th centuries===

There were numerous connections between the Kaptol diocese and the free sovereign town of Gradec for both economic and political reasons, but they were not known as an integrated city, even as Zagreb became the political center, and the regional Sabor () representing Croatia, Slavonia and Dalmatia, first convened at Gradec. Zagreb became the Croatian capital in 1557, with city also being chosen as the seat of the Ban of Croatia in 1621 under ban Nikola IX Frankopan.

At the invitation of the Croatian Parliament, the Jesuits came to Zagreb and built the first grammar school,
the St. Catherine&#x27;s Church (built 1620-1632)
and monastery. In 1669, they founded an academy where philosophy, theology, and law were taught, the forerunner of today&#x27;s University of Zagreb.

During the 17th and 18th centuries, Zagreb was badly devastated by fire and by the plague. In 1776, the royal council (government) moved from Varaždin to Zagreb and during the reign of the Emperor Joseph II Zagreb became the headquarters of the Varaždin and Karlovac general command.

===19th to mid-20th century===



In the 19th century, Zagreb was the center of the Croatian National Revival and saw the foundation of important cultural and historic institutions.
In 1850, the town was united under its first mayor – Janko Kamauf.

The first railway line to connect Zagreb with Zidani Most and Sisak opened in 1862 and in 1863 Zagreb received a gasworks. Since 1 January 1877, the Grič cannon fires daily from the Lotrščak Tower on Grič to mark midday. The Zagreb waterworks opened in 1878.

After the 1880 Zagreb earthquake, up to the 1914 outbreak of World War I, development flourished and the town received the characteristic layout which it has today.
The first horse-drawn tram dated from 1891. The construction of railway lines enabled the old suburbs to merge gradually into Donji Grad, characterized by a regular block pattern that prevails in Central European cities. This bustling core includes many imposing buildings, monuments, and parks as well as a multitude of museums, theatres, and cinemas. An electric-power plant was built in 1907.

The first half of the 20th century saw a considerable expansion of Zagreb. Before World War I, the city expanded and neighborhoods like Stara Peščenica in the east and Črnomerec in the west grew up. The Rokov perivoj neighbourhood, noted for its Art Nouveau features, was established at the start of the century.

After the war, working-class districts such as Trnje emerged between the railway and the Sava, whereas the construction of residential districts on the hills of the southern slopes of Medvednica was completed between the two World Wars.

In the 1920s, the population of Zagreb increased by 70 percent – the largest demographic boom in the history of the town. In 1926, the first radio station in the region began broadcasting from Zagreb, and in 1947 the Zagreb Fair opened.

During World War II, Zagreb became the capital of the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1945), which was backed by Nazi Germany and by the Italians. The history of Zagreb in World War II became rife with incidents of régime terror and resistance sabotage - the Ustaša régime had thousands of people executed during the war in and near the city. Partisans took the city at the end of the war. From 1945 until 1990, Zagreb functioned as the capital of the Socialist Republic of Croatia, one of the six constituent socialist republics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

===Contemporary era===
The area between the railway and the Sava river witnessed a new construction-boom after World War II. After the mid-1950s, construction of new residential areas south of the Sava river began, resulting in Novi Zagreb (Croatian for &quot;New Zagreb&quot;), originally called &quot;Južni Zagreb&quot; (&quot;Southern Zagreb&quot;).
From 1999 Novi Zagreb has comprised two city districts: Novi Zagreb – zapad (&quot;New Zagreb – West&quot;) and Novi Zagreb – istok (&quot;New Zagreb – East&quot;)

The city also expanded westward and eastward, incorporating Dubrava, Podsused, Jarun, Blato, and other settlements.

The cargo railway hub and the international airport (Pleso) were built south of the Sava river. The largest industrial zone (Žitnjak) in the south-eastern part of the city, represents an extension of the industrial zones on the eastern outskirts of the city, between the Sava and the Prigorje region. Zagreb hosted the Summer Universiade in 1987. This event initiated the creation of pedestrian-only zones in the city centre and extensive new sport infrastructure, lacking until then, all around the city.

During the 1991–1995 Croatian War of Independence, the city saw some sporadic fighting around its JNA army barracks, but escaped major damage. In May 1995, it was targeted by Serb rocket artillery in two rocket attacks which killed seven civilians and wounded many.

An urbanized area connects Zagreb with the surrounding towns of Zaprešić, Samobor, Dugo Selo, and Velika Gorica. Sesvete was the first and the closest area to become a part of the agglomeration and is already included in the City of Zagreb for administrative purposes and now forms the easternmost city district.

== Geography ==
=== Climate ===
The climate of Zagreb is classified as an oceanic climate (Köppen: &quot;Cfb&quot;), bordering a humid continental climate (&quot;Dfb&quot;).


Zagreb has four distinct seasons. Summers are generally warm, sometimes hot. In late May it gets significantly warmer, temperatures start rising and it often becomes very warm or even hot with occasional afternoon and evening thunderstorms. Heatwaves can occur but are short-lived. Temperatures rise above on average 14.6 days each summer. During summertime, rainfall is abundant and it mainly falls during thunderstorms. With 840 mm of precipitation per year, Zagreb is Europe&#x27;s ninth wettest capital, receiving less precipitation than Luxembourg but more than Brussels, Paris or London. Compared to these cities, however, Zagreb has fewer rainy days, but the annual rainfall is higher due to heavier showers occurring mainly in late spring and summer. Autumn in its early stage often brings pleasant and sunny weather with occasional episodes of rain later in the season. Late autumn is characterized by a mild increase in the number of rainy days and a gradual decrease in daily temperature averages. Morning fog is common from mid-October to January, with northern city districts at the foothills of the Medvednica mountain as well as south-central districts along the Sava river being more prone to longer fog accumulation.
Winters are relatively cold, bringing overcast skies and a precipitation decrease pattern. February is the driest month, averaging 39 mm of precipitation. On average there are 29 days with snowfall, with the first snow usually falling in early December. However, in recent years, the number of days with snowfall in wintertime has decreased considerably. Spring is characterized by often pleasant but changeable weather. As the season progresses, sunny days become more frequent, bringing higher temperatures. Sometimes cold spells can occur as well, mostly in the season&#x27;s early stages. The average daily mean temperature in the winter is around (from December to February) and the average temperature in the summer is .
The highest recorded temperature at the Maksimir weather station was in July 1950, and lowest was in February 1956. A temperature of was recorded on the since defunct Borongaj Airfield in February 1940.
===Cityscape===

The most important historical high-rise constructions are Neboder (1958) on Ban Jelačić Square, Cibona Tower (1987), and Zagrepčanka (1976) on Savska Street, Mamutica in Travno (Novi Zagreb – istok district, built in 1974) and Zagreb TV Tower on Sljeme (built in 1973).

In the 2000s, the City Assembly approved a new plan that allowed for the many recent high-rise buildings in Zagreb, such as the Almeria Tower, Eurotower, HOTO Tower, Zagrebtower, Sky Office Tower and the tallest high-rise building in Zagreb Strojarska Business Center.

In Novi Zagreb, the neighbourhoods of Blato and Lanište expanded significantly, including the Zagreb Arena and the adjoining business centre.

Due to a long-standing restriction that forbade the construction of 10-story or higher buildings, most of Zagreb&#x27;s high-rise buildings date from the 1970s and 1980s and new apartment buildings on the outskirts of the city are usually 4–8 floors tall. Exceptions to the restriction have been made in recent years, such as permitting the construction of high-rise buildings in Lanište or Kajzerica.

===Surroundings===

The wider Zagreb area has been continuously inhabited since the prehistoric period, as witnessed by archaeological findings in the Veternica cave from the Paleolithic and excavation of the remains of the Roman Andautonia near the present village of Šćitarjevo.

Picturesque former villages on the slopes of Medvednica, Šestine, Gračani, and Remete, maintain their rich traditions, including folk costumes, Šestine umbrellas, and gingerbread products.

To the north is the Medvednica Mountain (), with its highest peak Sljeme (1,035 m), where one of the tallest structures in Croatia, Zagreb TV Tower is located. The Sava and the Kupa valleys are to the south of Zagreb, and the region of Hrvatsko Zagorje is located on the other (northern) side of the Medvednica hill. In mid-January 2005, Sljeme held its first World Ski Championship tournament.
From the summit, weather permitting, the vista reaches as far as Velebit Range along Croatia&#x27;s rocky northern coast, as well as the snow-capped peaks of the towering Julian Alps in neighboring Slovenia. There are several lodging villages, offering accommodation and restaurants for hikers. Skiers visit Sljeme, which has four ski-runs, three ski-lifts, and a chairlift.

The old Medvedgrad, a recently restored medieval was built in the 13th century on Medvednica hill. It overlooks the western part of the city and also hosts the &quot;Shrine of the Homeland&quot;, a memorial with an eternal flame, where Croatia pays reverence to all its heroes fallen for homeland in its history, customarily on national holidays. The ruined medieval fortress Susedgrad is located on the far-western side of Medvednica hill. It has been abandoned since the early 17th century, but it is visited during the year.

Zagreb occasionally experiences earthquakes, due to the proximity of Žumberak-Medvednica fault zone. It&#x27;s classified as an area of high seismic activity. The area around Medvednica was the epicentre of the 1880 Zagreb earthquake (magnitude 6.3), and the area is known for occasional landslide threatening houses in the area. The proximity of strong seismic sources presents a real danger of strong earthquakes. Croatian Chief of Office of Emergency Management Pavle Kalinić stated Zagreb experiences around 400 earthquakes a year, most of them being imperceptible. However, in case of a strong earthquake, it&#x27;s expected that 3,000 people would die and up to 15,000 would be wounded. In 2020 the city experienced a 5.5 magnitude earthquake, which damaged various buildings in the historic downtown area. The city&#x27;s iconic cathedral lost the cross off of one of its towers. This earthquake was the strongest one to affect the city since the destructive 1880 Zagreb earthquake.

==Demographics==

Zagreb is by far the largest city in Croatia in terms of population, which was 767,131 in 2021.

Zagreb metropolitan area population is slightly above 1.0 million inhabitants, as it includes the Zagreb County. Zagreb metropolitan area makes approximately a quarter of a total population of Croatia.
In 1997, the City of Zagreb itself was given special County status, separating it from Zagreb County, although it remains the administrative centre of both.

The majority of its citizens are Croats making up 93.53% of the city&#x27;s population (2021 census). The same census records around 49,605 residents belonging to ethnic minorities: 12,035 Serbs (1.57%), 6,566 Bosniaks (0.86%), 3,475 Albanians (0.45%), 2,167 Romani (0.28%), 1,312 Slovenes (0.17%), 1,036 Macedonians (0.15%), 865 Montenegrins (0.11%), and a number of other smaller communities.

After the easing of COVID-19 pandemic restrictions, thousands of foreign workers immigrated to Zagreb due to the shortage of labor force in Croatia. These workers primarily come from countries such as Nepal, the Philippines, India, and Bangladesh, as well as some European countries including Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Kosovo and North Macedonia.

=== City districts ===

List of districts by area and population in 2021.

Since 14 December 1999 the City of Zagreb is divided into 17 city districts (&quot;gradska četvrt&quot;, pl. &quot;gradske četvrti&quot;):

City districts are subdivided in 218 local committees as primary units of local self-government.

=== Settlements ===

The city itself is not the only standalone settlement in the City of Zagreb administrative area – there are a number of larger urban settlements such as Sesvete and Lučko and a number of smaller villages attached to it whose population is tracked separately.

There are 70 settlements in the City of Zagreb administrative area:

*Adamovec, population 975
*Belovar, population 378
*Blaguša, population 594
*Botinec, population 9
*Brebernica, population 49
*Brezovica, population 594
*Budenec, population 323
*Buzin, population 1,055
*Cerje, population 398
*Demerje, population 721
*Desprim, population 377
*Dobrodol, population 1,203
*Donji Čehi, population 232
*Donji Dragonožec, population 577
*Donji Trpuci, population 428
*Drenčec, population 131
*Drežnik Brezovički, population 656
*Dumovec, population 903
*Đurđekovec, population 778
*Gajec, population 311
*Glavnica Donja, population 544
*Glavnica Gornja, population 226
*Glavničica, population 229
*Goli Breg, population 406
*Goranec, population 449
*Gornji Čehi, population 363
*Gornji Dragonožec, population 295
*Gornji Trpuci, population 87
*Grančari, population 221
*Havidić Selo, population 53
*Horvati, population 1,490
*Hrašće Turopoljsko, population 1,202
*Hrvatski Leskovac, population 2,687
*Hudi Bitek, population 441
*Ivanja Reka, population 1,800
*Jesenovec, population 460
*Ježdovec, population 1,728
*Kašina, population 1,548
*Kašinska Sopnica, population 245
*Kučilovina, population 219
*Kućanec, population 228
*Kupinečki Kraljevec, population 1,957
*Lipnica, population 207
*Lučko, population 3,010
*Lužan, population 719
*Mala Mlaka, population 636
*Markovo Polje, population 425
*Moravče, population 663
*Odra, population 1,866
*Odranski Obrež, population 1,578
*Paruževina, population 632
*Planina Donja, population 554
*Planina Gornja, population 247
*Popovec, population 937
*Prekvršje, population 809
*Prepuštovec, population 332
*Sesvete, population 54,085
*Soblinec, population 978
*Starjak, population 227
*Strmec, population 645
*Šašinovec, population 678
*Šimunčevec, population 271
*Veliko Polje, population 1,668
*Vuger Selo, population 273
*Vugrovec Donji, population 442
*Vugrovec Gornji, population 357
*Vurnovec, population 201
*Zadvorsko, population 1,288
*Zagreb, population 688,163
*Žerjavinec, population 556
== Politics and government ==


Zagreb is the capital of the Republic of Croatia, its political center and the center of various state institutions.

On the St. Mark&#x27;s Square are the seats of the Government of the Republic of Croatia in the Banski Dvori complex, the Croatian Parliament (Sabor), as well as the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia. Various ministries and state agencies are located in the wider area of the City of Zagreb.

=== City governance ===

The current mayor of Zagreb is Tomislav Tomašević (&#x27;We can!&#x27;), elected in the 2021 Zagreb local elections, the second round of which was held on 30 May 2021. There are two deputy mayors elected from the same list, Danijela Dolenec and Luka Korlaet.

The Zagreb Assembly is composed of 51 representatives, elected in the 2021 Zagreb local elections.


The Zagreb Assembly is composed of 51 representatives, elected in the 2021 Zagreb local elections.

According to the Constitution, the city of Zagreb, as the capital of Croatia, has a special status. As such, Zagreb performs self-governing public affairs of both city and county. It is also the seat of the Zagreb County which encircles Zagreb.

The city administration bodies are the Zagreb City Assembly (&quot;Gradska skupština Grada Zagreba&quot;) as the representative body and the mayor of Zagreb (&quot;Gradonačelnik Grada Zagreba&quot;) who is the executive head of the city.

The City Assembly is the representative body of the citizens of the City of Zagreb elected for a four-year term on the basis of universal suffrage in direct elections by secret ballot using proportional system with d&#x27;Hondt method in a manner specified by law. There are 51 representatives in the City Assembly, among them the president and vice-presidents of the assembly are elected by the representatives.

Before 2009, the mayor was elected by the City Assembly. It was changed to direct elections by majoritarian vote (two-round system) in 2009. The mayor is the head of the city administration and has two deputies (directly elected together with him/her).

The term of office of the mayor (and his/her deputies) is four years. The mayor (with the deputies) may be recalled by a referendum according to the law (not less than 20% of all electors in the City of Zagreb or not less than two-thirds of the Zagreb Assembly city deputies have the right to initiate a city referendum regarding recalling of the mayor; when a majority of voters taking part in the referendum vote in favor of the recall, provided that majority includes not less than one-third of all persons entitled to vote in the City of Zagreb, i.e. of persons in the City of Zagreb electoral register, the mayor&#x27;s mandate shall be deemed revoked and special mayoral by-elections shall be held).

In the City of Zagreb, the mayor is also responsible for the state administration (due to the special status of Zagreb as a &quot;city with county rights&quot;, there isn&#x27;t a State Administration Office which in all counties performs tasks of the central government).
City administration offices, institutions and services (18 city offices, 1 public institute or bureau and 2 city services) have been founded for performing activities within the self-administrative sphere and activities entrusted by the state administration.
The city administrative bodies are managed by the principals (appointed by the mayor for a four-year term of office, may be appointed again to the same duty). The City Assembly Professional Service is managed by the secretary of the City Assembly (appointed by the Assembly).

Local government is organised in 17 city districts represented by City District Councils. Residents of districts elect members of councils.

====Minority councils and representatives====
Directly elected minority councils and representatives are tasked with consulting tasks for the local or regional authorities in which they are advocating for minority rights and interests, integration into public life and participation in the management of local affairs. At the 2023 Croatian national minorities councils and representatives elections Albanians, Bosniaks, Czechs, Hungarians, Macedonians, Montenegrins, Roma, Slovenes and Serbs of Croatia each fulfilled legal requirements to elect 25 members minority councils of the City of Zagreb while Bulgarians, Poles, Pannonian Rusyns, Russians, Slovaks, Italians, Turks, Ukrainians and Jews of Croatia elected individual representatives, with a representative of the Germans of Croatia remaining unelected due to the lack of candidates.

===International relations===
====Twin towns – sister cities====
Zagreb is twinned with the following towns and cities:
* Bologna, Italy 
* Mainz, Germany 
* Saint Petersburg, Russia 
* Tromsø, Norway 
* Buenos Aires, Argentina 
* Kyoto, Japan 
* Lisbon, Portugal 
* Pittsburgh, United States 
* Shanghai, China 
* Budapest, Hungary 
* La Paz, Bolivia 
* Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
* Ljubljana, Slovenia 
* Podgorica, Montenegro 
* Tabriz, Iran 
* Ankara, Turkey 
* London, United Kingdom 
* Skopje, Macedonia 
* Warsaw, Poland 
* Pristina, Kosovo 
* Astana, Kazakhstan 
* Rome, Italy 
* Vienna, Austria 
* Petrinja, Croatia 
* Vukovar, Croatia 
* Xiangyang, China 
====Partner cities====

The city has partnership arrangements with:

* Kraków, Poland 
* Tirana, Albania
* Pécs, Hungary
* Kyiv, Ukraine 

== Culture ==

===Tourism===

Zagreb is an important tourist center, not only in terms of passengers traveling from the rest of Europe to the Adriatic Sea but also as a travel destination itself. Since the end of the war, it has attracted close to a million visitors annually, mainly from Austria, Germany, and Italy, and in recent years many tourists from far east (South Korea, Japan, China, and last two years, from India). It has become an important tourist destination, not only in Croatia, but considering the whole region of southeastern Europe.
There are many interesting sights and happenings for tourists to attend in Zagreb, for example, the two statues of Saint George, one at the Republic of Croatia Square, the other at the Stone Gate, where the image of the Virgin Mary is said to be the only thing that did not burn in the 17th-century fire. Also, there is an art installation starting in the Bogovićeva Street, called Nine Views.
Zagreb is also famous for its award-winning Christmas market that had been named the one in Europe for three consecutive years (2015, 2016 and 2017) by &quot;European Best Destinations&quot;.

The capital is also known for its many restaurants that serve not only traditional Croatian food and classic dishes. In addition to that, a lot of international hotel chains are offering their accommodations in Zagreb, including: Best Western, Hilton Worldwide: (DoubleTree by Hilton, Hilton Garden Inn &amp; Canopy by Hilton), Marriott International: (Sheraton Hotels &amp; The Westin), Radisson Hotel Group, Mövenpick Hotels &amp; Resorts and a former Regent Hotels &amp; Resorts which is now Esplanade Zagreb Hotel.
The historical part of the city to the north of Ban Jelačić Square is composed of the Gornji Grad and Kaptol, a medieval urban complex of churches, palaces, museums, galleries and government buildings that are popular with tourists on sightseeing tours. The historic district can be reached on foot, starting from the Ban Jelačić Square, the center of Zagreb, or by a funicular on nearby Tomićeva Street. Each Saturday, (from April until the end of September), on St. Mark&#x27;s Square in the Upper town, tourists can meet members of the Order of The Silver Dragon (&quot;Red Srebrnog Zmaja&quot;), who reenact famous historical conflicts between Gradec and Kaptol.

In 2010 more than 600,000 tourists visited the city, with a 10% increase seen in 2011. In 2012 a total of 675 707 tourists visited the city. A record number of tourists visited Zagreb in 2017, 1.286.087, up 16% compared to the year before, which generated 2.263.758 overnight stays, up 14,8%.

====Souvenirs and gastronomy====

Numerous shops, boutiques, store houses and shopping centers offer a variety of quality clothing. There are about fourteen big shopping centers in Zagreb. Zagreb&#x27;s offerings include crystal, china and ceramics, wicker or straw baskets, and top-quality Croatian wines and gastronomic products.

Notable Zagreb souvenirs are the tie or &quot;cravat&quot;, an accessory named after Croats who wore characteristic scarves around their necks in the Thirty Years&#x27; War in the 17th century and the ball-point pen, a tool developed from the inventions by Slavoljub Eduard Penkala, an inventor and a citizen of Zagreb.

Many Zagreb restaurants offer various specialties of national and international cuisine. Domestic products which deserve to be tasted include turkey, duck or goose with &quot;mlinci&quot; (flat pasta, soaked in roast juices), a famous &quot;Zagrebački odrezak&quot; (type of cordon bleu), &quot;Štrukli&quot; (cottage cheese strudel), &quot;sir i vrhnje&quot; (cottage cheese with cream), &quot;kremšnite&quot; (custard slices in flaky pastry), &quot;orehnjača&quot; (traditional walnut roll), and &quot;sarma&quot; (Sauerkraut rolls filed with minced pork meat and rice, served with mashed potato).

===Cultural institutions===

Zagreb&#x27;s museums reflect the history, art, and culture not only of Zagreb and Croatia, but also of Europe and the world. Around thirty collections in museums and galleries comprise more than 3.6 million various exhibits, excluding church and private collections.

The Archaeological Museum collections, today consisting of nearly 450,000 varied archaeological artefacts and monuments, have been gathered over the years from many different sources. These holdings include evidence of Croatian presence in the area. The most famous are the Egyptian collection, the Zagreb mummy and bandages with the oldest Etruscan inscription in the world (&quot;Liber Linteus Zagrabiensis&quot;), as well as the numismatic collection.

The Modern Gallery () holds the most important and comprehensive collection of paintings, sculptures and drawings by 19th- and 20th-century Croatian artists. The collection numbers more than 10,000 works of art, housed since 1934 in the historic Vranyczany Palace in the center of Zagreb, overlooking the Zrinjevac Park. A secondary gallery is the Josip Račić Studio.

The Croatian Natural History Museum holds one of the world&#x27;s most important collections of Neanderthal remains found at one site. These are the remains, stone weapons, and tools of prehistoric &quot;Krapina man&quot;. The holdings of the Croatian Natural History Museum comprise more than 250,000 specimens distributed among various collections.

The Technical Museum was founded in 1954 and it maintains the oldest preserved machine in the area, dating from 1830, which is still operational. The museum exhibits numerous historic aircraft, cars, machinery and equipment. There are some distinct sections in the museum: the Planetarium, the Apisarium, the Mine (model of mines for coal, iron and non-ferrous metals, about long), and the Nikola Tesla study.

The Museum of the City of Zagreb was established in 1907 by the Association of the Braća Hrvatskog Zmaja. It is located in a restored monumental complex (Popov toranj, the Observatory, Zakmardi Granary) of the former Convent of the Poor Clares, of 1650. The Museum deals with topics from the cultural, artistic, economic and political history of the city spanning from Roman finds to the modern period. The holdings comprise over 80,000 items arranged systematically into collections of artistic and mundane objects characteristic of the city and its history.

The Arts and Crafts Museum was founded in 1880 with the intention of preserving the works of art and craft against the new predominance of industrial products. With its 160,000 exhibits, the Arts and Crafts Museum is a national-level museum for artistic production and the history of material culture in Croatia.

The Ethnographic Museum was founded in 1919. It lies in the fine Secession building of the one-time Trades Hall of 1903. The ample holdings of about 80,000 items cover the ethnographic heritage of Croatia, classified in three cultural zones: the Pannonian, Dinaric and Adriatic.

The Mimara Museum an art museum, that was founded with a donation from Ante Topić Mimara and opened to the public in 1987. It is located in a late 19th-century neo-Renaissance palace. The holdings comprise 3,750 works of art of various techniques and materials, and different cultures and civilizations, including paintings from great European masters like: Caravaggio, Raphael, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Rembrandt, Hieronymus Bosch, Francisco Goya, Diego Velázquez and many others.

The Croatian Museum of Naïve Art is one of the first museums of naïve art in the world. The museum holds works of Croatian naïve expression of the 20th century. It is located in the 18th-century Raffay Palace in the Gornji Grad. The museum holdings consist of almost 2000 works of art – paintings, sculptures, drawings, and prints, mainly by Croatians but also by other well-known world artists. From time to time, the museum organizes topics and retrospective exhibitions by naïve artists, expert meetings and educational workshops and playrooms.


The Museum of Contemporary Art was founded in 1954. Its new building hosts a rich collection of Croatian and international contemporary visual art which has been collected throughout the decades from the nineteen-fifties until today. The museum is located in the center of Novi Zagreb and opened in 2009. The old location is now part of the Kulmer Palace in the Gornji Grad.
The Institute for Contemporary Art (&quot;Institut za suvremenu umjetnost&quot;), successor to the Soros Center for Contemporary Art – Zagreb (SCCA – Zagreb), was founded in 1993, and registered as an independent nonprofit organization in 1998. It was founded and run by art historians, curators, artists, photographers, designers, publishers, academics, and journalists, and initially located at the Museum of Contemporary Art. After moving a number of times, the institute has a gallery at the Academia Moderna. Its aims are to promote contemporary Croatian artists and the visual and other creative arts; to start documenting contemporary artists; and to build a body of contemporary art. It established the Radoslav Putar Award in 2002.

The Strossmayer Gallery of Old Masters offers permanent holdings presenting European paintings from the 14th to 19th centuries, and the Ivan Meštrović Studio, with sculptures, drawings, lithography portfolios and other items, was a donation of this great artist to his homeland. The Museum and Gallery Center introduces on various occasions the Croatian and foreign cultural and artistic heritage. The Art Pavilion by Viennese architects Hellmer and Fellmer who were the most famous designers of theatres in Central Europe is a neo-classical exhibition complex and one of the landmarks of the downtown. The exhibitions are also held in the Meštrović building on the Square of the Victims of Fascism – the Home of Croatian Fine Artists. The World Center &quot;Wonder of Croatian Naïve Art&quot; exhibits masterpieces of Croatian naïve art as well as the works of a new generation of artists. The Modern Gallery comprises all relevant fine artists of the 19th and 20th centuries. The Museum of Broken Relationships at 2 Ćirilometodska holds people&#x27;s mementos of past relationships. It is the first private museum in the country. Lauba House presents works from the Filip Trade Collection, a large private collection of modern and contemporary Croatian art and current artistic production.

Other museums and galleries are also found in the Croatian School Museum, the Croatian Hunting Museum, the Croatian Sports Museum, the Croatian Post and Telecommunications Museum, the HAZU (Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts) Glyptotheque (collection of monuments), and the HAZU Graphics Cabinet.

There are five castles in Zagreb: Dvorac Brezovica, Kašina (Castrum antiquum Paganorum), Medvedgrad, Susedgrad and Kulmerovi dvori.

Zagreb Zoo is a 7-hectare Zoo located in Maksimir Park, opened in 1925 and it&#x27;s one of the main attractions in Zagreb. The Zoo hold 2,225 animals of 275 species from all around the world. It&#x27;s the most visited Zoo in Croatia with almost half of million visitors in 2023.

===Events===
Zagreb has hosted some of the most popular mainstream musical artists in recent years, including those of Queen, Rolling Stones, U2, Guns N&#x27; Roses, Eric Clapton, Deep Purple, Bob Dylan, David Bowie, Elton John, Roger Waters, Depeche Mode, Prodigy, Beyoncé, Lady Gaga, Britney Spears, Ed Sheeran, Justin Bieber, Shakira, Nick Cave, Jamiroquai, George Michael, Sade, Sting, Rod Stewart, Eros Ramazzotti, Manu Chao, Massive Attack, Andrea Bocelli, Metallica, 50 Cent, Snoop Dogg, Duran Duran as well as some of world most recognised underground artists such as Dimmu Borgir, Sepultura, Melvins, Mastodon and more.

Zagreb is also the home of the INmusic festival, one of the biggest open-air festivals in Croatia which is held every year, usually at the end of June, hosting a lot of big names like Hozier, Lily Allen, Arctic Monkeys, Rokia Traoré, Anthrax and many more. There is also the Zagreb Jazz Festival which has featured popular jazz artists like Pat Metheny or Sonny Rollins. Many other festivals occur in Zagreb like Žedno uho featuring indie, rock, metal and electronica artists such as Animal Collective, Melvins, Butthole Surfers, Crippled Black Phoenix, NoMeansNo, The National, Mark Lanegan, Swans, Mudhoney around the clubs and concert halls of Zagreb.

===Performing arts===


There are about 20 permanent or seasonal theatres and stages. The Croatian National Theater in Zagreb was built in 1895 and opened by emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria. The most renowned concert hall named &quot;Vatroslav Lisinski&quot;, after the composer of the first Croatian opera, was built in 1973.

The World Theatre Festival and International Puppet Festival both take place in Zagreb in September and October.

&quot;Animafest&quot;, the World Festival of Animated Films, takes place every even-numbered year, and the &quot;Music Biennale&quot;, the international festival of avant-garde music, every odd-numbered year. It also hosts the annual &quot;ZagrebDox&quot; documentary film festival. The &quot;Festival of the Zagreb Philharmonic&quot; and the flowers exhibition &quot;Floraart&quot; (end of May or beginning of June), the &quot;Old-timer Rally&quot; annual events. In the summer, theatre performances and concerts, mostly in the Upper Town, are organized either indoors or outdoors. The stage on Opatovina hosts the &quot;Zagreb Histrionic Summer&quot; theatre events.

Zagreb is also the host of &quot;Zagrebfest&quot;, the oldest Croatian pop-music festival, as well as of several traditional international sports events and tournaments. The &quot;Day of the City of Zagreb&quot; on 16 November is celebrated every year with special festivities, especially on the Jarun lake in the southwestern part of the city.

===Recreation and sports===

Zagreb is home to numerous sports and recreational centers. Recreational Sports Center Jarun, situated on Jarun Lake in the southwest of the city, has fine shingle beaches, a world-class regatta course, a jogging lane around the lake, several restaurants, many night clubs and a discothèque. Its sports and recreation opportunities include swimming, sunbathing, waterskiing, angling, and other water sports, but also beach volleyball, football, basketball, handball, table tennis, and mini-golf.

Dom Sportova, a sport centre in northern Trešnjevka features six halls. The largest two have seating capacity of 5,000 and 3,100 people, respectively. This centre is used for basketball, handball, volleyball, hockey, gymnastics, tennis, etc. It also hosts music events.

Arena Zagreb was finished in 2008. The 16,500-seat arena hosted the 2009 World Men&#x27;s Handball Championship. The Dražen Petrović Basketball Hall seats 5,400 people. Alongside the hall is the high glass Cibona Tower. Sports Park Mladost, situated on the embankment of the Sava river, has an Olympic-size swimming pool, smaller indoor and outdoor swimming pools, a sunbathing terrace, 16 tennis courts as well as basketball, volleyball, handball, football and field hockey courts. A volleyball sports hall is within the park. Sports and Recreational Center Šalata, located in Šalata, only a couple hundred meters from the Jelačić Square, is most attractive for tennis players. It comprises a big tennis court and eight smaller ones, two of which are covered by the so-called &quot;balloon&quot;, and another two equipped with lights. The center also has swimming pools, basketball courts, football fields, a gym, and fitness center, and a four-lane bowling alley. Outdoor ice skating is a popular winter recreation. There are also several fine restaurants within and near the center.

Maksimir Tennis Center, located in Ravnice east of downtown, consists of two sports blocks. The first comprises a tennis center situated in a large tennis hall with four courts. There are 22 outdoor tennis courts with lights. The other block offers multipurpose sports facilities: apart from tennis courts, there are handball, basketball and indoor football grounds, as well as track and field facilities, a bocce ball alley and table tennis opportunities.

Recreational swimmers can enjoy a smaller-size indoor swimming pool in Daničićeva Street, and a newly opened indoor Olympic-size pool at Utrine sports center in Novi Zagreb. Skaters can skate in the skating rink on Trg Sportova (Sports Square) and on the lake Jarun Skaters&#x27; park. Zagreb Hippodrome offers recreational horseback riding opportunities, while horse races are held every weekend during the warmer part of the year.

The 38,923-seat Maksimir Stadium, last 10 years under renovation, is located in Maksimir in the northeastern part of the city. The stadium is part of the immense Svetice recreational and sports complex (ŠRC Svetice), south of the Maksimir Park. The complex covers an area of . It is part of a significant green zone, which passes from Medvednica in the north toward the south. ŠRC Svetice, together with Maksimir Park, creates an ideal connection of areas which are assigned to sport, recreation, and leisure.

The latest larger recreational facility is Bundek, a group of two small lakes near the Sava in Novi Zagreb, surrounded by a partly forested park. The location had been used prior to the 1970s, but then went to neglect until 2006 when it was renovated.

In year 2021 Zagreb was the host city of Croatia Rally, round three of 2021 World Rally Championship. The Rally was won by Sébastien Ogier and Julien Ingrassia, Toyota Gazoo Racing WRT crew. Service parc, Overnight parc ferme and Shakedown Medvedgrad took place in Zagreb placing him as a lone capital in the championship. 2021 Croatia Rally became third tightest WRC event up to date, with only 0,6 seconds dividing the winning crew and second placed Elfyn Evans and Scott Martin (co-driver) in Toyota Yaris WRC. The Croatian round of WRC was praised by becoming the part of 2022 World Rally Championship.

Some of the most notable sport clubs in Zagreb are: GNK Dinamo Zagreb, KHL Medveščak Zagreb, RK Zagreb, KK Cibona, KK Zagreb, KK Cedevita, NK Zagreb, HAVK Mladost and others. The city hosted the 2016 Davis Cup World Group final between Croatia and Argentina, as well as being one of three Croatian host cities for the 2025 World Men&#x27;s Handball Championship.

=== Religion ===

The Archdiocese of Zagreb is a metropolitan see of the Catholic Church in Croatia, serving as its religious center. The Archbishop is Dražen Kutleša. The Catholic Church is the largest religious organisation in Zagreb, Catholicism being the predominant religion of Croatia, with over 1.1 million adherents. Zagreb is also the episcopal see of the Metropolitanate of Zagreb and Ljubljana of the Serbian Orthodox Church. Islamic religious organization of Croatia has the see in Zagreb. President is Mufti Aziz Hasanović. There used to be a mosque in the Meštrović Pavilion during World War II at the Square of the Victims of Fascism, but it was relocated to the neighborhood of Borovje in Peščenica. Mainstream Protestant churches have also been present in Zagreb – Evangelical (Lutheran) Church and Reformed Christian (Calvinist) Church. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is also present in the Zagreb neighborhood of Jarun whereas Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses have their headquarters in Central Zagreb. In total there are around 40 non-Catholic religious organizations and denominations in Zagreb with their headquarters and places of worship across the city making it a large and diverse multicultural community. There is also significant Jewish history through the Holocaust.

== Economy ==

Important branches of industry are: production of electrical machines and devices, chemical, pharmaceutical, textile, food and drink processing. Zagreb is an international trade and business centre, as well as an essential transport hub placed at the crossroads of Central Europe, the Mediterranean and the Southeast Europe. Almost all of the largest Croatian as well as Central European companies and conglomerates such as Agrokor, INA, Hrvatski Telekom have their headquarters in the city.

The only Croatian stock exchange is the Zagreb Stock Exchange (), which is located in Eurotower, one of the tallest Croatian skyscrapers.

According to 2008 data, the city of Zagreb has the highest PPP and nominal gross domestic product per capita in Croatia at $32,185 and $27,271 respectively, compared to the Croatian averages of US$18,686 and $15,758.

As of May 2015, the average monthly net salary in Zagreb was 6,669 kuna, about €870 (Croatian average is 5,679 kuna, about €740). At the end of 2012, the average unemployment rate in Zagreb was around 9.5%.
34% of companies in Croatia have headquarters in Zagreb, and 38.4% of the Croatian workforce works in Zagreb, including almost all banks, utility and public transport companies.

Companies in Zagreb create 52% of the total turnover and 60% of the total profit of Croatia in 2006 as well as 35% of Croatian export and 57% of Croatian import.
The following table includes some of the main economic indicators for the period 2011–2019, based on the data provided by the Croatian Bureau of Statistics. A linear interpolation was used for the population data between 2011 and 2021. While data on the yearly averaged conversion rates between HRK, EUR and USD is provided by the Croatian National Bank.
==Transport==
===Highways===


Zagreb is the hub of five major Croatian highways.

The highway A6 was upgraded in October 2008 and leads , forming a part of the Pan-European Corridor Vb. The upgrade coincided with the opening of the bridge over the Mura river on the A4 and the completion of the Hungarian M7, which marked the opening of the first freeway corridor between Rijeka and Budapest. The A1 starts at the Lučko interchange and concurs with the A6 up to the Bosiljevo 2 interchange, connecting Zagreb and Split ( Vrgorac). A further extension of the A1 up to Dubrovnik is under construction. Both highways are tolled by the Croatian highway authorities Hrvatske autoceste and Autocesta Rijeka - Zagreb.

Highway A3 (formerly named Bratstvo i jedinstvo) was the showpiece of Croatia in the SFRY. It is the oldest Croatian highway.
A3 forms a part of the Pan-European Corridor X. The highway starts at the Bregana border crossing, bypasses Zagreb forming the southern arch of the Zagreb bypass, and ends at Lipovac near the Bajakovo border crossing. It continues in Southeast Europe in the direction of Near East. This highway is tolled except for the stretch between Bobovica and Ivanja Reka interchanges.

Highway A2 is a part of the Corridor Xa. It connects Zagreb and the frequently congested Macelj border crossing, forming a near-continuous motorway-level link between Zagreb and Western Europe. Forming a part of the Corridor Vb, highway A4 starts in Zagreb forming the northeastern wing of the Zagreb bypass and leads to Hungary until the Goričan border crossing. It is often used highway around Zagreb.
The railway and the highway A3 along the Sava river that extend to Slavonia (towards Slavonski Brod, Vinkovci, Osijek and Vukovar) are some of the busiest traffic corridors in the country. The railway running along the Sutla river and the A2 highway (Zagreb-Macelj) running through Zagorje, as well as traffic connections with the Pannonian region and Hungary (the Zagorje railroad, the roads and railway to Varaždin – Čakovec and Koprivnica) are linked with truck routes. The southern railway connection to Split operates on a high-speed tilting trains line via the Lika region (renovated in 2004 to allow for a five-hour journey); a faster line along the Una river valley is in use only up to the border between Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.

===Roads===


The city has an extensive avenue network with numerous main arteries up to ten lanes wide and Zagreb bypass, a congested four-lane highway encircling most of the city. Finding a parking space is supposed to be made somewhat easier by the construction of new underground multi-story parking lots (Importanne Center, Importanne Gallery, Lang Square, Tuškanac, Kvaternik Square, Klaić Street, etc.). The busiest roads are the main east–west arteries, former Highway &quot;Brotherhood and Unity&quot;, consisting of Ljubljanska Avenue, Zagrebačka Avenue and Slavonska Avenue; and the Vukovarska Avenue, the closest bypass of the city center. The avenues were supposed to alleviate the traffic problem, but most of them are nowadays gridlocked during rush hour and others, like Branimirova Avenue and Dubrovnik Avenue which are gridlocked for the whole day. European routes E59, E65 and E70 serve Zagreb.

====Bridges====

Zagreb has seven road traffic bridges across the river Sava, and they all span both the river and the levees, making them all by and large longer than . In downstream order, these are:

There are also two rail traffic bridges across the Sava, one near the Sava bridge and one near Mičevec, as well as two bridges that are part of the Zagreb bypass, one near Zaprešić (west), and the other near Ivanja Reka (east).

Two additional bridges across the river Sava are proposed: Jarun Bridge and Bundek Bridge.
===Public transportation===

Public transportation in the city is organized in several layers: the inner parts of the city are mostly covered by trams, the outer city areas, and closer suburbs are linked with buses and rapid transit commuter rail.

The public transportation company ZET (&quot;Zagrebački električni tramvaj&quot;, Zagreb Electric Tram) operates trams, all inner bus lines, and most of the suburban bus lines, and it is subsidized by the city council.

The national rail operator Croatian Railways (&quot;Hrvatske željeznice&quot;, HŽ) runs a network of urban and suburban train lines in the metropolitan Zagreb area and is a government-owned corporation.

The Zagreb funicular (&quot;uspinjača&quot;) in the historic part of the city is a tourist attraction.

Taxi market has been liberalized in early 2018 and numerous transport companies have been allowed to enter the market. Consequently, the prices significantly dropped whereas the service was immensely improved so the popularity of taxis in Zagreb has been increasing.

====Tram network====

Zagreb has an extensive tram network with 15 day and 4 night lines covering much of the inner- and middle-suburbs of the city. The first tram line was opened on 5 September 1891 and trams have been serving as a vital component of Zagreb mass transit ever since. Trams usually travel at speeds of , but slow considerably during rush hour. On narrower streets the tracks are either shared with car traffic or separated by a painted yellow line, which can still be used by taxis, buses and emergency vehicles, whereas on larger avenues the tracks are situated inside green belts.
An ambitious program, which entailed replacing old trams with the new and modern ones built mostly in Zagreb by companies Končar elektroindustrija and, to a lesser extent, by TŽV Gredelj, has recently been finished. The new &quot;TMK 2200&quot;, trams by the end of 2012 made around 95% of the fleet.

====Suburban rail network====
The commuter rail network in Zagreb has existed since 1992. In 2005, suburban rail services were increased to a 15-minute frequency serving the middle and outer suburbs of Zagreb, primarily in the east–west direction and to the southern districts. This has enhanced the commuting opportunities across the city.

A new link to the nearby town of Samobor has been announced and is due to start construction in 2014. This link will be standard-gauge and tie in with normal Croatian Railways operations. The previous narrow-gauge line to Samobor called &quot;Samoborček&quot; was closed in the 1970s.

===Air traffic===


Zagreb Airport is the main Croatian international airport, a drive southeast of Zagreb in the city of Velika Gorica. The airport is also the main Croatian airbase featuring a fighter squadron, helicopters, as well as military and freight transport aircraft. The airport had 3.45 million passengers in 2019 with a new passenger terminal being opened in late March 2017 that can accommodate up to 5.5 million passengers.

Zagreb also has a second, smaller airport, Lučko . It is home to sports aeroplanes and a Croatian special police unit, as well as being a military helicopter airbase. Lučko used to be the main airport of Zagreb from 1947 to 1959.

A third, small grass airfield, Buševec, is located just outside Velika Gorica. It is primarily used for sports purposes.

==Education==

Zagreb has 136 primary schools and 100 secondary schools including 30 gymnasia. There are 5 public higher education institution and 9 private professional higher education schools.

There are 4 International Schools in Zagreb:

*American International School of Zagreb (AISZ)
*The Learning Tree International Kindergarten (TLT)
*French School in Zagreb
*The German School in Zagreb.

=== University of Zagreb ===

Founded in 1669, the University of Zagreb is the oldest continuously operating university in Croatia and one of the largest and oldest universities in the Southeastern Europe. Ever since its foundation, the university has been continually growing and developing and now consists of 29 faculties, three art academies and the Croatian Studies Centre. More than 200,000 students have attained the Bachelor&#x27;s degree at the university, which has also assigned 18,000 Master&#x27;s and 8,000 Doctor&#x27;s degrees.
, the University of Zagreb is ranked among 500 Best Universities of the world by the Shanghai Academic Ranking of World Universities.

Zagreb is the seat of two private universities: the Catholic University of Croatia and the Libertas International University. It also hosts numerous public and private polytechnics, colleges and higher professional schools.

==Gallery==

==Notable people==



=== Artists ===
*Lea Deutsch (1927–1943), child actress
*Kristina Krepela (born 1979), actress
*Sanja Iveković (born 1949), photographer, performer, sculptor and installation artist
*Jagoda Kaloper (1947–2016), painter and actress
*Igor Kordej (born 1957), comic book artist
*Darko Macan (born 1966), writer and illustrator
*Ivan Meštrović (1983–1962), sculptor, architect, and writer
*Velimir Neidhardt (born 1942), architect
*Vlado Milunić (1941–2022), architect, known for designing the Dancing House in Prague
*Vera Nikolić Podrinska (1886–1972), painter and baroness
*Srećko Puntarić (born 1952), cartoonist
*Josip Račić (1885–1908), painter
*Esad Ribić (born 1972), comic book artist
*Goran Sudžuka (born 1969), comic book artist
*Marino Tartaglia (1894–1984), painter
*Vladimir Varlaj (1895–1962), artist
*Zdravko Zupan (1950–2015), comic book creator and historian

=== Footballers ===
*Milan Badelj (born 1989), football player
*Josip Brekalo (born 1998), football player
*Marcelo Brozović (born 1992), football player
*Tomislav Butina (born 1974), football player
*Ivan Čunčić (born 1985), football player
*Joško Gvardiol (born 2002), football player
*Tin Jedvaj (born 1995), football player
*Josip Juranović (born 1995), football player
*Andrej Kramarić (born 1991), football player
*Niko Kranjčar (born 1984), football player
*Jerko Leko (born 1980), football player
*Lovro Majer (born 1998), football player
*Jasmin Mujdža (born 1974), football player
*Mensur Mujdža (born 1984), football player
*Mislav Oršić (born 1992), football player
*Dubravko Pavličić (1967–2012), football player
*Josip Pivarić (born 1989), football player
*Marko Pjaca (born 1995), football player
*Dario Šimić (born 1975), football player
*Zvonimir Soldo (born 1967), football player
*Bernard Vukas (1927–1983), football player

=== Other sportspeople ===
*Vasilije Calasan (born 1981), French racing driver
*Marin Čolak (born 1984), racing driver
*Borna Ćorić (born 1996), tennis player
*Krešimir Ćosić (1948–1995), basketball player
*Danko Cvjetićanin (born 1963), basketball player
*Josip Glasnović (born 1983), sports shooter, Olympic gold medal winner
*Zlatko Horvat (born 1984), handball player
*Filip Hrgović (born 1992), professional boxer
*Ivo Karlović (born 1979), tennis player
*Nenad Kljaić (born 1966), handball player
*Vjekoslav Kobešćak (born 1974), water polo player and coach
*Ivica Kostelić (born 1979), alpine ski racer
*Janica Kostelić (born 1982), alpine ski racer, four-time Olympic gold medalist
*Luka Lončar (born 1987), water polo player
*Iva Majoli (born 1977), tennis player
*Nikola Mektić (born 1988), tennis player, Olympic gold medal winner
*Nika Mühl (born 2001), basketball player
*Mirko Novosel (born 1938), basketball player
*Tomislav Paškvalin (born 1961), water polo player
*Sandra Elkasević (born 1990), discus thrower, won two gold medals at the Summer Olympics
*Dubravko Šimenc (born 1966), water polo player
*Martin Sinković (born 1989), rower, Olympic gold medal winner
*Valent Sinković (born 1988), rower, Olympic gold medal winner
*Tin Srbić (born 1996), artistic gymnast
*Manuel Štrlek (born 1988), handball player
*Igor Vori (born 1980), handball player
*Vedran Zrnić (born 1979), handball player

=== Military ===
*Haim Bar-Lev (1924–1994), Israeli general and politician

=== Music ===
*Zlatko Baloković (1895–1965), violinist
*Josipa Lisac (born 1950), Croatian singer
*Tajči (born 1970), Croatian singer, television show host
*Miljenko Matijević (born 1964), singer and songwriter; the lead vocalist of rock band Steelheart
*Zinka Milanov (1906–1989), operatic spinto soprano
*Nina Badrić (born 1972), pop singer and songwriter
*Lana Jurčević (born 1984), pop singer
*Antonija Šola (born 1979), musician, singer-songwriter, lyricist, actress and music producer
*Sanja Doležal (born 1963), pop singer and television host, member of the pop music band Novi fosili
*Ana Rucner (born 1983), Croatian cellist

=== Religion ===
*Mihalj Šilobod Bolšić (1724–1787), Roman Catholic priest, mathematician, writer, and musical theorist primarily known for writing the first Croatian arithmetic textbook &quot;Arithmatika Horvatzka&quot; (published in Zagreb, 1758)
*Miroslav Šalom Freiberger (1903–1943), chief rabbi and writer
*Josip Juraj Strossmayer (1815–1905), politician, Roman Catholic bishop, and benefactor

=== Science and humanities ===
*Ivan Đikić (born 1966), molecular biologist, director of the Institute of Biochemistry II at Goethe University Frankfurt
*Mario Jurić (born 1979), astronomer
*Vesna Girardi-Jurkić (1944–2012), archeologist and museologist
*Dragutin Gorjanović-Kramberger (1856–1936), geologist, paleontologist, and archeologist
*Milan Kangrga (1923–2008), philosopher
*Radoslav Katičić (1930–2019), linguist, classical philologist
*Nada Klaić (1920–1988), historian
*Ivo Kolin (1924–2007), inventor
*Zdravko Lorković (1900–1998), biologist, entomologist and geneticist
*Ranko Matasović (born 1968), linguist
*Ivo Pilar (1874–1933), historian, politician, publicist and lawyer
*Martin Previšić (born 1984), historian
*Vesna Pusić (born 1953), sociologist and politician
*Marin Soljačić (born 1974), physicist and electrical engineer
*Rudi Supek (1913–1993), sociologist and philosopher
*Goran Švob (1947–2013), philosopher and logician
*Josip Torbar (1824–1900), natural scientist
*Hrvoje Turković (born 1943), film theorist
*Ljudevit Vukotinović (1813–1893), politician, writer and naturalist
*Milena Žic-Fuchs (born 1954), linguist

=== Writers ===
*Tituš Brezovački (1757–1805), playwright, satirist and poet
*August Cesarec (1893–1941), writer
*Bora Ćosić (born 1932), writer
*Dimitrija Demeter (1811–1872), writer
*Daša Drndić (1946–2018), writer
*Zoran Ferić (born 1961), writer
*Branko Gavella (1885–1962), theater director and essayist
*Miroslav Krleža (1893–1981), writer, considered the greatest Croatian writer of the 20th century
*Antun Mihanović (1796–1861), poet and lyricist, wrote the national anthem of Croatia
*August Šenoa (1838–1881), novelist
*Sunčana Škrinjarić (1931–2004), writer, poet and journalist
*Davor Slamnig (born 1956), writer and musician
*Slobodan Šnajder (born 1948), writer and publicist

==See also==
*Museum of Illusions
*Zagreb funicular
* Ilica (typeface)
* Zagreb metropolitan area

==Notes==

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

*Zagreb – Official website 
*Zagreb Tourist Board
*Zagreb Fair</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="0" end="6" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="18" end="25" title="capital (political)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30" end="42" title="List of cities and towns in Croatia#List of cities and towns" label="largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="46" end="53" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058276" start="68" end="88" title="Northern Croatia" label="north of the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="100" end="104" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q743452" start="142" end="152" title="Medvednica" label="Medvednica"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="227" end="235" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="269" end="284" title="above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q117475040" start="375" end="399" title="Zagreb metropolitan area" label="Zagreb metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q12744603" start="479" end="489" title="Andautonia" label="Andautonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041846" start="507" end="517" title="Šćitarjevo" label="Šćitarjevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542359" start="641" end="647" title="Kaptol, Zagreb" label="Kaptol"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702" start="673" end="688" title="free royal city" label="free royal city"/>
<link wikidata="Q718030" start="707" end="719" title="Janko Kamauf" label="Janko Kamauf"/>
<link wikidata="Q718043" start="741" end="752" title="List of mayors of Zagreb" label="first mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435941" start="785" end="817" title="Administrative divisions of Croatia" label="Croatian administrative division"/>
<link wikidata="Q27038" start="877" end="890" title="Zagreb County" label="Zagreb County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="933" end="950" title="#City districts" label="17 city districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q975995" start="1012" end="1036" title="Posavina" label="valley of the river Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q718103" start="1092" end="1101" title="Podsljeme" label="Podsljeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017892" start="1106" end="1113" title="Sesvete" label="Sesvete"/>
<link wikidata="Q743452" start="1161" end="1171" title="Medvednica" label="Medvednica"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="1313" end="1324" title="global city" label="global city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531726" start="1367" end="1414" title="Globalization and World Cities Research Network" label="Globalization and World Cities Research Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320217" start="1615" end="1633" title="central government" label="central government"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="1635" end="1656" title="public administration" label="administrative bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278383" start="1673" end="1694" title="Government of Croatia" label="government ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669700" start="1714" end="1740" title="List of Croatian companies" label="largest Croatian companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="1742" end="1747" title="Mass media" label="media"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="1874" end="1888" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="1912" end="1928" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="2007" end="2014" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="2065" end="2082" title="quality of living" label="quality of living"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2084" end="2091" title="#Museums" label="museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q466410" start="2177" end="2186" title="high-tech" label="high-tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="2206" end="2220" title="service sector" label="service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261961" start="2379" end="2393" title="Zagreb bishopric" label="Zagreb Diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q41790485" start="2520" end="2553" title="Felician, Archbishop of Esztergom" label="Felician, Archbishop of Esztergom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276244" start="2820" end="2830" title="Nada Klaić" label="Nada Klaić"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2832" end="2847" title="Miroslav Kravar" label="Miroslav Kravar"/>
<link wikidata="Q191090" start="2859" end="2869" title="metathesis (linguistics)" label="metathesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q838165" start="3070" end="3079" title="Kajkavian" label="Kajkavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q109964" start="3153" end="3167" title="folk etymology" label="folk etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130279" start="3403" end="3413" title="hypocorism" label="hypocorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190240" start="3424" end="3431" title="Cyprian" label="Cyprian"/>
<link wikidata="Q520019" start="3467" end="3474" title="Csepreg" label="Csepreg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278569" start="3664" end="3668" title="Gradec, Zagreb" label="Grič"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="3674" end="3686" title="Middle Latin" label="Middle Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248221" start="3691" end="3703" title="Neo-Latin" label="Modern Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="3786" end="3792" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278569" start="3897" end="3910" title="Gradec, Zagreb" label="Grič (Gradec)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4003" end="4005" title=":wikt:Reconstruction:Proto-Slavic/za" label="za"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4006" end="4011" title=":wikt:Reconstruction:Proto-Slavic/grobъ" label="grab-"/>
<link wikidata="Q12633199" start="4164" end="4176" title="Ivan Tkalčić" label="Ivan Tkalčić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714860" start="4245" end="4261" title="Augustin Kažotić" label="Augustin Kažotić"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4451" end="4461" title="Ban Jelačić Square#History" label="Manduševac"/>
<link wikidata="Q12744603" start="4683" end="4693" title="Andautonia" label="Andautonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041846" start="4699" end="4709" title="Ščitarjevo" label="Ščitarjevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542359" start="4922" end="4928" title="Kaptol, Zagreb" label="Kaptol"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="4950" end="4956" title="clergy" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312220" start="4969" end="4985" title="Zagreb Cathedral" label="Zagreb Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278569" start="5011" end="5017" title="Gradec, Zagreb" label="Gradec"/>
<link wikidata="Q253779" start="5076" end="5090" title="Ban of Croatia" label="Ban of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154418" start="5092" end="5105" title="Josip Jelačić" label="Josip Jelačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q377002" start="5167" end="5185" title="Ban Jelačić Square" label="Ban Jelačić Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="5228" end="5238" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085493" start="5356" end="5385" title="Croatian independence referendum, 1991" label="Croatia declared independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="5415" end="5452" title="Croatian Parliament" label="Parliament of the Republic of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="5594" end="5603" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26486" start="5604" end="5618" title="Ladislaus I of Hungary" label="King Ladislaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q858841" start="5660" end="5678" title="Kingdom of Croatia (medieval)" label="Kingdom of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="5727" end="5730" title="Episcopal see" label="see"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542359" start="5757" end="5763" title="Kaptol, Zagreb" label="Kaptol"/>
<link wikidata="Q312220" start="5783" end="5799" title="Zagreb Cathedral" label="Zagreb Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278569" start="5833" end="5839" title="Gradec, Zagreb" label="Gradec"/>
<link wikidata="Q128957" start="5976" end="5987" title="Gornji Grad – Medveščak" label="Gornji Grad"/>
<link wikidata="Q852171" start="6075" end="6081" title="Mongol invasion of Europe" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q152370" start="6196" end="6208" title="Béla IV of Hungary" label="King Béla IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579248" start="6228" end="6247" title="Golden Bull of 1242" label="Golden Bull of 1242"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="6335" end="6350" title="judiciary" label="judicial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="6491" end="6498" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579248" start="6543" end="6554" title="Golden Bull of 1242" label="Golden Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="7557" end="7565" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="7570" end="7578" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q253779" start="7697" end="7711" title="Ban of Croatia" label="Ban of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315195" start="7730" end="7749" title="Nikola IX Frankopan" label="Nikola IX Frankopan"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="7777" end="7796" title="Croatian Parliament" label="Croatian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="7802" end="7809" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="7845" end="7859" title="grammar school" label="grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q179718" start="7865" end="7885" title="Catherine of Alexandria" label="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q675848" start="8039" end="8059" title="University of Zagreb" label="University of Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="8141" end="8151" title="Bubonic plague" label="the plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420" start="8204" end="8212" title="Varaždin" label="Varaždin"/>
<link wikidata="Q76555" start="8259" end="8268" title="Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Joseph II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420" start="8307" end="8315" title="Varaždin" label="Varaždin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617" start="8320" end="8328" title="Karlovac" label="Karlovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q680821" start="8431" end="8456" title="Illyrian movement" label="Croatian National Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q718043" start="8574" end="8579" title="List of mayors of Zagreb" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q718030" start="8582" end="8594" title="Janko Kamauf" label="Janko Kamauf"/>
<link wikidata="Q198478" start="8643" end="8654" title="Zidani Most" label="Zidani Most"/>
<link wikidata="Q192119" start="8659" end="8664" title="Sisak" label="Sisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495738" start="8710" end="8718" title="gasworks" label="gasworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986837" start="8746" end="8757" title="Grič cannon" label="Grič cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986837" start="8779" end="8793" title="Lotrščak Tower" label="Lotrščak Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278569" start="8797" end="8801" title="Grič, Zagreb" label="Grič"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="8829" end="8839" title="water supply" label="waterworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618441" start="8867" end="8889" title="1880 Zagreb earthquake" label="1880 Zagreb earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="8918" end="8929" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="9044" end="9048" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241602" start="9148" end="9158" title="Donji grad (Zagreb)" label="Donji Grad"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="9218" end="9232" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="9378" end="9398" title="power station" label="electric-power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601369" start="9555" end="9570" title="Stara Peščenica" label="Stara Peščenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285592" start="9587" end="9596" title="Črnomerec" label="Črnomerec"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="9665" end="9676" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="9748" end="9761" title="working class" label="working-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287416" start="9780" end="9785" title="Trnje, Zagreb" label="Trnje"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="9822" end="9826" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q743452" start="9917" end="9927" title="Medvednica" label="Medvednica"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="9942" end="9968" title="Interwar period" label="between the two World Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="10112" end="10125" title="radio broadcasting" label="radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q603772" start="10188" end="10199" title="Zagreb Fair" label="Zagreb Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="10263" end="10291" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="10325" end="10337" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="10349" end="10357" title="Fascism in Italy" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q171258" start="10374" end="10396" title="Zagreb in World War II" label="Zagreb in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="10471" end="10477" title="Ustaša" label="Ustaša"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="10555" end="10564" title="Partisans (Yugoslavia)" label="Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q209062" start="10664" end="10693" title="Socialist Republic of Croatia" label="Socialist Republic of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="10749" end="10789" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024104" start="11020" end="11031" title="Novi Zagreb" label="Novi Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286337" start="11185" end="11199" title="city districts" label="city districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285601" start="11201" end="11220" title="Novi Zagreb – zapad" label="Novi Zagreb – zapad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285623" start="11257" end="11276" title="Novi Zagreb – istok" label="Novi Zagreb – istok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620406" start="11370" end="11377" title="Dubrava, Zagreb" label="Dubrava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764105" start="11389" end="11394" title="Jarun" label="Jarun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925519" start="11396" end="11401" title="Blato, Zagreb" label="Blato"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="11457" end="11478" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q128016" start="11480" end="11485" title="Zagreb Airport" label="Pleso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662024" start="11535" end="11550" title="industrial district" label="industrial zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142713" start="11746" end="11764" title="1987 Summer Universiade" label="Summer Universiade"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="11955" end="11983" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="Croatian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624653" start="12003" end="12020" title="Battle of the Barracks" label="sporadic fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="12032" end="12035" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="JNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q131263" start="12036" end="12049" title="barracks" label="army barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q167682" start="12114" end="12130" title="rocket artillery" label="rocket artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q140392" start="12138" end="12152" title="Zagreb rocket attacks" label="rocket attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408" start="12265" end="12273" title="Zaprešić" label="Zaprešić"/>
<link wikidata="Q390587" start="12275" end="12282" title="Samobor" label="Samobor"/>
<link wikidata="Q400041" start="12284" end="12293" title="Dugo Selo" label="Dugo Selo"/>
<link wikidata="Q331141" start="12299" end="12312" title="Velika Gorica" label="Velika Gorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="12381" end="12394" title="urban agglomeration" label="agglomeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="12589" end="12604" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q64589543" start="12606" end="12612" title="Humid temperate climate" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="12644" end="12669" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="13233" end="13243" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="13258" end="13266" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="13268" end="13273" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="13277" end="13283" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q743452" start="13804" end="13814" title="Medvednica" label="Medvednica"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="13869" end="13873" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q18142" start="14902" end="14911" title="high-rise" label="high-rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595983" start="14930" end="14937" title="Neboder" label="Neboder"/>
<link wikidata="Q377002" start="14948" end="14966" title="Ban Jelačić Square" label="Ban Jelačić Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073587" start="14968" end="14980" title="Cibona Tower" label="Cibona Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051087" start="14993" end="15004" title="Zagrepčanka" label="Zagrepčanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285699" start="15030" end="15038" title="Mamutica" label="Mamutica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285623" start="15050" end="15069" title="Novi Zagreb – istok" label="Novi Zagreb – istok"/>
<link wikidata="Q462813" start="15099" end="15114" title="Zagreb TV Tower" label="Zagreb TV Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q743452" start="15118" end="15124" title="Medvednica" label="Sljeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251720" start="15286" end="15295" title="Eurotower (Zagreb)" label="Eurotower"/>
<link wikidata="Q951553" start="15297" end="15307" title="HOTO Tower" label="HOTO Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064476" start="15309" end="15320" title="Zagrebtower" label="Zagrebtower"/>
<link wikidata="Q892427" start="15322" end="15338" title="Sky Office Tower" label="Sky Office Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642214" start="15347" end="15373" title="tallest buildings in Croatia" label="tallest high-rise building"/>
<link wikidata="Q17441856" start="15384" end="15410" title="Strojarska Business Center" label="Strojarska Business Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024104" start="15416" end="15427" title="Novi Zagreb" label="Novi Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925519" start="15451" end="15456" title="Blato, Zagreb" label="Blato"/>
<link wikidata="Q12635300" start="15461" end="15468" title="Lanište, Croatia" label="Lanište"/>
<link wikidata="Q641519" start="15507" end="15519" title="Arena Zagreb" label="Zagreb Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q12749707" start="16110" end="16124" title="Veternica cave" label="Veternica cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="16134" end="16145" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178600" start="16408" end="16419" title="gingerbread" label="gingerbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q743452" start="16451" end="16461" title="Medvednica" label="Medvednica"/>
<link wikidata="Q743452" start="16497" end="16503" title="Medvednica" label="Sljeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q462813" start="16563" end="16578" title="Zagreb TV Tower" label="Zagreb TV Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q211046" start="16608" end="16612" title="Kupa (river)" label="Kupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q743502" start="16667" end="16683" title="Hrvatsko Zagorje" label="Hrvatsko Zagorje"/>
<link wikidata="Q943691" start="16791" end="16824" title="FIS Alpine World Ski Championships" label="World Ski Championship tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q223275" start="16891" end="16898" title="Velebit" label="Velebit"/>
<link wikidata="Q119206" start="16997" end="17008" title="Julian Alps" label="Julian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="17024" end="17032" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013127" start="17210" end="17220" title="Medvedgrad" label="Medvedgrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q640692" start="17417" end="17430" title="eternal flame" label="eternal flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q16513600" start="17490" end="17498" title="homeland" label="homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197685" start="17530" end="17546" title="Public holiday" label="national holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q12643002" start="17578" end="17587" title="Susedgrad" label="Susedgrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q394286" start="17800" end="17808" title="Žumberak" label="Žumberak"/>
<link wikidata="Q743452" start="17809" end="17819" title="Medvednica" label="Medvednica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618441" start="17942" end="17964" title="1880 Zagreb earthquake" label="1880 Zagreb earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079212" start="18165" end="18195" title="Office of Emergency Management" label="Office of Emergency Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q88259708" start="18455" end="18479" title="2020 Zagreb earthquake" label="5.5 magnitude earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618441" start="18697" end="18719" title="1880 Zagreb earthquake" label="1880 Zagreb earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047394" start="18757" end="18784" title="Demographics of Croatia" label="the largest city in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="18844" end="18861" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q27038" start="18935" end="18948" title="Zagreb County" label="Zagreb County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047394" start="19016" end="19037" title="Demographics of Croatia" label="population of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="19165" end="19186" title="administrative centre" label="administrative centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="19230" end="19236" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047394" start="19360" end="19377" title="Ethnic minorities in Croatia" label="ethnic minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280677" start="19386" end="19391" title="Serbs of Croatia" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947386" start="19407" end="19415" title="Bosniaks of Croatia" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709238" start="19431" end="19440" title="Albanians of Croatia" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502513" start="19456" end="19462" title="Romani people in Croatia" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503182" start="19478" end="19486" title="Slovenes of Croatia" label="Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407146" start="19502" end="19513" title="Macedonians of Croatia" label="Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503053" start="19527" end="19539" title="Montenegrins of Croatia" label="Montenegrins"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="19794" end="19799" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="19801" end="19816" title="Philippines" label="the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="19818" end="19823" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="19829" end="19839" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="19886" end="19908" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="19910" end="19916" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="19918" end="19924" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="19929" end="19944" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286337" start="20083" end="20097" title="city districts" label="city districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845841" start="20313" end="20334" title="naselje" label="standalone settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942662" start="20611" end="20619" title="Adamovec" label="Adamovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683204" start="20637" end="20644" title="Belovar" label="Belovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442985" start="20662" end="20669" title="Blaguša" label="Blaguša"/>
<link wikidata="Q97238195" start="20687" end="20694" title="Botinec" label="Botinec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354754" start="20710" end="20720" title="Brebernica" label="Brebernica"/>
<link wikidata="Q911685" start="20737" end="20746" title="Brezovica, Zagreb" label="Brezovica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593016" start="20764" end="20771" title="Budenec" label="Budenec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257235" start="20789" end="20794" title="Buzin, Zagreb" label="Buzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415708" start="20814" end="20819" title="Cerje, Zagreb" label="Cerje"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296432" start="20837" end="20844" title="Demerje" label="Demerje"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660928" start="20862" end="20869" title="Desprim" label="Desprim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508835" start="20887" end="20895" title="Dobrodol, Croatia" label="Dobrodol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225121" start="20915" end="20925" title="Donji Čehi" label="Donji Čehi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036818" start="20943" end="20959" title="Donji Dragonožec" label="Donji Dragonožec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655123" start="20977" end="20989" title="Donji Trpuci" label="Donji Trpuci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509198" start="21007" end="21014" title="Drenčec" label="Drenčec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954909" start="21032" end="21050" title="Drežnik Brezovički" label="Drežnik Brezovički"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129108" start="21068" end="21075" title="Dumovec" label="Dumovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079911" start="21093" end="21103" title="Đurđekovec" label="Đurđekovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517571" start="21121" end="21126" title="Gajec, Croatia" label="Gajec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746694" start="21144" end="21158" title="Glavnica Donja" label="Glavnica Donja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537041" start="21176" end="21191" title="Glavnica Gornja" label="Glavnica Gornja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868246" start="21209" end="21219" title="Glavničica" label="Glavničica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810080" start="21237" end="21246" title="Goli Breg" label="Goli Breg"/>
<link wikidata="Q752921" start="21264" end="21271" title="Goranec, Zagreb" label="Goranec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851514" start="21289" end="21300" title="Gornji Čehi" label="Gornji Čehi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332304" start="21318" end="21335" title="Gornji Dragonožec" label="Gornji Dragonožec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996109" start="21353" end="21366" title="Gornji Trpuci" label="Gornji Trpuci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015505" start="21383" end="21391" title="Grančari" label="Grančari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759111" start="21409" end="21421" title="Havidić Selo" label="Havidić Selo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442392" start="21438" end="21445" title="Horvati" label="Horvati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300065" start="21465" end="21483" title="Hrašće Turopoljsko" label="Hrašće Turopoljsko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495762" start="21503" end="21520" title="Hrvatski Leskovac" label="Hrvatski Leskovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273450" start="21540" end="21550" title="Hudi Bitek" label="Hudi Bitek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442699" start="21568" end="21579" title="Ivanja Reka" label="Ivanja Reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201643" start="21599" end="21608" title="Jesenovec" label="Jesenovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936120" start="21626" end="21634" title="Ježdovec" label="Ježdovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444750" start="21654" end="21660" title="Kašina" label="Kašina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937919" start="21680" end="21696" title="Kašinska Sopnica" label="Kašinska Sopnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485206" start="21714" end="21724" title="Kučilovina" label="Kučilovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508995" start="21742" end="21749" title="Kućanec" label="Kućanec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509176" start="21767" end="21786" title="Kupinečki Kraljevec" label="Kupinečki Kraljevec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133712" start="21806" end="21813" title="Lipnica, Zagreb" label="Lipnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290060" start="21831" end="21836" title="Lučko" label="Lučko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600130" start="21856" end="21861" title="Lužan" label="Lužan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281233" start="21879" end="21889" title="Mala Mlaka" label="Mala Mlaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q920509" start="21907" end="21920" title="Markovo Polje" label="Markovo Polje"/>
<link wikidata="Q732877" start="21938" end="21945" title="Moravče, Croatia" label="Moravče"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564347" start="21963" end="21967" title="Odra, Zagreb" label="Odra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094716" start="21987" end="22001" title="Odranski Obrež" label="Odranski Obrež"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509426" start="22021" end="22031" title="Paruževina" label="Paruževina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258470" start="22049" end="22062" title="Planina Donja" label="Planina Donja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1843359" start="22080" end="22094" title="Planina Gornja" label="Planina Gornja"/>
<link wikidata="Q630192" start="22112" end="22119" title="Popovec" label="Popovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699027" start="22137" end="22146" title="Prekvršje" label="Prekvršje"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513180" start="22164" end="22175" title="Prepuštovec, Zagreb" label="Prepuštovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017892" start="22193" end="22200" title="Sesvete" label="Sesvete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512516" start="22221" end="22229" title="Soblinec" label="Soblinec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377697" start="22247" end="22254" title="Starjak" label="Starjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904608" start="22272" end="22278" title="Strmec, Zagreb" label="Strmec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514064" start="22296" end="22305" title="Šašinovec" label="Šašinovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q12646126" start="22323" end="22333" title="Šimunčevec" label="Šimunčevec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453358" start="22351" end="22363" title="Veliko Polje, Zagreb" label="Veliko Polje"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509207" start="22383" end="22393" title="Vuger Selo" label="Vuger Selo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790575" start="22411" end="22425" title="Vugrovec Donji" label="Vugrovec Donji"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333695" start="22443" end="22458" title="Vugrovec Gornji" label="Vugrovec Gornji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901535" start="22476" end="22484" title="Vurnovec" label="Vurnovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236873" start="22502" end="22511" title="Zadvorsko" label="Zadvorsko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478379" start="22559" end="22569" title="Žerjavinec" label="Žerjavinec"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="22647" end="22666" title="Croatia" label="Republic of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501733" start="22743" end="22765" title="St. Mark&amp;#x27;s Square, Zagreb" label="St. Mark&amp;#x27;s Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278383" start="22787" end="22824" title="Government of Croatia" label="Government of the Republic of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q806072" start="22832" end="22844" title="Banski Dvori" label="Banski Dvori"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="22858" end="22877" title="Croatian Parliament" label="Croatian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583191" start="22902" end="22949" title="Constitutional Court of Croatia" label="Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q96250350" start="23099" end="23117" title="Tomislav Tomašević" label="Tomislav Tomašević"/>
<link wikidata="Q96099072" start="23125" end="23132" title="We can! (Croatia)" label="We can!"/>
<link wikidata="Q106091697" start="23156" end="23183" title="2021 Zagreb local elections" label="2021 Zagreb local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q12631733" start="23332" end="23347" title="Zagreb Assembly" label="Zagreb Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12631733" start="23433" end="23448" title="Zagreb Assembly" label="Zagreb Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276230" start="23546" end="23558" title="Constitution of Croatia" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="23654" end="23668" title="Self-governance" label="self-governing"/>
<link wikidata="Q131744" start="23692" end="23696" title="List of cities and towns in Croatia" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q57053" start="23701" end="23707" title="Counties of Croatia" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q27038" start="23736" end="23749" title="Zagreb County" label="Zagreb County"/>
<link wikidata="Q12631733" start="23814" end="23834" title="Zagreb Assembly" label="Zagreb City Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q718043" start="23916" end="23931" title="list of mayors of Zagreb" label="mayor of Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="24142" end="24160" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="24164" end="24180" title="direct elections" label="direct elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q337987" start="24184" end="24197" title="secret ballot" label="secret ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="24204" end="24223" title="proportional representation" label="proportional system"/>
<link wikidata="Q337866" start="24229" end="24248" title="d&amp;#x27;Hondt method" label="d&amp;#x27;Hondt method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382648" start="24523" end="24540" title="Majority vote" label="majoritarian vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="24542" end="24558" title="two-round system" label="two-round system"/>
<link wikidata="Q12631733" start="24927" end="24942" title="Zagreb Assembly" label="Zagreb Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196663" start="24986" end="25001" title="recall referendum" label="city referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q702448" start="25270" end="25288" title="electoral register" label="electoral register"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="25343" end="25371" title="special elections" label="special mayoral by-elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q718043" start="25416" end="25421" title="mayors of Zagreb" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936366" start="25721" end="25733" title="Municipal service" label="city offices"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936366" start="25737" end="25753" title="Municipal service" label="public institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936366" start="25757" end="25763" title="Municipal service" label="bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936366" start="25770" end="25783" title="Municipal services" label="city services"/>
<link wikidata="Q12645496" start="26234" end="26247" title="Districts of Zagreb" label="city district"/>
<link wikidata="Q118134387" start="26665" end="26737" title="2023 Croatian national minorities councils and representatives elections" label="2023 Croatian national minorities councils and representatives elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709238" start="26738" end="26747" title="Albanians of Croatia" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947386" start="26749" end="26757" title="Bosniaks of Croatia" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441791" start="26759" end="26765" title="Czechs of Croatia" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q837094" start="26767" end="26777" title="Hungarians of Croatia" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407146" start="26779" end="26790" title="Macedonians of Croatia" label="Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503053" start="26792" end="26804" title="Montenegrins of Croatia" label="Montenegrins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502513" start="26806" end="26810" title="Romani people in Croatia" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503182" start="26812" end="26820" title="Slovenes of Croatia" label="Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280677" start="26825" end="26841" title="Serbs of Croatia" label="Serbs of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507850" start="26942" end="26952" title="Bulgarians in Croatia" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209315" start="26954" end="26959" title="Poles of Croatia" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q312259" start="26961" end="26977" title="Pannonian Rusyns" label="Pannonian Rusyns"/>
<link wikidata="Q10817992" start="26979" end="26987" title="Russians of Croatia" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566878" start="26989" end="26996" title="Slovaks of Croatia" label="Slovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503479" start="26998" end="27006" title="Italians of Croatia" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855539" start="27008" end="27013" title="Turks in Croatia" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047394" start="27015" end="27025" title="Ukrainians of Croatia" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509326" start="27030" end="27045" title="Jews of Croatia" label="Jews of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191669" start="27111" end="27129" title="Germans of Croatia" label="Germans of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="27257" end="27264" title="twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="27304" end="27311" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="27322" end="27327" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="27340" end="27356" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q26087" start="27368" end="27374" title="Tromsø" label="Tromsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="27386" end="27398" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="27413" end="27418" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="27429" end="27435" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="27449" end="27459" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="27478" end="27486" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="27497" end="27505" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491" start="27518" end="27524" title="La Paz" label="La Paz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="27537" end="27545" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="27573" end="27582" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q23564" start="27596" end="27605" title="Podgorica" label="Podgorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q80053" start="27621" end="27627" title="Tabriz" label="Tabriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="27637" end="27643" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="27655" end="27661" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="27681" end="27687" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="27702" end="27708" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q25270" start="27720" end="27728" title="Pristina" label="Pristina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520" start="27740" end="27746" title="Astana" label="Astana"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="27762" end="27766" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="27777" end="27783" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q396512" start="27796" end="27804" title="Petrinja" label="Petrinja"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867" start="27817" end="27824" title="Vukovar" label="Vukovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q71284" start="27837" end="27846" title="Xiangyang" label="Xiangyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="27926" end="27932" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q19689" start="27944" end="27950" title="Tirana" label="Tirana"/>
<link wikidata="Q45779" start="27962" end="27966" title="Pécs" label="Pécs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="27978" end="27982" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q210726" start="28211" end="28214" title="History of Croatia" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557929" start="28687" end="28713" title="Republic of Croatia Square" label="Republic of Croatia Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q603560" start="28732" end="28742" title="Stone Gate" label="Stone Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q287178" start="28929" end="28939" title="Nine Views" label="Nine Views"/>
<link wikidata="Q57607" start="28985" end="29001" title="Christmas market" label="Christmas market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789628" start="29217" end="29230" title="Croatian cuisine" label="Croatian food"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609317" start="29281" end="29307" title="List of chained-brand hotels" label="international hotel chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q830334" start="29364" end="29376" title="Best Western" label="Best Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057464" start="29378" end="29394" title="Hilton Worldwide" label="Hilton Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504643" start="29397" end="29417" title="DoubleTree by Hilton" label="DoubleTree by Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162859" start="29419" end="29436" title="Hilton Garden Inn" label="Hilton Garden Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632909" start="29443" end="29459" title="Canopy by Hilton" label="Canopy by Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141173" start="29462" end="29484" title="Marriott International" label="Marriott International"/>
<link wikidata="Q634831" start="29487" end="29502" title="Sheraton Hotels" label="Sheraton Hotels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969162" start="29509" end="29519" title="The Westin" label="The Westin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19724671" start="29522" end="29542" title="Radisson Hotel Group" label="Radisson Hotel Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q691162" start="29544" end="29574" title="Mövenpick Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts" label="Mövenpick Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250375" start="29588" end="29615" title="Regent Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts" label="Regent Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739460" start="29629" end="29651" title="Esplanade Zagreb Hotel" label="Esplanade Zagreb Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q377002" start="29701" end="29719" title="Ban Jelačić Square" label="Ban Jelačić Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278569" start="29739" end="29750" title="Gradec, Zagreb" label="Gornji Grad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542359" start="29755" end="29761" title="Kaptol, Zagreb" label="Kaptol"/>
<link wikidata="Q142031" start="30021" end="30030" title="funicular" label="funicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501733" start="30117" end="30139" title="St. Mark&amp;#x27;s Square, Zagreb" label="St. Mark&amp;#x27;s Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278569" start="30147" end="30157" title="Gradec, Zagreb" label="Upper town"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993628" start="30301" end="30307" title="Gradec, Zagreb County" label="Gradec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542359" start="30312" end="30318" title="Kaptol, Zagreb" label="Kaptol"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="30693" end="30709" title="shopping mall" label="shopping centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="30836" end="30843" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074328" start="30845" end="30850" title="Chinese ceramics" label="china"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="30855" end="30863" title="Pottery" label="ceramics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081013" start="30865" end="30871" title="wicker" label="wicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="30875" end="30880" title="straw" label="straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q171141" start="30925" end="30936" title="gastronomy" label="gastronomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44416" start="30981" end="30984" title="necktie" label="tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="31098" end="31120" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q160137" start="31149" end="31163" title="Ballpoint pen" label="ball-point pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281664" start="31205" end="31229" title="Slavoljub Eduard Penkala" label="Slavoljub Eduard Penkala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789628" start="31322" end="31330" title="Croatian cuisine" label="national"/>
<link wikidata="Q601763" start="31335" end="31356" title="Fusion cuisine" label="international cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200953" start="31411" end="31417" title="Turkey as food" label="turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q542042" start="31419" end="31423" title="duck (meat)" label="duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426070" start="31444" end="31450" title="mlinci" label="mlinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q429518" start="31544" end="31555" title="Cordon bleu (dish)" label="cordon bleu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902532" start="31564" end="31571" title="Zagorski štrukli" label="Štrukli"/>
<link wikidata="Q13221624" start="31579" end="31593" title="cottage cheese" label="cottage cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q59170" start="31594" end="31601" title="strudel" label="strudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q13221624" start="31630" end="31644" title="cottage cheese" label="cottage cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436724" start="31664" end="31673" title="Cremeschnitte" label="kremšnite"/>
<link wikidata="Q625825" start="31681" end="31688" title="custard" label="custard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31749" end="31755" title="walnut#Nuts" label="walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q13434162" start="31773" end="31778" title="sarma (food)" label="sarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q154166" start="31786" end="31796" title="Sauerkraut" label="Sauerkraut"/>
<link wikidata="Q322787" start="31853" end="31866" title="mashed potato" label="mashed potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986831" start="32172" end="32193" title="Archaeological Museum, Zagreb" label="Archaeological Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="32249" end="32263" title="archaeology" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q395968" start="32467" end="32479" title="Liber Linteus" label="Zagreb mummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891256" start="32509" end="32517" title="Old Italic alphabet" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q395968" start="32550" end="32563" title="Liber Linteus" label="Liber Linteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437510" start="32600" end="32610" title="coin collecting" label="numismatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350879" start="32628" end="32642" title="Modern Gallery, Zagreb" label="Modern Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366704" start="32997" end="33028" title="Croatian Natural History Museum" label="Croatian Natural History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="33089" end="33100" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q221189" start="33197" end="33204" title="Krapina" label="Krapina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618661" start="33349" end="33365" title="Technical Museum, Zagreb" label="Technical Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q428946" start="33694" end="33712" title="ferrous" label="non-ferrous metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q9036" start="33735" end="33747" title="Nikola Tesla" label="Nikola Tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618426" start="33760" end="33788" title="Zagreb City Museum" label="Museum of the City of Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q733658" start="33988" end="33999" title="Poor Clares" label="Poor Clares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147507" start="34081" end="34098" title="political history" label="political history"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="34144" end="34157" title="modern history" label="modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q406652" start="34321" end="34343" title="Museum of Arts and Crafts, Zagreb" label="Arts and Crafts Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q465299" start="34601" end="34617" title="Archaeological culture" label="material culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q502157" start="34635" end="34654" title="Ethnographic Museum, Zagreb" label="Ethnographic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936046" start="34915" end="34928" title="Mimara Museum" label="Mimara Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q207694" start="34932" end="34942" title="art museum" label="art museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q571630" start="34982" end="34999" title="Ante Topić Mimara" label="Ante Topić Mimara"/>
<link wikidata="Q502163" start="35071" end="35086" title="Renaissance Revival architecture" label="neo-Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q42207" start="35269" end="35279" title="Caravaggio" label="Caravaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="35281" end="35288" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="35290" end="35311" title="Pierre-Auguste Renoir" label="Pierre-Auguste Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="35313" end="35322" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q130531" start="35324" end="35340" title="Hieronymus Bosch" label="Hieronymus Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432" start="35342" end="35356" title="Francisco Goya" label="Francisco Goya"/>
<link wikidata="Q297" start="35358" end="35373" title="Diego Velázquez" label="Diego Velázquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187140" start="35396" end="35424" title="Croatian Museum of Naïve Art" label="Croatian Museum of Naïve Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q281108" start="35456" end="35465" title="naïve art" label="naïve art"/>
<link wikidata="Q128957" start="35608" end="35619" title="Gornji Grad – Medveščak" label="Gornji Grad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503103" start="35946" end="35972" title="Museum of Contemporary Art, Zagreb" label="Museum of Contemporary Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024104" start="36215" end="36226" title="Novi Zagreb" label="Novi Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q128957" start="36304" end="36315" title="Gornji Grad – Medveščak" label="Gornji Grad"/>
<link wikidata="Q50637" start="36588" end="36601" title="art historian" label="art historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="36893" end="36899" title="visual arts" label="visual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258421" start="37063" end="37097" title="Strossmayer Gallery of Old Masters" label="Strossmayer Gallery of Old Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q313828" start="37195" end="37209" title="Ivan Meštrović" label="Ivan Meštrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q391613" start="37461" end="37473" title="Art Pavilion, Zagreb" label="Art Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="37587" end="37600" title="Neoclassicism" label="neo-classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q12643863" start="37725" end="37757" title="Square of the Victims of Fascism" label="Square of the Victims of Fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954595" start="38041" end="38071" title="Museum of Broken Relationships" label="Museum of Broken Relationships"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497683" start="38191" end="38202" title="Lauba House" label="Lauba House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448525" start="38227" end="38249" title="Filip Trade Collection" label="Filip Trade Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629766" start="38352" end="38379" title="List of museums in Croatia" label="Other museums and galleries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264085" start="38542" end="38579" title="Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts" label="Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="38668" end="38674" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q220113" start="38786" end="38796" title="Zagreb Zoo" label="Zagreb Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43501" start="38812" end="38815" title="Zoo" label="Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q348076" start="38827" end="38840" title="Maksimir Park" label="Maksimir Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="39187" end="39192" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="39194" end="39208" title="Rolling Stones" label="Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="39210" end="39212" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895" start="39214" end="39232" title="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses" label="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="39234" end="39246" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="39248" end="39259" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="39261" end="39270" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="39272" end="39283" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="39285" end="39295" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q180861" start="39297" end="39309" title="Roger Waters" label="Roger Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="39311" end="39323" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256860" start="39325" end="39332" title="The Prodigy" label="Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="39334" end="39341" title="Beyoncé Knowles" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="39343" end="39352" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="39354" end="39368" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q47447" start="39370" end="39380" title="Ed Sheeran" label="Ed Sheeran"/>
<link wikidata="Q34086" start="39382" end="39395" title="Justin Bieber" label="Justin Bieber"/>
<link wikidata="Q34424" start="39397" end="39404" title="Shakira" label="Shakira"/>
<link wikidata="Q192668" start="39406" end="39415" title="Nick Cave" label="Nick Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q202041" start="39417" end="39427" title="Jamiroquai" label="Jamiroquai"/>
<link wikidata="Q130311" start="39429" end="39443" title="George Michael" label="George Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q194187" start="39445" end="39449" title="Sade (singer)" label="Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q483203" start="39451" end="39456" title="Sting (musician)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q182655" start="39458" end="39469" title="Rod Stewart" label="Rod Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q153708" start="39471" end="39486" title="Eros Ramazzotti" label="Eros Ramazzotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q207898" start="39488" end="39497" title="Manu Chao" label="Manu Chao"/>
<link wikidata="Q357418" start="39499" end="39513" title="Massive Attack" label="Massive Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q42402" start="39515" end="39529" title="Andrea Bocelli" label="Andrea Bocelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="39531" end="39540" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060" start="39542" end="39549" title="50 Cent" label="50 Cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="39551" end="39561" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q58381" start="39563" end="39574" title="Duran Duran" label="Duran Duran"/>
<link wikidata="Q58207" start="39644" end="39656" title="Dimmu Borgir" label="Dimmu Borgir"/>
<link wikidata="Q239074" start="39658" end="39667" title="Sepultura" label="Sepultura"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="39669" end="39676" title="Melvins" label="Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q548844" start="39678" end="39686" title="Mastodon (band)" label="Mastodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q426402" start="39729" end="39745" title="INmusic festival" label="INmusic festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233232" start="39882" end="39888" title="Hozier" label="Hozier"/>
<link wikidata="Q58735" start="39890" end="39900" title="Lily Allen" label="Lily Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170599" start="39902" end="39916" title="Arctic Monkeys" label="Arctic Monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q256065" start="39918" end="39930" title="Rokia Traoré" label="Rokia Traoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q109871" start="39932" end="39939" title="Anthrax (American band)" label="Anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q213887" start="40039" end="40050" title="Pat Metheny" label="Pat Metheny"/>
<link wikidata="Q299208" start="40054" end="40067" title="Sonny Rollins" label="Sonny Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q547272" start="40182" end="40199" title="Animal Collective" label="Animal Collective"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="40201" end="40208" title="Melvins" label="Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018174" start="40210" end="40226" title="Butthole Surfers" label="Butthole Surfers"/>
<link wikidata="Q599433" start="40228" end="40250" title="Crippled Black Phoenix" label="Crippled Black Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430380" start="40252" end="40261" title="NoMeansNo" label="NoMeansNo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142566" start="40263" end="40275" title="The National (band)" label="The National"/>
<link wikidata="Q319277" start="40277" end="40289" title="Mark Lanegan" label="Mark Lanegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q573017" start="40291" end="40296" title="Swans (band)" label="Swans"/>
<link wikidata="Q898820" start="40298" end="40306" title="Mudhoney" label="Mudhoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q268151" start="40444" end="40479" title="Croatian National Theatre in Zagreb" label="Croatian National Theater in Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="40520" end="40545" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Joseph I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11302994" start="40565" end="40577" title="List of concert halls" label="concert hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267773" start="40590" end="40608" title="Vatroslav Lisinski Concert Hall" label="Vatroslav Lisinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q106391582" start="40688" end="40710" title="World Theatre Festival (Zagreb)" label="World Theatre Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q106391582" start="40715" end="40744" title="International Puppet Festival" label="International Puppet Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="40843" end="40856" title="Animation" label="Animated Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332751" start="40963" end="40980" title="avant-garde music" label="avant-garde music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563260" start="41038" end="41047" title="ZagrebDox" label="ZagrebDox"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="41054" end="41070" title="documentary film" label="documentary film"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="41114" end="41126" title="orchestra" label="Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="41539" end="41548" title="pop music" label="pop-music"/>
<link wikidata="Q868557" start="41549" end="41557" title="music festival" label="festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764105" start="41764" end="41769" title="Jarun" label="Jarun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131232" start="41916" end="41929" title="SportsCenter" label="Sports Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764105" start="41949" end="41959" title="Jarun" label="Jarun Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344830" start="42030" end="42037" title="regatta" label="regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q816261" start="42048" end="42055" title="jogging" label="jogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="42104" end="42115" title="Nightclub" label="night clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="42122" end="42133" title="discothèque" label="discothèque"/>
<link wikidata="Q61065" start="42237" end="42249" title="List of water sports" label="water sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q4543" start="42260" end="42276" title="beach volleyball" label="beach volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q754796" start="42328" end="42337" title="Miniature golf" label="mini-golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q115391" start="42340" end="42352" title="Dom Sportova" label="Dom Sportova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443873" start="42381" end="42391" title="Trešnjevka" label="Trešnjevka"/>
<link wikidata="Q641519" start="42611" end="42623" title="Arena Zagreb" label="Arena Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q478755" start="42679" end="42722" title="2009 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2009 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q549238" start="42728" end="42759" title="Dražen Petrović Basketball Hall" label="Dražen Petrović Basketball Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073587" start="42817" end="42829" title="Cibona Tower" label="Cibona Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q8100590" start="42831" end="42850" title="Mladost (sports society)" label="Sports Park Mladost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084454" start="42905" end="42931" title="Olympic-size swimming pool" label="Olympic-size swimming pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="43026" end="43036" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="43038" end="43048" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="43050" end="43058" title="team handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="43060" end="43068" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="43073" end="43085" title="field hockey" label="field hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511266" start="43189" end="43195" title="Šalata" label="Šalata"/>
<link wikidata="Q377002" start="43235" end="43249" title="Ban Jelačić Square" label="Jelačić Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q741118" start="43309" end="43321" title="tennis court" label="tennis court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177899" start="43562" end="43569" title="bowling" label="bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q779272" start="43585" end="43596" title="ice skating" label="ice skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241602" start="43749" end="43757" title="Donji grad (Zagreb)" label="downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q28954" start="44040" end="44055" title="indoor soccer" label="indoor football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="44076" end="44091" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q33135384" start="44106" end="44116" title="bocce" label="bocce ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="44127" end="44139" title="table tennis" label="table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903239" start="44293" end="44299" title="Utrine, Zagreb" label="Utrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282870" start="44355" end="44367" title="Ice rink" label="skating rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q56160042" start="44442" end="44459" title="Zagreb Hippodrome" label="Zagreb Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="44480" end="44496" title="Equestrianism" label="horseback riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="44518" end="44529" title="horse racing" label="horse races"/>
<link wikidata="Q723603" start="44606" end="44622" title="Stadion Maksimir" label="Maksimir Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q373744" start="44670" end="44678" title="Maksimir" label="Maksimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q743452" start="44925" end="44935" title="Medvednica" label="Medvednica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997513" start="45144" end="45150" title="Bundek" label="Bundek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024104" start="45196" end="45207" title="Novi Zagreb" label="Novi Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6098635" start="45395" end="45408" title="Croatia Rally" label="Croatia Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q85737968" start="45425" end="45454" title="2021 World Rally Championship" label="2021 World Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q368793" start="45477" end="45492" title="Sébastien Ogier" label="Sébastien Ogier"/>
<link wikidata="Q59664" start="45497" end="45513" title="Julien Ingrassia" label="Julien Ingrassia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28052062" start="45515" end="45538" title="Toyota Gazoo Racing WRT" label="Toyota Gazoo Racing WRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013127" start="45594" end="45604" title="Medvedgrad" label="Medvedgrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q106293870" start="45677" end="45695" title="2021 Croatia Rally" label="2021 Croatia Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359948" start="45806" end="45817" title="Elfyn Evans" label="Elfyn Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691261" start="45822" end="45846" title="Scott Martin (co-driver)" label="Scott Martin (co-driver)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85738038" start="45930" end="45959" title="2022 World Rally Championship" label="2022 World Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q172803" start="46014" end="46031" title="GNK Dinamo Zagreb" label="GNK Dinamo Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464091" start="46033" end="46053" title="KHL Medveščak Zagreb" label="KHL Medveščak Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q570556" start="46055" end="46064" title="RK Zagreb" label="RK Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q916967" start="46066" end="46075" title="KK Cibona" label="KK Cibona"/>
<link wikidata="Q656406" start="46077" end="46086" title="KK Zagreb" label="KK Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q185173" start="46088" end="46099" title="KK Cedevita" label="KK Cedevita"/>
<link wikidata="Q462411" start="46101" end="46110" title="NK Zagreb" label="NK Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q226004" start="46112" end="46124" title="HAVK Mladost" label="HAVK Mladost"/>
<link wikidata="Q21077669" start="46157" end="46183" title="2016 Davis Cup World Group" label="2016 Davis Cup World Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276241" start="46198" end="46205" title="Croatia Davis Cup team" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q645674" start="46210" end="46219" title="Argentina Davis Cup team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q78210015" start="46280" end="46323" title="2025 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2025 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261961" start="46348" end="46369" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Zagreb" label="Archdiocese of Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q189854" start="46375" end="46391" title="metropolitan bishop" label="metropolitan see"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191920" start="46399" end="46425" title="Roman Catholicism in Croatia" label="Catholic Church in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256070" start="46478" end="46492" title="Dražen Kutleša" label="Dražen Kutleša"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="46670" end="46683" title="episcopal see" label="episcopal see"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283815" start="46691" end="46730" title="Metropolitanate of Zagreb and Ljubljana" label="Metropolitanate of Zagreb and Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376184" start="46738" end="46761" title="Eastern Orthodoxy in Croatia" label="Serbian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501164" start="46763" end="46804" title="Islam in Croatia" label="Islamic religious organization of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061727" start="46896" end="46914" title="Meštrović Pavilion" label="Meštrović Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q171258" start="46922" end="46934" title="Zagreb in World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12643863" start="46942" end="46974" title="Square of the Victims of Fascism" label="Square of the Victims of Fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286898" start="47031" end="47040" title="Peščenica – Žitnjak" label="Peščenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="47181" end="47228" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764105" start="47275" end="47280" title="Jarun" label="Jarun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509326" start="47594" end="47608" title="History of the Jews in Croatia" label="Jewish history"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144567" start="47617" end="47630" title="The Holocaust in the Independent State of Croatia" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q207652" start="47731" end="47739" title="chemical industry" label="chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="47741" end="47755" title="pharmaceutical drug" label="pharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q607081" start="47757" end="47764" title="textile industry" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q540912" start="47766" end="47780" title="food industry" label="food and drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="47806" end="47825" title="international trade" label="international trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="47955" end="47971" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q397347" start="48072" end="48079" title="Agrokor" label="Agrokor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662137" start="48081" end="48084" title="INA (company)" label="INA"/>
<link wikidata="Q470696" start="48086" end="48102" title="Hrvatski Telekom" label="Hrvatski Telekom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251720" start="48227" end="48236" title="Eurotower (Zagreb)" label="Eurotower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642214" start="48257" end="48277" title="List of tallest buildings in Croatia" label="Croatian skyscrapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="48355" end="48377" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q26360" start="48565" end="48569" title="Croatian kuna" label="kuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="48577" end="48578" title="Euro" label="€"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="48660" end="48672" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513788" start="49172" end="49201" title="Croatian Bureau of Statistics" label="Croatian Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q26360" start="49341" end="49344" title="Croatian kuna" label="HRK"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="49346" end="49349" title="Euro" label="EUR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="49354" end="49357" title="United States dollar" label="USD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143457" start="49377" end="49399" title="Croatian National Bank" label="Croatian National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q786224" start="49496" end="49498" title="A6 (Croatia)" label="A6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467879" start="49634" end="49660" title="Zrinski Bridge" label="bridge over the Mura river"/>
<link wikidata="Q429650" start="49668" end="49670" title="A4 (Croatia)" label="A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q789500" start="49707" end="49709" title="M7 motorway (Hungary)" label="M7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="49774" end="49780" title="Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="49785" end="49793" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q429165" start="49799" end="49801" title="A1 (Croatia)" label="A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706899" start="49816" end="49833" title="Lučko interchange" label="Lučko interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159092" start="49838" end="49845" title="Concurrency (road)" label="concurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947279" start="49868" end="49891" title="Bosiljevo 2 interchange" label="Bosiljevo 2 interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="49915" end="49920" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q398436" start="49923" end="49930" title="Vrgorac" label="Vrgorac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="49969" end="49978" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632546" start="50063" end="50081" title="Hrvatske autoceste" label="Hrvatske autoceste"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826187" start="50086" end="50111" title="Autocesta Rijeka - Zagreb" label="Autocesta Rijeka - Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q429577" start="50122" end="50124" title="A3 (Croatia)" label="A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q531855" start="50141" end="50161" title="Brotherhood and unity" label="Bratstvo i jedinstvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="50199" end="50203" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="SFRY"/>
<link wikidata="Q659418" start="50263" end="50286" title="Pan-European Corridor X" label="Pan-European Corridor X"/>
<link wikidata="Q849282" start="50314" end="50321" title="Bregana" label="Bregana"/>
<link wikidata="Q757292" start="50322" end="50337" title="border checkpoint" label="border crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064470" start="50388" end="50401" title="Zagreb bypass" label="Zagreb bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280840" start="50415" end="50422" title="Lipovac, Vukovar-Srijem County" label="Lipovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="50474" end="50490" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="50511" end="50520" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228972" start="50589" end="50600" title="Ivanja Reka interchange" label="Ivanja Reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q429413" start="50624" end="50626" title="A2 (Croatia)" label="A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129509" start="50644" end="50655" title="Pan-European Corridor Xa" label="Corridor Xa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723237" start="50705" end="50711" title="Macelj" label="Macelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="50794" end="50808" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q429650" start="50853" end="50855" title="A4 (Croatia)" label="A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064470" start="50910" end="50923" title="Zagreb bypass" label="Zagreb bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q248701" start="50955" end="50962" title="Goričan" label="Goričan"/>
<link wikidata="Q429577" start="51048" end="51050" title="A3 (Croatia)" label="A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="51061" end="51065" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="51087" end="51095" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686" start="51105" end="51119" title="Slavonski Brod" label="Slavonski Brod"/>
<link wikidata="Q221495" start="51121" end="51129" title="Vinkovci" label="Vinkovci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640" start="51131" end="51137" title="Osijek" label="Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867" start="51142" end="51149" title="Vukovar" label="Vukovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q516459" start="51239" end="51244" title="Sutla" label="Sutla"/>
<link wikidata="Q429413" start="51259" end="51261" title="A2 (Croatia)" label="A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723237" start="51278" end="51284" title="Macelj" label="Macelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158060" start="51302" end="51309" title="Zagora (Croatia)" label="Zagorje"/>
<link wikidata="Q743502" start="51385" end="51392" title="Hrvatsko Zagorje" label="Zagorje"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420" start="51428" end="51436" title="Varaždin" label="Varaždin"/>
<link wikidata="Q167839" start="51439" end="51446" title="Čakovec" label="Čakovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640" start="51451" end="51461" title="Koprivnica" label="Koprivnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="51528" end="51533" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q671188" start="51559" end="51572" title="tilting train" label="tilting train"/>
<link wikidata="Q142894" start="51587" end="51591" title="Lika" label="Lika"/>
<link wikidata="Q212927" start="51677" end="51680" title="Una (Sava)" label="Una"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="51746" end="51768" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q54114" start="51811" end="51817" title="Boulevard" label="avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064470" start="51879" end="51892" title="Zagreb bypass" label="Zagreb bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="51916" end="51923" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235407" start="52240" end="52281" title="Brotherhood and Unity Highway" label="Highway &amp;quot;Brotherhood and Unity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660950" start="52297" end="52315" title="Ljubljanska Avenue" label="Ljubljanska Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064475" start="52317" end="52334" title="Zagrebačka Avenue" label="Zagrebačka Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539502" start="52339" end="52355" title="Slavonska Avenue" label="Slavonska Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q106123" start="52638" end="52653" title="International E-road network" label="European routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q674617" start="52654" end="52657" title="European route E59" label="E59"/>
<link wikidata="Q911135" start="52659" end="52662" title="European route E65" label="E65"/>
<link wikidata="Q429577" start="52667" end="52670" title="E70 in Croatia" label="E70"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="52752" end="52762" title="Sava" label="river Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="52805" end="52810" title="levee" label="levee"/>
<link wikidata="Q379329" start="52984" end="52991" title="Mičevec" label="Mičevec"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064470" start="53037" end="53050" title="Zagreb bypass" label="Zagreb bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408" start="53061" end="53069" title="Zaprešić" label="Zaprešić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442699" start="53097" end="53108" title="Ivanja Reka" label="Ivanja Reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="53158" end="53162" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="53238" end="53254" title="Public transport" label="Public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="53354" end="53358" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064459" start="53442" end="53455" title="Zagreb Commuter Rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q136060" start="53492" end="53495" title="Zagrebački električni tramvaj" label="ZET"/>
<link wikidata="Q931988" start="53705" end="53722" title="Croatian Railways" label="Croatian Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="53851" end="53879" title="government-owned corporation" label="government-owned corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q583140" start="53886" end="53902" title="Zagreb Funicular" label="Zagreb funicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q570116" start="53965" end="53983" title="tourist attraction" label="tourist attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="53986" end="53990" title="Taxicab" label="Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="54300" end="54304" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q868252" start="54603" end="54612" title="rush hour" label="rush hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315294" start="54840" end="54851" title="Reserved track" label="green belts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509011" start="54975" end="54999" title="KONČAR Group" label="Končar elektroindustrija"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443031" start="55028" end="55039" title="TŽV Gredelj" label="TŽV Gredelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q869972" start="55083" end="55091" title="CROTRAM" label="TMK 2200"/>
<link wikidata="Q390587" start="55530" end="55537" title="Samobor" label="Samobor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="55617" end="55631" title="standard gauge" label="standard-gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q931988" start="55655" end="55672" title="Croatian Railways" label="Croatian Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409986" start="55740" end="55750" title="Samoborček" label="Samoborček"/>
<link wikidata="Q128016" start="55803" end="55817" title="Zagreb Airport" label="Zagreb Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q331141" start="55905" end="55918" title="Velika Gorica" label="Velika Gorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q19799" start="56041" end="56059" title="Cargo aircraft" label="transport aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290060" start="56266" end="56271" title="Lučko" label="Lučko"/>
<link wikidata="Q331141" start="56518" end="56531" title="Velika Gorica" label="Velika Gorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q975085" start="56606" end="56613" title="primary education" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q13006147" start="56630" end="56639" title="secondary education" label="secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="56661" end="56669" title="gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="56690" end="56706" title="higher education" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="57399" end="57421" title="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="57472" end="57485" title="Master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Master&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="57496" end="57516" title="Doctorate" label="Doctor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q12632683" start="57706" end="57736" title="Catholic University of Croatia" label="Catholic University of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261369" start="57931" end="57942" title="Lea Deutsch" label="Lea Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560234" start="57971" end="57987" title="Kristina Krepela" label="Kristina Krepela"/>
<link wikidata="Q451563" start="58010" end="58024" title="Sanja Iveković" label="Sanja Iveković"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258929" start="58097" end="58111" title="Jagoda Kaloper" label="Jagoda Kaloper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148292" start="58146" end="58157" title="Igor Kordej" label="Igor Kordej"/>
<link wikidata="Q929885" start="58190" end="58201" title="Darko Macan" label="Darko Macan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313828" start="58239" end="58253" title="Ivan Meštrović" label="Ivan Meštrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514054" start="58300" end="58317" title="Velimir Neidhardt" label="Velimir Neidhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q521787" start="58342" end="58355" title="Vlado Milunić" label="Vlado Milunić"/>
<link wikidata="Q244816" start="58404" end="58417" title="Dancing House" label="Dancing House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="58421" end="58427" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920815" start="58429" end="58451" title="Vera Nikolić Podrinska" label="Vera Nikolić Podrinska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315171" start="58487" end="58502" title="Srećko Puntarić" label="Srećko Puntarić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266850" start="58528" end="58539" title="Josip Račić" label="Josip Račić"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396672" start="58562" end="58572" title="Esad Ribić" label="Esad Ribić"/>
<link wikidata="Q46099" start="58605" end="58618" title="Goran Sudžuka" label="Goran Sudžuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502468" start="58651" end="58667" title="Marino Tartaglia" label="Marino Tartaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502160" start="58690" end="58705" title="Vladimir Varlaj" label="Vladimir Varlaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281761" start="58727" end="58740" title="Zdravko Zupan" label="Zdravko Zupan"/>
<link wikidata="Q433120" start="58809" end="58821" title="Milan Badelj" label="Milan Badelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q22342392" start="58852" end="58865" title="Josip Brekalo" label="Josip Brekalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845710" start="58896" end="58912" title="Marcelo Brozović" label="Marcelo Brozović"/>
<link wikidata="Q468876" start="58943" end="58958" title="Tomislav Butina" label="Tomislav Butina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097886" start="58989" end="59000" title="Ivan Čunčić" label="Ivan Čunčić"/>
<link wikidata="Q73400656" start="59031" end="59045" title="Joško Gvardiol" label="Joško Gvardiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807765" start="59076" end="59086" title="Tin Jedvaj" label="Tin Jedvaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q19968645" start="59117" end="59132" title="Josip Juranović" label="Josip Juranović"/>
<link wikidata="Q502898" start="59163" end="59178" title="Andrej Kramarić" label="Andrej Kramarić"/>
<link wikidata="Q84272" start="59209" end="59222" title="Niko Kranjčar" label="Niko Kranjčar"/>
<link wikidata="Q314759" start="59253" end="59263" title="Jerko Leko" label="Jerko Leko"/>
<link wikidata="Q28137504" start="59294" end="59305" title="Lovro Majer" label="Lovro Majer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6161711" start="59336" end="59349" title="Jasmin Mujdža" label="Jasmin Mujdža"/>
<link wikidata="Q129045" start="59380" end="59393" title="Mensur Mujdža" label="Mensur Mujdža"/>
<link wikidata="Q16234878" start="59424" end="59436" title="Mislav Oršić" label="Mislav Oršić"/>
<link wikidata="Q767894" start="59467" end="59484" title="Dubravko Pavličić" label="Dubravko Pavličić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508868" start="59515" end="59528" title="Josip Pivarić" label="Josip Pivarić"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039855" start="59559" end="59570" title="Marko Pjaca" label="Marko Pjaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q242193" start="59601" end="59612" title="Dario Šimić" label="Dario Šimić"/>
<link wikidata="Q231470" start="59643" end="59657" title="Zvonimir Soldo" label="Zvonimir Soldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q725988" start="59688" end="59701" title="Bernard Vukas" label="Bernard Vukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916714" start="59760" end="59776" title="Vasilije Calasan" label="Vasilije Calasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q907790" start="59812" end="59823" title="Marin Čolak" label="Marin Čolak"/>
<link wikidata="Q14905846" start="59852" end="59863" title="Borna Ćorić" label="Borna Ćorić"/>
<link wikidata="Q435875" start="59892" end="59906" title="Krešimir Ćosić" label="Krešimir Ćosić"/>
<link wikidata="Q590055" start="59939" end="59956" title="Danko Cvjetićanin" label="Danko Cvjetićanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290865" start="59989" end="60004" title="Josip Glasnović" label="Josip Glasnović"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="60034" end="60041" title="Summer Olympics" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207153" start="60061" end="60074" title="Zlatko Horvat" label="Zlatko Horvat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630993" start="60105" end="60118" title="Filip Hrgović" label="Filip Hrgović"/>
<link wikidata="Q295483" start="60152" end="60164" title="Ivo Karlović" label="Ivo Karlović"/>
<link wikidata="Q976930" start="60193" end="60205" title="Nenad Kljaić" label="Nenad Kljaić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509696" start="60236" end="60254" title="Vjekoslav Kobešćak" label="Vjekoslav Kobešćak"/>
<link wikidata="Q311903" start="60297" end="60311" title="Ivica Kostelić" label="Ivica Kostelić"/>
<link wikidata="Q10091" start="60343" end="60358" title="Janica Kostelić" label="Janica Kostelić"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="60400" end="60407" title="Winter Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16111460" start="60423" end="60434" title="Luka Lončar" label="Luka Lončar"/>
<link wikidata="Q232472" start="60467" end="60477" title="Iva Majoli" label="Iva Majoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7035585" start="60506" end="60519" title="Nikola Mektić" label="Nikola Mektić"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="60548" end="60555" title="Summer Olympics" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q115908231" start="60575" end="60584" title="Nika Mühl" label="Nika Mühl"/>
<link wikidata="Q591248" start="60617" end="60630" title="Mirko Novosel" label="Mirko Novosel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512225" start="60663" end="60681" title="Tomislav Paškvalin" label="Tomislav Paškvalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379" start="60714" end="60730" title="Sandra Elkasević" label="Sandra Elkasević"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="60787" end="60802" title="Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335365" start="60804" end="60819" title="Dubravko Šimenc" label="Dubravko Šimenc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897931" start="60852" end="60867" title="Martin Sinković" label="Martin Sinković"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="60888" end="60895" title="Summer Olympics" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q176317" start="60915" end="60930" title="Valent Sinković" label="Valent Sinković"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="60951" end="60958" title="Summer Olympics" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25500682" start="60978" end="60987" title="Tin Srbić" label="Tin Srbić"/>
<link wikidata="Q595476" start="61019" end="61032" title="Manuel Štrlek" label="Manuel Štrlek"/>
<link wikidata="Q367587" start="61063" end="61072" title="Igor Vori" label="Igor Vori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364867" start="61103" end="61115" title="Vedran Zrnić" label="Vedran Zrnić"/>
<link wikidata="Q467150" start="61164" end="61176" title="Haim Bar-Lev" label="Haim Bar-Lev"/>
<link wikidata="Q207147" start="61237" end="61253" title="Zlatko Baloković" label="Zlatko Baloković"/>
<link wikidata="Q384043" start="61278" end="61290" title="Josipa Lisac" label="Josipa Lisac"/>
<link wikidata="Q258323" start="61321" end="61326" title="Tajči" label="Tajči"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396867" start="61379" end="61397" title="Miljenko Matijević" label="Miljenko Matijević"/>
<link wikidata="Q967122" start="61465" end="61475" title="Steelheart" label="Steelheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q204625" start="61477" end="61490" title="Zinka Milanov" label="Zinka Milanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q152506" start="61529" end="61540" title="Nina Badrić" label="Nina Badrić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267546" start="61581" end="61594" title="Lana Jurčević" label="Lana Jurčević"/>
<link wikidata="Q250850" start="61620" end="61633" title="Antonija Šola" label="Antonija Šola"/>
<link wikidata="Q744439" start="61714" end="61727" title="Sanja Doležal" label="Sanja Doležal"/>
<link wikidata="Q541346" start="61802" end="61813" title="Novi fosili" label="Novi fosili"/>
<link wikidata="Q483073" start="61815" end="61825" title="Ana Rucner" label="Ana Rucner"/>
<link wikidata="Q12636824" start="61875" end="61896" title="Mihalj Šilobod Bolšić" label="Mihalj Šilobod Bolšić"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="61910" end="61924" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649521" start="62107" end="62132" title="Miroslav Šalom Freiberger" label="Miroslav Šalom Freiberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q434257" start="62170" end="62193" title="Josip Juraj Strossmayer" label="Josip Juraj Strossmayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q832302" start="62290" end="62300" title="Ivan Đikić" label="Ivan Đikić"/>
<link wikidata="Q50662" start="62383" end="62410" title="Goethe University Frankfurt" label="Goethe University Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q973485" start="62412" end="62423" title="Mario Jurić" label="Mario Jurić"/>
<link wikidata="Q376731" start="62449" end="62469" title="Vesna Girardi-Jurkić" label="Vesna Girardi-Jurkić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287538" start="62513" end="62543" title="Dragutin Gorjanović-Kramberger" label="Dragutin Gorjanović-Kramberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q344844" start="62602" end="62615" title="Milan Kangrga" label="Milan Kangrga"/>
<link wikidata="Q344559" start="62642" end="62658" title="Radoslav Katičić" label="Radoslav Katičić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276244" start="62705" end="62715" title="Nada Klaić" label="Nada Klaić"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645770" start="62740" end="62749" title="Ivo Kolin" label="Ivo Kolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8067999" start="62773" end="62789" title="Zdravko Lorković" label="Zdravko Lorković"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709346" start="62843" end="62858" title="Ranko Matasović" label="Ranko Matasović"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888272" start="62882" end="62891" title="Ivo Pilar" label="Ivo Pilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q27979045" start="62950" end="62965" title="Martin Previšić" label="Martin Previšić"/>
<link wikidata="Q58191" start="62990" end="63001" title="Vesna Pusić" label="Vesna Pusić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861667" start="63043" end="63057" title="Marin Soljačić" label="Marin Soljačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q566766" start="63106" end="63116" title="Rudi Supek" label="Rudi Supek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584507" start="63159" end="63169" title="Goran Švob" label="Goran Švob"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290963" start="63209" end="63221" title="Josip Torbar (scientist)" label="Josip Torbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5924063" start="63254" end="63269" title="Hrvoje Turković" label="Hrvoje Turković"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437113" start="63298" end="63318" title="Ljudevit Vukotinović" label="Ljudevit Vukotinović"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851259" start="63367" end="63383" title="Milena Žic-Fuchs" label="Milena Žic-Fuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649169" start="63424" end="63440" title="Tituš Brezovački" label="Tituš Brezovački"/>
<link wikidata="Q761055" start="63485" end="63499" title="August Cesarec" label="August Cesarec"/>
<link wikidata="Q893296" start="63521" end="63531" title="Bora Ćosić" label="Bora Ćosić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225959" start="63553" end="63570" title="Dimitrija Demeter" label="Dimitrija Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12956738" start="63592" end="63603" title="Daša Drndić" label="Daša Drndić"/>
<link wikidata="Q211992" start="63625" end="63636" title="Zoran Ferić" label="Zoran Ferić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272294" start="63658" end="63672" title="Branko Gavella" label="Branko Gavella"/>
<link wikidata="Q325428" start="63717" end="63732" title="Miroslav Krleža" label="Miroslav Krleža"/>
<link wikidata="Q610036" start="63815" end="63830" title="Antun Mihanović" label="Antun Mihanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q146502" start="63873" end="63899" title="national anthem of Croatia" label="national anthem of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q347672" start="63901" end="63913" title="August Šenoa" label="August Šenoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12759810" start="63937" end="63955" title="Sunčana Škrinjarić" label="Sunčana Škrinjarić"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715" start="63998" end="64011" title="Davor Slamnig" label="Davor Slamnig"/>
<link wikidata="Q834044" start="64046" end="64062" title="Slobodan Šnajder" label="Slobodan Šnajder"/>
<link wikidata="Q116285119" start="64112" end="64131" title="Museum of Illusions" label="Museum of Illusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q583140" start="64133" end="64149" title="Zagreb funicular" label="Zagreb funicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q127962525" start="64152" end="64168" title="Ilica (typeface)" label="Ilica (typeface)"/>
<link wikidata="Q117475040" start="64171" end="64195" title="Zagreb metropolitan area" label="Zagreb metropolitan area"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55908" wikidata="Q116038" url="?curid=55908" title="Security-Enhanced Linux">
<text>Security-Enhanced Linux (SELinux) is a Linux kernel security module that provides a mechanism for supporting access control security policies, including mandatory access controls (MAC).

SELinux is a set of kernel modifications and user-space tools that have been added to various Linux distributions. Its architecture strives to separate enforcement of security decisions from the security policy, and streamlines the amount of software involved with security policy enforcement. The key concepts underlying SELinux can be traced to several earlier projects by the United States National Security Agency (NSA).

==Overview==
The NSA Security-enhanced Linux Team describes NSA SELinux as

a set of patches to the Linux kernel and utilities to provide a strong, flexible, mandatory access control (MAC) architecture into the major subsystems of the kernel. It provides an enhanced mechanism to enforce the separation of information based on confidentiality and integrity requirements, which allows threats of tampering, and bypassing of application security mechanisms, to be addressed and enables the confinement of damage that can be caused by malicious or flawed applications. It includes a set of sample security policy configuration files designed to meet common, general-purpose security goals.

A Linux kernel integrating SELinux enforces mandatory access control policies that confine user programs and system services, as well as access to files and network resources. Limiting privilege to the minimum required to work reduces or eliminates the ability of these programs and daemons to cause harm if faulty or compromised (for example via buffer overflows or misconfigurations). This confinement mechanism operates independently of the traditional Linux (discretionary) access control mechanisms. It has no concept of a &quot;root&quot; superuser, and does not share the well-known shortcomings of the traditional Linux security mechanisms, such as a dependence on setuid/setgid binaries.

The security of an &quot;unmodified&quot; Linux system (a system without SELinux) depends on the correctness of the kernel, of all the privileged applications, and of each of their configurations. A fault in any one of these areas may allow the compromise of the entire system. In contrast, the security of a &quot;modified&quot; system (based on an SELinux kernel) depends primarily on the correctness of the kernel and its security-policy configuration. While problems with the correctness or configuration of applications may allow the limited compromise of individual user programs and system daemons, they do not necessarily pose a threat to the security of other user programs and system daemons or to the security of the system as a whole.

From a purist perspective, SELinux provides a hybrid of concepts and capabilities drawn from mandatory access controls, mandatory integrity controls, role-based access control (RBAC), and type enforcement architecture. Third-party tools enable one to build a variety of security policies.

==History==
The earliest work directed toward standardizing an approach providing mandatory and discretionary access controls (MAC and DAC) within a UNIX (more precisely, POSIX) computing environment can be attributed to the National Security Agency&#x27;s Trusted UNIX (TRUSIX) Working Group, which met from 1987 to 1991 and published one Rainbow Book (#020A), and produced a formal model and associated evaluation evidence prototype (#020B) that was ultimately unpublished.

SELinux was designed to demonstrate the value of mandatory access controls to the Linux community and how such controls could be added to Linux. Originally, the patches that make up SELinux had to be explicitly applied to the Linux kernel source; SELinux was merged into the Linux kernel mainline in the 2.6 series of the Linux kernel.

The NSA, the original primary developer of SELinux, released the first version to the open source development community under the GNU GPL on December 22, 2000. The software was merged into the mainline Linux kernel 2.6.0-test3, released on 8 August 2003. Other significant contributors include Red Hat, Network Associates, Secure Computing Corporation, Tresys Technology, and Trusted Computer Solutions. Experimental ports of the FLASK/TE implementation have been made available via the TrustedBSD Project for the FreeBSD and Darwin operating systems.

Security-Enhanced Linux implements the Flux Advanced Security Kernel (FLASK). Such a kernel contains architectural components prototyped in the Fluke operating system. These provide general support for enforcing many kinds of mandatory access control policies, including those based on the concepts of type enforcement, role-based access control, and multilevel security. FLASK, in turn, was based on DTOS, a Mach-derived Distributed Trusted Operating System, as well as on Trusted Mach, a research project from Trusted Information Systems that had an influence on the design and implementation of DTOS.

=== Original and external contributors ===

A comprehensive list of the original and external contributors to SELinux was hosted at the NSA website until maintenance ceased sometime in 2009. The following list reproduces the original as preserved by the Internet Archive Wayback Machine. The scope of their contributions was listed in the page and has been omitted for brevity, but it can be accessed through the archived copy.

==Users, policies and security contexts==
SELinux users and roles do not have to be related to the actual system users and roles. For every current user or process, SELinux assigns a three string context consisting of a username, role, and domain (or type). This system is more flexible than normally required: as a rule, most of the real users share the same SELinux username, and all access control is managed through the third tag, the domain. The circumstances under which a process is allowed into a certain domain must be configured in the policies. The command codice_1 allows for the launching of a process into an explicitly specified context (user, role, and domain), but SELinux may deny the transition if it is not approved by the policy.

Files, network ports, and other hardware also have an SELinux context, consisting of a name, role (seldom used), and type. In the case of file systems, mapping between files and the security contexts is called labeling. The labeling is defined in policy files but can also be manually adjusted without changing the policies. Hardware types are quite detailed, for instance, codice_2 (all files in the folder /bin) or codice_3 (PostgreSQL port, 5432). The SELinux context for a remote file system can be specified explicitly at mount time.

SELinux adds the codice_4 switch to the shell commands codice_5, codice_6, and some others, allowing the security context of the files or process to be seen.

Typical policy rules consist of explicit permissions, for example, which domains the user must possess to perform certain actions with the given target (read, execute, or, in case of network port, bind or connect), and so on. More complex mappings are also possible, involving roles and security levels.

A typical policy consists of a mapping (labeling) file, a rule file, and an interface file, that define the domain transition. These three files must be compiled together with the SELinux tools to produce a single policy file. The resulting policy file can be loaded into the kernel to make it active. Loading and unloading policies does not require a reboot. The policy files are either hand written or can be generated from the more user friendly SELinux management tool. They are normally tested in permissive mode first, where violations are logged but allowed. The codice_7 tool can be used later to produce additional rules that extend the policy to allow all legitimate activities of the application being confined.

==Features==
SELinux features include:
* Clean separation of policy from enforcement
* Well-defined policy interfaces
* Support for applications querying the policy and enforcing access control (for example, crond running jobs in the correct context)
* Independence of specific policies and policy languages
* Independence of specific security-label formats and contents
* Individual labels and controls for kernel objects and services
* Support for policy changes
* Separate measures for protecting system integrity (domain-type) and data confidentiality (multilevel security)
* Flexible policy
* Controls over process initialization and inheritance, and program execution
* Controls over file systems, directories, files, and open file descriptors
* Controls over sockets, messages, and network interfaces
* Controls over the use of &quot;capabilities&quot;
* Cached information on access-decisions via the &quot;Access Vector Cache&quot; (AVC)
* Default-deny policy (anything not explicitly specified in the policy is disallowed)

==Adoption==

SELinux has been implemented in Android since version 4.3.

Among free community-supported Linux distributions, Fedora was one of the earliest adopters, including support for it by default since Fedora Core 2. Other distributions include support for it such as Debian as of version 9 Stretch release and Ubuntu as of 8.04 Hardy Heron. As of version 11.1, openSUSE contains SELinux &quot;basic enablement&quot;. SUSE Linux Enterprise (SLE) 11 features SELinux as a &quot;technology preview&quot;.

SELinux is popular in systems based on Linux containers, such as CoreOS Container Linux and rkt. It is useful as an additional security control to help further enforce isolation between deployed containers and their host.

SELinux is available since 2005 as part of Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) version 4 and all future releases. This presence is also reflected in corresponding versions of derived systems such as CentOS, Scientific Linux, AlmaLinux and Rocky Linux. The supported policy in RHEL4 is targeted policy which aims for maximum ease of use and thus is not as restrictive as it might be. Future versions of RHEL are planned to have more targets in the targeted policy which will mean more restrictive policies. RHEL version 5 introduced multilevel security (MLS) policy for servers only. Fedora Linux 10 introduced a minimum policy, designed for certain platforms such as low-memory devices and virtual machines.

openSUSE Tumbleweed transitioned from AppArmor to SELinux for new installation since 11 February 2025, upcoming SLE/openSUSE Leap 16 will be shipped with SELinux by default as well. openSUSE/SLE adopted RHEL/Fedora policies for its SELinux implementation although with some differences. AppArmor is retained for existing Tumbleweed and SLE/openSUSE Leap 15.x installation (users can manually migrate their existing installation to SELinux). AppArmor is also available as install-time selection for users who prefer it.

==Use case scenarios==
SELinux can potentially control which activities a system allows each user, process, and daemon, with very precise specifications. It is used to confine daemons such as database engines or web servers that have clearly defined data access and activity rights. This limits potential harm from a confined daemon that becomes compromised.

Command-line utilities include:
codice_8,
codice_9,
codice_10,
codice_1,
codice_12,
codice_13,
codice_14,
codice_15,
codice_16,
codice_17,
codice_18,
codice_19
codice_20,
codice_21,
codice_22,
codice_23,
codice_24,
codice_25,
codice_26,
codice_27,
and codice_28

===Examples===
To put SELinux into enforcing mode:
:codice_29

To query the SELinux status:
:codice_30

==Comparison with AppArmor==
SELinux represents one of several possible approaches to the problem of restricting the actions that installed software can take. Another popular alternative is called AppArmor and is available on SUSE Linux Enterprise Server (SLES), openSUSE, and Debian-based platforms. AppArmor was developed as a component to the now-defunct Immunix Linux platform. Because AppArmor and SELinux differ radically from one another, they form distinct alternatives for software control. Whereas SELinux re-invents certain concepts to provide access to a more expressive set of policy choices, AppArmor was designed to be simple by extending the same administrative semantics used for DAC up to the mandatory access control level.

There are several key differences:
* One important difference is that AppArmor identifies file system objects by path name instead of inode. This means that, for example, a file that is inaccessible may become accessible under AppArmor when a hard link is created to it, while SELinux would deny access through the newly created hard link.
** As a result, AppArmor can be said not to be a type enforcement system, as files are not assigned a type; instead, they are merely referenced in a configuration file.
* SELinux and AppArmor also differ significantly in how they are administered and how they integrate into the system.
* Since it endeavors to recreate traditional DAC controls with MAC-level enforcement, AppArmor&#x27;s set of operations is also considerably smaller than those available under most SELinux implementations. For example, AppArmor&#x27;s set of operations consist of: read, write, append, execute, lock, and link. Most SELinux implementations will support numbers of operations orders of magnitude more than that. For example, SELinux will usually support those same permissions, but also includes controls for mknod, binding to network sockets, implicit use of POSIX capabilities, loading and unloading kernel modules, various means of accessing shared memory, etc.
* There are no controls in AppArmor for categorically bounding POSIX capabilities. Since the current implementation of capabilities contains no notion of a subject for the operation (only the actor and the operation) it is usually the job of the MAC layer to prevent privileged operations on files outside the actor&#x27;s enforced realm of control (i.e. &quot;Sandbox&quot;). AppArmor can prevent its own policy from being altered, and prevent file systems from being mounted/unmounted, but does nothing to prevent users from stepping outside their approved realms of control.
** For example, it may be deemed beneficial for help desk employees to change ownership or permissions on certain files even if they don&#x27;t own them (for example, on a departmental file share). The administrator does not want to give the user(s) root access on the box so they give them codice_31 or codice_32. Under SELinux the administrator (or platform vendor) can configure SELinux to deny all capabilities to otherwise unconfined users, then create confined domains for the employee to be able to transition into after logging in, one that can exercise those capabilities, but only upon files of the appropriate type.
* There is no notion of multilevel security with AppArmor, thus there is no hard BLP or Biba enforcement available..
* AppArmor configuration is done using solely regular flat files. SELinux (by default in most implementations) uses a combination of flat files (used by administrators and developers to write human readable policy before it&#x27;s compiled) and extended attributes.
* SELinux supports the concept of a &quot;remote policy server&quot; (configurable via /etc/selinux/semanage.conf) as an alternative source for policy configuration. Central management of AppArmor is usually complicated considerably since administrators must decide between configuration deployment tools being run as root (to allow policy updates) or configured manually on each server.

==Similar systems and enhancements==
Isolation of processes can also be accomplished by mechanisms such as virtualization; the OLPC project, for example, in its first implementation sandboxed individual applications in lightweight Vservers. Also, the NSA has adopted some of the SELinux concepts in Security-Enhanced Android.

General Dynamics builds and distributes PitBull Trusted Operating System, a multilevel security (MLS) enhancement for Red Hat Enterprise Linux.

Multi-Category Security (MCS) is an enhancement to SELinux for Red Hat Enterprise Linux that allows users to label files with categories, in order to further restrict access through discretionary access control and type enforcement. Categories provide additional compartments within sensitivity levels used by multilevel security (MLS).

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==
* Security-Enhanced Linux at the National Security Agency in the Internet Archive
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q116038" start="0" end="23" title="Security-Enhanced Linux" label="Security-Enhanced Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q116038" start="25" end="32" title="Security-Enhanced Linux" label="SELinux"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="39" end="51" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550704" start="52" end="67" title="Linux Security Modules" label="security module"/>
<link wikidata="Q228502" start="109" end="123" title="access control" label="access control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888932" start="153" end="177" title="mandatory access control" label="mandatory access control"/>
<link wikidata="Q131669" start="281" end="299" title="Linux distribution" label="Linux distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q846636" start="306" end="318" title="software architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q208218" start="698" end="705" title="patch (computing)" label="patches"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="713" end="725" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q308980" start="1584" end="1591" title="daemon (computing)" label="daemons"/>
<link wikidata="Q19423" start="1648" end="1663" title="buffer overflow" label="buffer overflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228590" start="1764" end="1777" title="discretionary access control" label="discretionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q255063" start="1846" end="1855" title="superuser" label="superuser"/>
<link wikidata="Q269582" start="1974" end="1980" title="setuid" label="setuid"/>
<link wikidata="Q269582" start="1981" end="1987" title="setgid" label="setgid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285482" start="2867" end="2894" title="mandatory integrity control" label="mandatory integrity control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702839" start="2897" end="2922" title="role-based access control" label="role-based access control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463060" start="2935" end="2964" title="type enforcement architecture" label="type enforcement architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="3262" end="3286" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398947" start="3377" end="3389" title="Rainbow Series" label="Rainbow Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="3789" end="3810" title="Linux kernel mainline" label="Linux kernel mainline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="3937" end="3948" title="Open-source software" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="3981" end="3988" title="GNU GPL" label="GNU GPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q485593" start="4145" end="4152" title="Red Hat" label="Red Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q267313" start="4154" end="4172" title="Network Associates" label="Network Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799203" start="4174" end="4202" title="Secure Computing Corporation" label="Secure Computing Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q213218" start="4281" end="4286" title="FLASK" label="FLASK"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="4338" end="4348" title="TrustedBSD" label="TrustedBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="4365" end="4372" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q14581" start="4377" end="4383" title="Darwin (operating system)" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q213218" start="4443" end="4472" title="FLASK" label="Flux Advanced Security Kernel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4548" end="4570" title="Fluke operating system" label="Fluke operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463060" start="4706" end="4722" title="type enforcement" label="type enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702839" start="4724" end="4749" title="role-based access control" label="role-based access control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047485" start="4755" end="4774" title="multilevel security" label="multilevel security"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4826" end="4862" title="Distributed Trusted Operating System" label="Distributed Trusted Operating System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848182" start="4916" end="4943" title="Trusted Information Systems" label="Trusted Information Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q300864" start="8126" end="8130" title="cron" label="cron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047485" start="8475" end="8494" title="multilevel security" label="multilevel security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060813" start="8651" end="8666" title="file descriptor" label="file descriptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141748" start="8867" end="8879" title="Whitelisting" label="Default-deny"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="8998" end="9005" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q48267" start="9078" end="9084" title="Fedora (operating system)" label="Fedora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715973" start="9227" end="9233" title="Debian" label="Debian"/>
<link wikidata="Q381" start="9270" end="9276" title="Ubuntu (operating system)" label="Ubuntu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16691" start="9321" end="9329" title="SUSE Linux" label="openSUSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759786" start="9377" end="9398" title="SUSE Linux Enterprise" label="SUSE Linux Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079320" start="9502" end="9518" title="Linux containers" label="Linux containers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15984850" start="9528" end="9550" title="Container Linux by CoreOS" label="CoreOS Container Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q215273" start="9729" end="9753" title="Red Hat Enterprise Linux" label="Red Hat Enterprise Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q207542" start="9881" end="9887" title="CentOS" label="CentOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q839735" start="9889" end="9905" title="Scientific Linux" label="Scientific Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q106601457" start="9907" end="9916" title="AlmaLinux" label="AlmaLinux"/>
<link wikidata="Q104102686" start="9921" end="9932" title="Rocky Linux" label="Rocky Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047485" start="10214" end="10233" title="multilevel security" label="multilevel security"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="10372" end="10388" title="Virtual machine" label="virtual machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q620616" start="10429" end="10437" title="AppArmor" label="AppArmor"/>
<link wikidata="Q308980" start="11087" end="11094" title="Daemon (computer software)" label="daemons"/>
<link wikidata="Q620616" start="11835" end="11843" title="AppArmor" label="AppArmor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759786" start="11864" end="11892" title="SUSE Linux Enterprise Server" label="SUSE Linux Enterprise Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q16691" start="11901" end="11909" title="openSUSE" label="openSUSE"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11915" end="11927" title="List of Linux distributions#Debian-based" label="Debian-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005466" start="11996" end="12009" title="Immunix" label="Immunix Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228590" start="12335" end="12338" title="Discretionary Access Control" label="DAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463060" start="12771" end="12787" title="type enforcement" label="type enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q815667" start="14959" end="14962" title="Bell–LaPadula model" label="BLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q856029" start="14966" end="14970" title="Biba Model" label="Biba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079320" start="15757" end="15771" title="Operating system-level virtualization" label="virtualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q842120" start="15777" end="15781" title="OLPC" label="OLPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q842193" start="15832" end="15841" title="Sandbox (computer security)" label="sandboxed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275569" start="15881" end="15888" title="Vserver" label="Vserver"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="15901" end="15904" title="NSA" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="15967" end="15974" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q502940" start="15977" end="15993" title="General Dynamics" label="General Dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047485" start="16053" end="16072" title="multilevel security" label="multilevel security"/>
<link wikidata="Q215273" start="16095" end="16119" title="Red Hat Enterprise Linux" label="Red Hat Enterprise Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q215273" start="16185" end="16209" title="Red Hat Enterprise Linux" label="Red Hat Enterprise Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047485" start="16432" end="16451" title="multilevel security" label="multilevel security"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="16556" end="16580" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="16588" end="16604" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55909" wikidata="Q33497" url="?curid=55909" title="Laurel and Hardy">
<text>Laurel and Hardy were a British-American comedy team during the early Classical Hollywood era of American cinema, consisting of Englishman Stan Laurel (1890–1965) and American Oliver Hardy (1892–1957). Starting their career as a duo in the silent film era, they later successfully transitioned to &quot;talkies&quot;. From the late 1920s to the mid-1950s, they were internationally famous for their slapstick comedy, with Laurel playing the clumsy, childlike friend to Hardy&#x27;s pompous bully. Their signature theme song, known as &quot;The Cuckoo Song&quot;, &quot;Ku-Ku&quot;, or &quot;The Dance of the Cuckoos&quot; (by Hollywood composer T. Marvin Hatley) was heard over their films&#x27; opening credits, and became as emblematic of them as their bowler hats.

Prior to emerging as a team, both had well-established film careers. Laurel had acted in over 50 films, and worked as a writer and director, while Hardy was in more than 250 productions. Both had appeared in &quot;The Lucky Dog&quot; (1921), but were not teamed at the time. They first appeared together in a short film in 1926, when they signed separate contracts with the Hal Roach film studio. They officially became a team in 1927 when they appeared in the silent short &quot;Putting Pants on Philip&quot;. They remained with Roach until 1940, and then appeared in eight B movie comedies for 20th Century Fox and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer from 1941 to 1945. After finishing their film commitments at the end of 1944, they concentrated on performing stage shows, and embarked on a music hall tour of England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland. They made their last film in 1950, a French–Italian co-production called &quot;Atoll K&quot;. Afterward, they resumed their stage appearances until 1954.

They appeared as a team in 107 films, starring in 32 short silent films, 40 short sound films, and 23 full-length feature films. They also made 12 guest or cameo appearances, including in the &quot;Galaxy of Stars&quot; promotional film of 1936. On December 1, 1954, they made their sole American television appearance, when they were surprised and interviewed by Ralph Edwards on his live NBC-TV program &quot;This Is Your Life&quot;.

Since the 1930s, their works have been released in numerous theatrical reissues, television revivals, 8-mm and 16-mm home movies, feature-film compilations, and home videos. In 2005, they were voted the seventh-greatest comedy act of all time by a UK poll of professional comedians. The official Laurel and Hardy appreciation society is The Sons of the Desert, after a fictional fraternal society in the film of the same name.

==Early careers==

===Stan Laurel===
Stan Laurel (June 16, 1890 – February 23, 1965) was born Arthur Stanley Jefferson in Ulverston, Lancashire, England, into a theatrical family. His father, Arthur Joseph Jefferson, was a theatrical entrepreneur and theater owner in northern England and Scotland who, with his wife, was a major force in the industry. In 1905, the Jefferson family moved to Glasgow to be closer to their business mainstay of the Metropole Theatre, and Laurel made his stage debut in a Glasgow hall called the Britannia Panopticon one month short of his 16th birthday. Arthur Jefferson secured Laurel his first acting job with the juvenile theatrical company of Levy and Cardwell, which specialized in Christmas pantomimes. In 1909, Laurel was employed by Britain&#x27;s leading comedy impresario Fred Karno as a supporting actor, and as an understudy for Charlie Chaplin. Laurel said of Karno, &quot;There was no one like him. He had no equal. His name &quot;was&quot; box-office.&quot;

In 1912, Laurel left England with the Fred Karno Troupe to tour the United States. Laurel had expected the tour to be merely a pleasant interval before returning to London; however, he decided to remain in the U.S. In 1917, Laurel was teamed with Mae Dahlberg as a double act for stage and film; they were living as common-law husband and wife. The same year, Laurel made his film debut with Dahlberg in &quot;Nuts in May&quot;. While working with Mae, he began using the name &quot;Stan Laurel&quot; and changed his name legally in 1931. Dahlberg demanded roles in his films, but her tempestuous nature made her difficult to work with. Dressing room arguments were common between the two; it was reported that producer Joe Rock paid her to leave Laurel and to return to her native Australia. In 1925, Laurel joined the Hal Roach film studio as a director and writer. From May 1925 to September 1926, he received credit in at least 22 films. Laurel appeared in over 50 films for various producers before teaming up with Hardy. Prior to that, he experienced only modest success. It was difficult for producers, writers, and directors to write for his character, with American audiences knowing him either as a &quot;nutty burglar&quot; or as a Charlie Chaplin imitator.

===Oliver Hardy===
Oliver Hardy (January 18, 1892 – August 7, 1957) was born Norvell Hardy in Harlem, Georgia, United States. By his late teens, Hardy was a popular stage singer and he operated a movie house in Milledgeville, Georgia, the Palace Theater, financed in part by his mother. For his stage name he took his father&#x27;s first name, calling himself &quot;Oliver Norvell Hardy&quot;, while offscreen his nicknames were &quot;Ollie&quot; and &quot;Babe&quot;. The nickname &quot;Babe&quot; originated from an Italian barber near the Lubin Studios in Jacksonville, Florida, who would rub Hardy&#x27;s face with talcum powder and say &quot;That&#x27;s nice-a baby!&quot; Other actors in the Lubin company mimicked this, and Hardy was billed as &quot;Babe Hardy&quot; in his early films.

Seeing film comedies inspired him to take up comedy himself and, in 1913, he began working with Lubin Motion Pictures in Jacksonville. He started by helping around the studio with lights, props, and other duties, gradually learning the craft as a script-clerk for the company. It was around this time that Hardy married his first wife, Madelyn Saloshin. In 1914, Hardy was billed as &quot;Babe Hardy&quot; in his first film, &quot;Outwitting Dad&quot;. Between 1914 and 1916 Hardy made 177 shorts as Babe with the Vim Comedy Company, which were released up to the end of 1917. Exhibiting a versatility in playing heroes, villains and even female characters, Hardy was in demand for roles as a supporting actor, comic villain or second banana. For 10 years he memorably assisted star comic and Charlie Chaplin imitator Billy West, and appeared in the comedies of Jimmy Aubrey, Larry Semon, and Charley Chase. In total, Hardy starred or co-starred in more than 250 silent shorts, of which roughly 150 have been lost. He was rejected for enlistment by the Army during World War I due to his large size. In 1917, following the collapse of the Florida film industry, Hardy and his wife Madelyn moved to California to seek new opportunities.

==History as Laurel and Hardy==
===Hal Roach===
Hal Roach recounted how Laurel and Hardy became a team: Hardy was already working for Roach (and others) when Roach hired Laurel, whom he had seen in vaudeville. Laurel had very light blue eyes, and Roach discovered that, due to the technology of film at that time, Laurel&#x27;s eyes would not photograph properly—blue photographed as white. This problem is apparent in their first silent film together, &quot;The Lucky Dog&quot;, where an attempt was made to compensate for the problem by applying heavy makeup to Laurel&#x27;s eyes. For about a year, Roach had Laurel work at the studio as a writer. Then panchromatic film was developed; they tested Laurel, and found the problem was solved. Laurel and Hardy were then put together in a film, and they seemed to complement each other. Comedy teams were usually composed of a straight man and a funny man, but these two were both comedians; however, each knew how to play the straight man when the script required it. Roach said, &quot;You could always cut to a close-up of either one, and their reaction was good for another laugh.&quot;

===Leo McCarey===
Screenwriter, director and producer for Hal Roach Studios, Leo McCarey recounted a story on the NBC television program This Is Your Life on December 1, 1954 of how a leg of lamb brought Laurel and Hardy together.

===Style of comedy and characterizations===

The humor of Laurel and Hardy was highly visual, with slapstick used for emphasis. They often had physical arguments (in character) which were quite complex and involved a cartoonish style of violence. Their ineptitude and misfortune precluded them from making any real progress, even in the simplest endeavors. Much of their comedy involves &quot;milking&quot; a joke, where a simple idea provides a basis for multiple, ongoing gags without following a defined narrative.

Stan Laurel was of average height and weight, but appeared comparatively small and slight next to Oliver Hardy, who was and weighed about in his prime. Details of their hair and clothing were used to enhance this natural contrast. Laurel kept his hair short on the sides and back, growing it long on top to create a natural &quot;fright wig&quot;. Typically, at times of shock, he simultaneously screwed up his face to appear as if crying while pulling up his hair. In contrast, Hardy&#x27;s thinning hair was pasted on his forehead in spit curls and he sported a toothbrush moustache. To achieve a flat-footed walk, Laurel removed the heels from his shoes. Both wore bowler hats, with Laurel&#x27;s being narrower than Hardy&#x27;s, and with a flattened brim. The characters&#x27; normal attire called for wing collar shirts, with Hardy wearing a necktie which he would twiddle when he was particularly self-conscious; and Laurel, a bow tie. Hardy&#x27;s sports jacket was a little small and done up with one straining button, whereas Laurel&#x27;s double-breasted jacket was loose-fitting.

A popular routine was a &quot;tit for tat&quot; fight with an adversary. It could be with their wives—often played by Mae Busch, Anita Garvin, or Daphne Pollard—or with a neighbor, often played by Charlie Hall or James Finlayson. Laurel and Hardy would accidentally damage someone&#x27;s property, and the injured party would retaliate by ruining something belonging to Laurel or Hardy. After calmly surveying the damage, one or the other of the &quot;offended&quot; parties found something else to vandalize, and the conflict escalated until both sides were simultaneously destroying items in front of each other. An early example of the routine occurs in their classic short &quot;Big Business&quot; (1929), which was added to the National Film Registry in 1992. Another short film which revolves around such an altercation was titled &quot;Tit for Tat&quot; (1935).

One of their best-remembered dialogue devices was the &quot;Tell me that again&quot; routine. Laurel would tell Hardy a genuinely smart idea he came up with, and Hardy would reply, &quot;Tell me that again.&quot; Laurel would then try to repeat the idea, but, having instantly forgotten it, babble utter nonsense. Hardy, who had difficulty understanding Laurel&#x27;s idea when expressed clearly, would then understand the jumbled version perfectly. While much of their comedy remained visual, humorous dialogue often occurred in Laurel and Hardy&#x27;s talking films as well. Examples include:
* &quot;You can lead a horse to water, but a pencil must be led.&quot; (Laurel, &quot;Brats&quot;)
* &quot;I was dreaming I was awake, but I woke up and found meself asleep.&quot; (Laurel, &quot;Oliver the Eighth&quot;)
* &quot;A lot of weather we&#x27;ve been having lately.&quot; (Hardy, &quot;Way Out West&quot;)

In some cases, their comedy bordered on the surreal, in a style Laurel called &quot;white magic&quot;. For example, in the 1937 film &quot;Way Out West&quot;, Laurel flicks his thumb upward as if working a lighter. His thumb ignites and he matter-of-factly lights Hardy&#x27;s pipe. Amazed at seeing this, Hardy unsuccessfully attempts to duplicate it throughout the film. Much later he finally succeeds, only to be terrified when his thumb catches fire. Laurel expands the joke in the 1938 film &quot;Block-Heads&quot; by pouring tobacco into his clenched fist and smoking it as though it were a pipe, again to Hardy&#x27;s bemusement. This time, the joke ends when a match Laurel was using relights itself, Hardy throws it into the fireplace, and it explodes with a loud bang.

Rather than showing Hardy suffering the pain of misfortunes, such as falling down stairs or being beaten by a thug, banging and crashing sound effects were often used so the audience could visualize the mayhem. The 1927 film &quot;Sailors, Beware!&quot; was a significant one for Hardy because two of his enduring trademarks were developed. The first was his &quot;tie twiddle&quot; to demonstrate embarrassment. Hardy, while acting, had received a pail of water in the face. He said, &quot;I had been expecting it, but I didn&#x27;t expect it at that particular moment. It threw me mentally and I couldn&#x27;t think what to do next, so I waved the tie in a kind of tiddly-widdly fashion to show embarrassment while trying to look friendly.&quot; His second trademark was the &quot;camera look&quot;, where he breaks the fourth wall and, in frustration, stares directly at the audience. Hardy said: &quot;I had to become exasperated, so I just stared right into the camera and registered my disgust.&quot; Offscreen, Laurel and Hardy were quite the opposite of their movie characters: Laurel was the industrious &quot;idea man&quot;, while Hardy was more easygoing.

===Catchphrases===
Laurel and Hardy&#x27;s best-known catchphrase is, &quot;Well, here&#x27;s another nice mess you&#x27;ve gotten me into!&quot; It was earlier used by W. S. Gilbert in both &quot;The Mikado&quot; (1885) and &quot;The Grand Duke&quot; (1896). It was first used by Hardy in &quot;The Laurel-Hardy Murder Case&quot; in 1930. In popular culture, the catchphrase is often misquoted as &quot;Well, here&#x27;s another &quot;fine&quot; mess you&#x27;ve gotten me into&quot;, which was never spoken by Hardy—a misunderstanding that stems from the title of their film &quot;Another Fine Mess&quot;. When Hardy said the phrase, Laurel&#x27;s frequent, iconic response was to start to cry, pull his hair up, exclaim &quot;Well, I couldn&#x27;t help it...&quot;, then whimper and speak gibberish.

Some variations on the phrase occurred. For example, in &quot;Chickens Come Home,&quot; Ollie impatiently says to Stan, &quot;Well...&quot;, and Stan continues for him: &quot;Here&#x27;s another nice mess I&#x27;ve gotten you into.&quot; The films &quot;Thicker than Water&quot; and &quot;The Fixer Uppers&quot; use the phrase &quot;Well, here&#x27;s another nice kettle of fish you&#x27;ve pickled me in!&quot; In &quot;Saps at Sea&quot;, the phrase becomes &quot;Well, here&#x27;s another nice bucket of suds you&#x27;ve gotten me into!&quot; The catchphrase, in its original form, was used as the last line of dialogue in the duo&#x27;s last film, &quot;Atoll K&quot; (1951)&quot;.&quot;

In moments of particular distress or frustration, Hardy often exclaims, &quot;Why don&#x27;t you do something to &quot;help&quot; me?&quot;, as Laurel stands helplessly by.

&quot;OH!&quot; (or drawn out as &quot;Ohhhhh-OH!&quot;) was another catchphrase used by Hardy. He uses the expression in the duo&#x27;s first sound film, &quot;Unaccustomed As We Are&quot; (1929) when his character&#x27;s wife smashes a record over his head.

Mustachioed Scottish actor James Finlayson, who appeared in 33 Laurel and Hardy films, used a variation: &quot;D&#x27;oh!&quot; The phrase, expressing surprise, impatience, or incredulity, inspired the trademark &quot;D&#x27;oh!&quot; of character Homer Simpson (voiced by Dan Castellaneta) in the long-running animated comedy &quot;The Simpsons&quot;.

===Films===
Laurel&#x27;s and Hardy&#x27;s first film pairing, although as separate performers, was in the silent &quot;The Lucky Dog.&quot; Its production details have not survived, but film historian Bo Berglund has placed it between September 1920 and January 1921. According to interviews they gave in the 1930s, the pair&#x27;s acquaintance at the time was casual, and both had forgotten their initial film entirely. The plot sees Laurel&#x27;s character befriended by a stray dog which, after some lucky escapes, saves him from being blown up by dynamite. Hardy&#x27;s character is a mugger attempting to rob Laurel. They later signed separate contracts with the Hal Roach Studios, and next appeared in the 1926 film &quot;45 Minutes From Hollywood&quot;.

Hal Roach is considered the most important person in the development of Laurel&#x27;s and Hardy&#x27;s film careers. He brought them together, and they worked for Roach for almost 20 years. Director Charley Rogers, who worked closely with the three men for many years, said, &quot;It could not have happened if Laurel, Hardy, and Roach had not met at the right place and the right time.&quot; Their first &quot;official&quot; film together was &quot;Putting Pants on Philip&quot;, released December 3, 1927. The plot involves Laurel as Philip, a young Scotsman who arrives in the United States in full kilted splendor, and suffers mishaps involving the kilts. His uncle, played by Hardy, tries to put trousers on him. Also in 1927, the pair starred in &quot;The Battle of the Century&quot;, a classic pie-throwing short involving over 3,000 real pies; only a fragment of the film was known to exist until the first half resurfaced in the 1970s; a more complete print was discovered in 2015 by historian Jon Mirsalis.
Laurel said to the duo&#x27;s biographer John McCabe: &quot;Of all the questions we&#x27;re asked, the most frequent is, how did we come together? I always explain that we came together naturally.&quot; Laurel and Hardy were joined by accident and grew by indirection. In 1926, both were part of the Roach Comedy All Stars, a stock company of actors who took part in a series of films. Laurel&#x27;s and Hardy&#x27;s parts gradually grew larger, while those of their fellow stars diminished, because Laurel and Hardy had superior pantomime skills. Their teaming was suggested by Leo McCarey, their supervising director from 1927 and 1930. During that period, McCarey and Laurel jointly devised the team&#x27;s format. McCarey also influenced the slowing of their comedy action from the silent era&#x27;s typically frantic pace to a more natural one. The formula worked so well that Laurel and Hardy played the same characters for the next 30 years.

Although Roach employed writers and directors such as H. M. Walker, Leo McCarey, James Parrott, and James W. Horne on the Laurel and Hardy films, Laurel, who had a considerable background in comedy writing, often rewrote entire sequences and scripts. He also encouraged the cast and crew to improvise, then meticulously reviewed the footage during editing. By 1929, he was the pair&#x27;s head writer, and it was reported that the writing sessions were gleefully chaotic. Stan had three or four writers who competed with him in a perpetual game of &#x27;Can You Top This?&#x27; Hardy was quite happy to leave the writing to his partner. He said, &quot;After all, just doing the gags was hard enough work, especially if you have taken as many falls and been dumped in as many mudholes as I have. I think I earned my money.&quot; Laurel eventually became so involved in their films&#x27; productions, many film historians and aficionados consider him an uncredited director. He ran the Laurel and Hardy set, no matter who was in the director&#x27;s chair, but never asserted his authority. Roach remarked: &quot;Laurel bossed the production. With any director, if Laurel said &#x27;I don&#x27;t like this idea,&#x27; the director didn&#x27;t say &#x27;Well, you&#x27;re going to do it anyway.&#x27; That was understood.&quot; As Laurel made so many suggestions, there was not much left for the credited director to do.

Their 1929 release &quot;Big Business&quot; is by far the most critically acclaimed of the silents. Laurel and Hardy are Christmas tree salesmen who are drawn into a classic tit-for-tat battle, with a character played by James Finlayson, that eventually destroys his house and their car. &quot;Big Business&quot; was added to the United States National Film Registry as a national treasure in 1992.

==Sound films==
In 1929 the silent era of film was coming to an end. Many silent-film actors failed to make the transition to &quot;talkies&quot;—some, because they felt sound was irrelevant to their craft of conveying stories with body language; and others, because their spoken voices were considered inadequate for the new medium. However, the addition of spoken dialogue only enhanced Laurel&#x27;s and Hardy&#x27;s performances; both had extensive theatrical experience, and could use their voices to great comic effect. Their films also continued to feature much visual comedy. In these ways, they made a seamless transition to their first sound film, &quot;Unaccustomed As We Are&quot; (1929) (whose title was a play on the familiar phrase, &quot;Unaccustomed as I am to public speaking&quot;). In the opening dialogue, Laurel and Hardy began by spoofing the slow and self-conscious speech of the early talking actors which became a routine they would use regularly.

&quot;The Music Box&quot; (1932), with the pair delivering a piano up a long flight of steps, won an Academy Award for Best Live Action Short Subject. &quot;The Music Box&quot; remains one of the duo&#x27;s most widely known films.

Laurel and Hardy were favorites around the world, and Hal Roach catered to international audiences by filming many of their early talkies in other languages. They spoke their dialogue phonetically, in Spanish, Italian, French, or German. The plots remained similar to the English versions, although the supporting actors were often changed to those who were fluent in the native language. &quot;Pardon Us&quot; (1931) was reshot in all four foreign languages. &quot;Blotto&quot;, &quot;Hog Wild&quot; and &quot;Be Big!&quot; were remade in French and Spanish versions. &quot;Night Owls&quot; was remade in both Spanish and Italian, and &quot;Below Zero&quot; and &quot;Chickens Come Home&quot; in Spanish.

==Feature films==
Just as Laurel and Hardy&#x27;s teaming was accidental, so was their entry into the field of feature films. In the words of biographer John McCabe, &quot;Roach planned to use the MGM set [built for &quot;The Big House&quot;] for a simple prison-break two-reeler but MGM suddenly added a proviso: Laurel and Hardy would have to do a picture for them in exchange. Roach would not agree so he built his own prison set, a very expensive item for a two-reeler. So expensive was it indeed that he added four more reels to bring it into the feature category and, it was hoped, the bigger market.&quot; The experiment was successful, and the team continued to make features along with their established short subjects until 1935, when they converted to features exclusively.

&quot;Sons of the Desert&quot; (1933) is often cited as Laurel and Hardy&#x27;s best feature-length film. The situation-comedy script by actor-playwright Frank Craven and screenwriter Byron Morgan is stronger than usual for a Laurel &amp; Hardy comedy, and versatile director William A. Seiter, who had made light comedies with Reginald Denny as well as outlandish ones with Wheeler and Woolsey, handled the film with a more controlled sense of pace and style than other directors of the team&#x27;s features. Stan and Ollie are henpecked husbands who want to attend a convention held by the Sons of the Desert fraternal lodge. They tell their wives that Ollie requires an ocean voyage to Honolulu for his health, and they sneak off to the convention. They are unaware that the Honolulu-bound ship they were supposedly aboard is sinking, and the wives confront their errant husbands when they get home.

&quot;Babes in Toyland&quot; (1934) remains a perennial on American television during the Christmas season. When interviewed, Hal Roach spoke scathingly about the film and Laurel&#x27;s behavior. Roach himself had written a treatment detailing the characters and storyline, only to find that Laurel considered Roach&#x27;s effort totally unsuitable. Roach, affronted, tried to argue in favor of his treatment, but Laurel was adamant. Roach angrily gave up and allowed Laurel to make the film his way. The rift damaged Roach-Laurel relations to the point that Roach said that after &quot;Toyland&quot;, he did not want to produce for Laurel and Hardy. Although their association continued for another six years, Roach no longer took an active hand in Laurel and Hardy films.

&quot;Way Out West&quot; (1937) was a personal favorite of both Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy. A satire of the Gene Autry musical westerns sweeping America at the time, the film combines Laurel and Hardy&#x27;s slapstick routines with songs and dances performed by the stars.

It appeared that the team would split permanently in 1938. Hal Roach had become dissatisfied with his distribution arrangement with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, and had begun releasing his films through United Artists. He still owed MGM one last feature, and made the Laurel and Hardy comedy &quot;Block-Heads&quot;, with the announcement that this would be Laurel and Hardy&#x27;s farewell film. Stan Laurel&#x27;s contract with Roach then expired, and Roach did not renew it. Oliver Hardy&#x27;s contract was still in force, however, and Roach starred Hardy solo in the antebellum comedy &quot;Zenobia&quot; (1939), with Harry Langdon as Hardy&#x27;s comic foil. This fueled rumors that Laurel and Hardy had split on bad terms.

After &quot;Zenobia&quot;, Laurel rejoined Hardy and the team signed with independent producer Boris Morros for the comedy feature &quot;The Flying Deuces&quot; (1939). Meanwhile, Hal Roach wanted to demonstrate his new idea of making four-reel, 40-minute featurettes—twice the length of standard two-reel, 20-minute comedies—which Roach felt could fit more conveniently into double-feature programs. He referred to these extended films as &quot;streamliners&quot;. To test his theory, Roach rehired Laurel and Hardy. The resulting films, &quot;A Chump at Oxford&quot; and &quot;Saps at Sea&quot; (both 1940), were prepared as featurettes. United Artists overruled Roach and insisted that they be released as full-length features.

Hoping for greater artistic freedom, Laurel and Hardy split with Roach, and signed with 20th Century-Fox in 1941 and MGM in 1942. However, their working conditions were now completely different: they were simply hired actors, relegated to both studios’ B-film units, and not initially allowed to contribute to the scripts or improvise, as they had always done. When their films proved popular, the studios allowed them more input, and they starred in eight features until the end of 1944. These films, while far from their best work, were still very successful. Budgeted between $300,000 and $450,000 each, they earned millions at the box office for Fox and MGM. The Fox films were so profitable that the studio kept making Laurel and Hardy comedies after it discontinued its other &quot;B&quot; series films.

The busy team decided to take a rest during 1946, but 1947 saw their first European tour in 15 years. A film based in the charters of &quot;Robin Hood&quot; was planned during the tour, but not realized. In 1947, Laurel and Hardy famously attended the reopening of the Dungeness loop of the Romney, Hythe and Dymchurch Railway, where they performed improvised routines with a steam locomotive for the benefit of local crowds and dignitaries.

In 1948, on the team&#x27;s return to America, Laurel was sidelined by illness and temporarily unable to work. He encouraged Hardy to take movie roles on his own. Hardy&#x27;s friend John Wayne hired him to co-star in &quot;The Fighting Kentuckian&quot; for Republic Pictures, and Bing Crosby got him a small part in Frank Capra&#x27;s &quot;Riding High&quot;.

In 1950–51, Laurel and Hardy made their final feature-length film together, &quot;Atoll K&quot;. A French-Italian co-production directed by Léo Joannon, it was plagued by problems with language barriers, production issues, and both actors&#x27; serious health issues. When Laurel received the script&#x27;s final draft, he felt its heavy political content overshadowed the comedy. He quickly rewrote it, with screen comic Monte Collins contributing visual gags, and hired old friend Alfred Goulding to direct the Laurel and Hardy scenes. During filming, Hardy developed an irregular heartbeat, while Laurel experienced painful prostate complications that caused his weight to drop to 114 pounds. Critics were disappointed with the storyline, English dubbing, and Laurel&#x27;s sickly physical appearance. The film was not commercially successful on its first release, and brought an end to Laurel and Hardy&#x27;s film careers. &quot;Atoll K&quot; did finally turn a profit when it was rereleased in other countries. In 1954, an American distributor removed 18 minutes of footage and released it as &quot;Utopia&quot;; widely released on film and video, it is the film&#x27;s best-known version.

After &quot;Atoll K&quot; wrapped in April 1951, Laurel and Hardy returned to America and used the remainder of the year to rest. Stan appeared, in character, in a silent TV newsreel, &quot;Swim Meet&quot;, judging a local California swimming contest.

Most Laurel and Hardy films have survived and are still in circulation. Only three of their 107 films are considered lost and have not been seen in complete form since the 1930s. The silent film &quot;Hats Off&quot; from 1927 has vanished completely. The first half of &quot;Now I&#x27;ll Tell One&quot; (1927) is lost, and the second half has yet to be released on video. &quot;The Battle of the Century&quot; (1927), after years of obscurity, is now almost complete but a few minutes are missing. In the 1930 operatic Technicolor musical &quot;The Rogue Song&quot;, Laurel and Hardy appeared as comedy relief in 10 sequences; only one exists. The complete soundtrack has survived.

===Radio===
Laurel and Hardy made at least two audition recordings for radio, a half-hour NBC series, based on the skit, &quot;Driver’s License&quot;, and a 1944 NBC pilot for &quot;The Laurel and Hardy Show,&quot; casting Stan and Ollie in different occupations each episode. The surviving audition record, &quot;Mr. Slater&#x27;s Poultry Market,&quot; has Stan and Ollie as meat-market butchers mistaken for vicious gangsters. A third attempt was commissioned by BBC Radio in 1953: &quot;Laurel and Hardy Go to the Moon,&quot; a series of science-fiction comedies. A sample script was written by Tony Hawes and Denis Gifford, and the comedians staged a read-through, which was not recorded. The team was forced to withdraw due to Hardy&#x27;s declining health, and the project was abandoned.

===Final years===
Following the making of &quot;Atoll K&quot;, Laurel and Hardy took some months off to deal with health issues. On their return to the European stage in 1952, they undertook a well-received series of public appearances, performing a short Laurel-written sketch, &quot;A Spot of Trouble&quot;. The following year, Laurel wrote a routine entitled &quot;Birds of a Feather&quot;. On September 9, 1953, their boat arrived in Cobh in Ireland. Laurel recounted their reception:


On May 17, 1954, Laurel and Hardy made their last live stage performance in Plymouth, UK at the Palace Theatre. On December 1, 1954, they made their only American television appearance when they were surprised and interviewed by Ralph Edwards on his live NBC-TV program &quot;This Is Your Life&quot;. Lured to the Knickerbocker Hotel under the pretense of a business meeting with producer Bernard Delfont, the doors opened to their suite, #205, flooding the room with light and Edwards&#x27; voice. The telecast was preserved on a kinescope and later released on home video. Partly due to the broadcast&#x27;s positive response, the team began renegotiating with Hal Roach Jr. for a series of color NBC Television specials, to be called &quot;Laurel and Hardy&#x27;s Fabulous Fables&quot;. However, the plans had to be shelved as the aging comedians continued to suffer from declining health. In 1955, America&#x27;s magazine &quot;TV Guide&quot; ran a color spread on the team with current photos. That year, they made their final public appearance together while taking part in &quot;This Is Music Hall&quot;, a BBC Television program about the Grand Order of Water Rats, a British variety organization. Laurel and Hardy provided a filmed insert where they reminisced about their friends in British variety. They made their final appearance on camera in 1956 in a private home movie, shot by a family friend at the Reseda, California home of Stan Laurel&#x27;s daughter, Lois. The three-minute film has no audio.

In 1956, while following his doctor&#x27;s orders to improve his health due to a heart condition, Hardy lost over , but nonetheless suffered several strokes causing reduced mobility and speech. Despite his long and successful career, Hardy&#x27;s home was sold to help cover his medical expenses. He died of a stroke on August 7, 1957, and longtime friend Bob Chatterton said Hardy weighed just at the time of his death. Hardy was laid to rest at Pierce Brothers&#x27; Valhalla Memorial Park, North Hollywood. Following Hardy&#x27;s death, scenes from Laurel and Hardy&#x27;s early films were seen once again in theaters, featured in Robert Youngson&#x27;s silent-film compilation &quot;The Golden Age of Comedy&quot;.

For the remaining eight years of his life, Stan Laurel refused to perform, and declined Stanley Kramer&#x27;s offer of a cameo in his landmark 1963 film &quot;It&#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World&quot;. In 1960, Laurel was given a special Academy Award for his contributions to film comedy, but was unable to attend the ceremony due to poor health. Actor Danny Kaye accepted the award on his behalf. Despite not appearing on screen after Hardy&#x27;s death, Laurel did contribute gags to several comedy filmmakers. His favorite TV comedy was Leonard B. Stern&#x27;s &quot;I&#x27;m Dickens, He&#x27;s Fenster&quot;, co-starring John Astin and Marty Ingels as carpenters. Laurel enjoyed the Astin-Ingels chemistry and sent two-man gags to Stern.

During this period, most of his communication was in the form of written correspondence, and he insisted on personally answering every fan letter. Late in life, he welcomed visitors from the new generation of comedians and celebrities, including Dick Cavett, Jerry Lewis, Peter Sellers, Marcel Marceau, Johnny Carson, and Dick Van Dyke. Jerry Lewis offered Laurel a job as consultant, but he chose to help only on Lewis&#x27;s 1960 feature &quot;The Bellboy&quot;.

Dick Van Dyke was a longtime fan, and based his comedy and dancing styles on Laurel&#x27;s. When he discovered Laurel&#x27;s home number in the phone book and called him, Laurel invited him over for the afternoon. Van Dyke hosted a television tribute to Stan Laurel the year he died.

Laurel lived to see the duo&#x27;s work rediscovered through television and classic film revivals. He died on February 23, 1965, in Santa Monica and is buried at Forest Lawn-Hollywood Hills in Los Angeles, California.

===Supporting cast members===
Laurel and Hardy&#x27;s films included a supporting cast of comic actors, some of whom appeared regularly:
*Harry Bernard (former vaudeville partner of Charley Chase) played supporting roles as a waiter, bartender, or policeman.
*Mae Busch often played the formidable Mrs. Hardy and other characters, particularly sultry &quot;femmes fatales.&quot;
*Charley Chase, the Hal Roach film star and brother of James Parrott, a writer/director of several Laurel and Hardy films, made four appearances.
*Dorothy Coburn appeared in nearly a dozen early silent shorts.
*Baldwin Cooke (former vaudeville partner of Stan Laurel) played supporting roles as a waiter, colleague, or neighbor.
*Richard Cramer appeared as a scowling, menacing villain or opponent.
*Peter Cushing, well before becoming a star in Hammer Horror films, played one of the students in &quot;A Chump at Oxford&quot;.
*Bobby Dunn appeared as a cross-eyed bartender and telegram messenger, as well as the genial shoplifter in &quot;Tit for Tat&quot;.
*Eddie Dunn made several appearances, notably as the belligerent taxi driver in &quot;Me and My Pal&quot;. 
*James Finlayson, a balding, mustachioed Scotsman known for displays of indignation and squinting, pop-eyed &quot;double takes,&quot; made 33 appearances and is perhaps their most celebrated foil.
*Anita Garvin appeared in a number of Laurel and Hardy films, often cast as Mrs. Laurel.
*Billy Gilbert made many appearances, most notably as bombastic, blustery characters such as those in &quot;The Music Box&quot; (1932) and &quot;Block-Heads&quot;.
*Charlie Hall, who usually played angry, diminutive adversaries, appeared nearly 50 times.
*Jean Harlow had a small role in the silent short &quot;Double Whoopee&quot; (1929) and two other films in the early part of her career.
*Arthur Housman made several appearances as a comic drunk.
*Isabelle Keith was the only actress to appear as wife to both Laurel &quot;and&quot; Hardy (in &quot;Perfect Day&quot; and &quot;Be Big!&quot;, respectively).
*Edgar Kennedy, master of the &quot;slow burn,&quot; often appeared as a cop, a hostile neighbor, or a relative.
*Walter Long played grizzled, unshaven, physically threatening villains.
*Sam Lufkin appeared several times, usually as a husky authority figure.
*Charles Middleton made a handful of appearances, usually as a sourpuss adversary.
*James C. Morton appeared as a bartender or exasperated policeman.
*Vivien Oakland appeared in several early silent films, and later talkies including &quot;Scram!&quot; and &quot;Way Out West&quot;.
*Blanche Payson, a former policewoman, was featured in several sound shorts, including Oliver&#x27;s formidable wife in &quot;Helpmates&quot;.
*Daphne Pollard was featured as Oliver&#x27;s diminutive but daunting wife.
*Viola Richard appeared in several early silent films, most notably as the beautiful cave girl in &quot;Flying Elephants&quot; (1928).
*Charley Rogers, an English actor and gag writer, appeared several times.
*Tiny Sandford was a tall, burly, physically imposing character actor who played authority figures, usually policemen.
*Thelma Todd appeared several times before her own career as a comic leading lady.
*Ben Turpin, the cross-eyed Mack Sennett comedy star, made two memorable appearances.
*Ellinor Vanderveer made many appearances as a dowager, high society matron, or posh party guest.

===Music===
The duo&#x27;s famous signature tune, known variously as &quot;The Cuckoo Song&quot;, &quot;Ku-Ku&quot; or &quot;The Dance of the Cuckoos&quot;, was composed by Roach musical director Marvin Hatley as the on-the-hour chime for KFVD, the Roach studio&#x27;s radio station. Laurel heard the tune on the station and asked Hatley if they could use it as the Laurel and Hardy theme song. The original theme, recorded by two clarinets in 1930, was recorded again with a full orchestra in 1935. Leroy Shield composed the majority of the music used in the Laurel and Hardy short sound films. A compilation of songs from their films, titled &quot;Trail of the Lonesome Pine&quot;, was released in 1975. The title track was released as a single in the UK and reached number 2 in the UK singles chart.

==Influence and legacy==
Laurel and Hardy&#x27;s influence over a very broad range of comedy and other genres has been considerable. Lou Costello of the famed duo of Abbott and Costello, stated &quot;They were the funniest comedy team in the world.&quot; Many critics and film scholars throughout the years have agreed with this assessment; writers, artists, and performers as diverse as Samuel Beckett, Jerry Lewis, Lucille Ball, Peter Sellers, Marcel Marceau Steve Martin, John Cleese, Harold Pinter, Alec Guinness, J. D. Salinger, René Magritte and Kurt Vonnegut among many others, have acknowledged an artistic debt. Starting in the 1960s, the exposure on television of (especially) their short films has ensured a continued influence on generations of comedians and fans.

===Posthumous revivals and popular culture===
Since the 1930s, the works of Laurel and Hardy have been released again in numerous theatrical reissues, television revivals (broadcast, especially public television and cable), 16 mm and 8 mm home movies, feature-film compilations and home video. After Stan Laurel&#x27;s death in 1965, there were two major motion-picture tributes: &quot;Laurel and Hardy&#x27;s Laughing &#x27;20s&quot; was Robert Youngson&#x27;s compilation of the team&#x27;s silent-film highlights, and &quot;The Great Race&quot; was a large-scale salute to slapstick that director Blake Edwards dedicated to &quot;Mr. Laurel and Mr. Hardy&quot;. For many years the duo were impersonated by Jim MacGeorge (as Laurel) and Chuck McCann (as Hardy) in children&#x27;s TV shows and television commercials for various products.

Numerous colorized versions of Laurel and Hardy features and shorts have been reproduced by several studios. The process was introduced in 1983 by Colorization, Inc. in partnership with Hal Roach Studios, then a Canadian concern licensing its name and films from Hal Roach. Early efforts were the famous Laurel &amp; Hardy films &quot;Helpmates&quot;, &quot;Way Out West&quot;, and &quot;The Music Box,&quot; which were released to television and issued on VHS videocassettes. Most of the Laurel &amp; Hardy sound shorts were ultimately colorized for distribution in Europe; The pixel-based color process and the conversion from the American NTSC system to the European PAL system often affected the sharpness of the image, so since 2011 video distributors have issued the original, more accurately rendered black-and-white editions.

There are three Laurel and Hardy museums. One is in Laurel&#x27;s birthplace of Ulverston, England and another is in Hardy&#x27;s birthplace of Harlem, Georgia, United States.
The third is located in Solingen, Germany. Maurice Sendak showed three identical Oliver Hardy figures as bakers preparing cakes for the morning in his award-winning 1970 children&#x27;s book &quot;In the Night Kitchen&quot;. The Beatles used cut-outs of Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy in the cutout celebrity crowd for the cover of their 1967 album &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot;. A 2005 poll by fellow comedians and comedy insiders of the top 50 comedians for &quot;The Comedian&#x27;s Comedian&quot;, a TV documentary broadcast on UK&#x27;s Channel 4, voted the duo the seventh-greatest comedy act ever, making them the top double act on the list.

Merchandiser Larry Harmon claimed ownership of Laurel&#x27;s and Hardy&#x27;s likenesses and has issued Laurel and Hardy toys and coloring books. He also co-produced a series of &quot;Laurel and Hardy&quot; cartoons in 1966 with Hanna-Barbera Productions. His animated versions of Laurel and Hardy guest-starred in a 1972 episode of Hanna-Barbera&#x27;s &quot;The New Scooby-Doo Movies&quot;. In 1999, Harmon produced a direct-to-video feature live-action comedy entitled &quot;The All New Adventures of Laurel &amp; Hardy in For Love or Mummy&quot;. Actors Bronson Pinchot and Gailard Sartain were cast playing the lookalike nephews of Laurel and Hardy named Stanley Thinneus Laurel and Oliver Fatteus Hardy.

Currently, the North American rights to a majority of the Laurel &amp; Hardy library are owned by Chicken Soup for the Soul Entertainment, successor-in-interest to the companies that previously held such rights (Cabin Fever, RHI, Hallmark, and Sonar), while the CCA owns international rights, and Larry Harmon&#x27;s estate owns the likenesses and trademarks to Laurel &amp; Hardy.

The Indian comedy duo Ghory and Dixit was known as the Indian Laurel and Hardy. In 2011 the German/French TV station Arte released in co-production with the German TV station ZDF the 90-minute documentary &quot;Laurel &amp; Hardy: Their Lives and Magic&quot;. The film, titled in the original German &quot;Laurel and Hardy: Die komische Liebesgeschichte von &quot;Dick &amp; Doof&quot;&quot;, was written and directed by German film-maker and author Andreas Baum. It includes many movie clips, rare and unpublished photographs, interviews with family, fans, friends, showbiz pals and newly recovered footage. Laurel&#x27;s daughter Lois Laurel Hawes said of the film: &quot;The best documentary about Laurel and Hardy I have ever seen!&quot;. It has also been released as a Director&#x27;s Cut with a length of 105 minutes, plus 70 minutes of bonus materials on DVD.

In 2024, author Andreas Baum and his German co-author Michael Ehret published the world&#x27;s largest and most comprehensive illustrated book about Laurel &amp; Hardy with over 500 pages and numerous essays by international Laurel &amp; Hardy experts including a DVD about the life and work of the comedy duo entitled LAUREL AND HARDY: A TRUE LOVE STORY - THE PICTORIAL HISTORY OF STAN &amp; OLLIE: THEIR LIFE AND WORK (Volume 1).

===Appreciation society===

The official Laurel and Hardy appreciation society is known as The Sons of the Desert, after a fraternal society in their film of the same name (1933). It was established in New York City in 1965 by Laurel and Hardy biographer John McCabe, with Orson Bean, Al Kilgore, Chuck McCann, and John Municino as founding members, with the sanction of Stan Laurel. Since the group&#x27;s inception, well over 150 chapters of the organization have formed across North America, Europe, and Australia. An Emmy-winning film documentary about the group, &quot;Revenge of the Sons of the Desert&quot;, has been released on DVD as part of &quot;The Laurel and Hardy Collection, Vol. 1.&quot;

===Around the world===
Laurel and Hardy are popular around the world but are known under different names in various countries and languages.

===Biopic===
A biographical film titled &quot;Stan &amp; Ollie&quot; directed by Jon S. Baird and starring Steve Coogan as Stan and John C. Reilly as Oliver was released in 2018 and chronicled the duo&#x27;s 1953 tour of Great Britain and Ireland. The film received positive reviews from critics, garnering a 94% &quot;Fresh&quot; rating on Rotten Tomatoes. For their performances, Reilly and Coogan were nominated for a Golden Globe and a BAFTA award respectively.

==Filmographies==
* Laurel and Hardy filmography
* Oliver Hardy filmography
* Stan Laurel filmography


==See also==
* &quot;Pekka and Pätkä&quot;

==References==
Notes
Citations
Bibliography

* Andrews, Robert. &quot;Famous Lines: A Columbia Dictionary of Familiar Quotations&quot;. New York: Columbia University Press, 1997. 
* Anobile, Richard J., ed. &quot;A Fine Mess: Verbal and Visual Gems from The Crazy World of Laurel &amp; Hardy&quot;. New York: Crown Publishers, 1975. 
* Barr, Charles. &quot;Laurel and Hardy&quot; (Movie Paperbacks). Berkeley: University of California Press, 1968; First edition 1967, London: Studio Vista. 
* Bergen, Ronald. &quot;The Life and Times of Laurel and Hardy&quot;. New York: Smithmark, 1992. 
* Brooks, Leo M. &quot;The Laurel &amp; Hardy Stock Company&quot;. Hilversum, Netherlands: Blotto Press, 1997. 
* Byron, Stuart and Elizabeth Weis, eds. &quot;The National Society of Film Critics on Movie Comedy&quot;. New York: Grossman/Viking, 1977. 
* Crowther, Bruce. &quot;Laurel and Hardy: Clown Princes of Comedy&quot;. New York: Columbus Books, 1987. 
* Cullen, Frank, Florence Hackman and Donald McNeilly. &quot;Vaudeville, Old and New: An Encyclopedia of Variety Performers in America.&quot; London: Routledge, 2007. 
* Durgnat, Raymond. &quot;Beau Chumps and Church Bells&quot; (essay). &quot;The Crazy Mirror: Hollywood Comedy and the American Image&quot;. New York: Dell Publishing, 1970. 
* Everson, William K. &quot;The Complete Films of Laurel and Hardy&quot;. New York: Citadel, 2000; First edition 1967. 
* Everson, William K. &quot;The Films of Hal Roach&quot;. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1971. 
* Gehring, Wes D. &quot;Laurel &amp; Hardy: A Bio-Bibliography&quot;. Burnham Bucks, UK: Greenwood Press, 1990. 
* Gehring, Wes D. &quot;Film Clowns of the Depression: Twelve Defining Comic Performances&quot;. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland &amp; Co., 2007. .
* Guiles, Fred Lawrence. &quot;Stan: The Life of Stan Laurel&quot;. New York: Stein &amp; Day, 1991; First edition 1980. .
* Harness, Kyp. &quot;The Art of Laurel and Hardy: Graceful Calamity in the Films&quot;. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland &amp; Co., 2006. .
* Kanin, Garson. &quot;Together Again!: Stories of the Great Hollywood Teams&quot;. New York: Doubleday &amp; Co., 1981. .
* Kerr, Walter. &quot;The Silent Clowns&quot;. New York: Da Capo Press, 1990, First edition 1975, Alfred A. Knopf. .
* Lahue, Kalton C. &quot;World of Laughter: The Motion Picture Comedy Short, 1910–1930&quot;. Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma Press, 1966. .
* Louvish, Simon. &quot;Stan and Ollie: The Roots of Comedy: The Double Life of Laurel and Hardy&quot;. London: Faber &amp; Faber, 2001. .
* Louvish, Simon. &quot;Stan and Ollie: The Roots of Comedy: The Double Life of Laurel and Hardy&quot;. New York: St. Martin&#x27;s Press, 2002. .
* Maltin, Leonard. &quot;Movie Comedy Teams&quot;. New York: New American Library, 1985; First edition 1970. .
* Maltin, Leonard, &quot;Selected Short Subjects&quot; (First published as &quot;The Great Movie Shorts&quot;. New York: Crown Publishers, 1972.) New York: Da Capo Press, 1983. .
* Maltin, Leonard. &quot;The Laurel &amp; Hardy Book (Curtis Films Series)&quot;. Sanibel Island, Florida: Ralph Curtis Books, 1973. .
* Maltin, Leonard. &quot;The Great Movie Comedians&quot;. New York: Crown Publishers, 1978. .
* Marriot, A. J. &quot;Laurel &amp; Hardy: The British Tours&quot;. Hitchen, Herts, UK: AJ Marriot, 1993. 
* Marriot, A. J. &quot;Laurel and Hardy: The U.S. Tours&quot;. Hitchen, Herts, UK: AJ Marriot, 2011. 
* Mast, Gerald. &quot;The Comic Mind: Comedy and the Movies&quot;. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979; First edition 1973. .
* McCabe, John. &quot;Mr. Laurel &amp; Mr. Hardy: An Affectionate Biography&quot;. London: Robson Books, 2004; First edition 1961; Reprint: New York: Doubleday &amp; Co., 1966. .
* McCabe, John. &quot;The Comedy World of Stan Laurel&quot;. Beverly Hills: Moonstone Press, 1990; First edition 1974, Doubleday &amp; Co. .
* McCabe, John, with Al Kilgore and Richard W. Bann. &quot;Laurel &amp; Hardy&quot;. New York: Bonanza Books, 1983; First edition 1975, E.P. Dutton. .
* McCabe, John. &quot;Babe: The Life of Oliver Hardy&quot;. London: Robson Books, 2004; First edition 1989, Citadel. .
* McCaffrey, Donald W. &quot;Duet of Incompetence&quot; (essay). &quot;The Golden Age of Sound Comedy: Comic Films and Comedians of the Thirties&quot;. New York: A.S. Barnes, 1973. .
* McGarry, Annie. &quot;Laurel &amp; Hardy&quot;. London: Bison Group, 1992. .
* MacGillivray, Scott. &quot;Laurel &amp; Hardy: From the Forties Forward&quot;. Second edition: New York: iUniverse, 2009 ; first edition: Lanham, Maryland: Vestal Press, 1998.
* McIntyre, Willie. &quot;The Laurel &amp; Hardy Digest: A Cocktail of Love and Hisses&quot;. Ayrshire, Scotland: Willie McIntyre, 1998. .
* McIver, Stuart B. &quot;Dreamers, Schemers and Scalawags.&quot; Sarasota, Florida: Pineapple Press Inc., 1998. 
* Mitchell, Glenn. &quot;The Laurel &amp; Hardy Encyclopedia&quot;. New York: Batsford, 2010; First edition 1995. .
* Nollen, Scott Allen. &quot;The Boys: The Cinematic World of Laurel and Hardy&quot;. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland &amp; Co., 1989. .
* Okuda, Ted and James L. Neibaur. &quot;Stan Without Ollie: The Stan Laurel Solo Films: 1917–1927&quot;. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland &amp; Co., 2012. .
* Robb, Brian J. &quot;The Pocket Essential Laurel &amp; Hardy&quot;. Manchester, UK: Pocket Essentials, 2008. .
* Robinson, David. &quot;The Great Funnies: A History of Film Comedy&quot;. New York: E.P. Dutton, 1969. .
* Sanders, Jonathan. &quot;Another Fine Dress: Role Play in the Films of Laurel and Hardy&quot;. London: Cassell, 1995. .
* Scagnetti, Jack. &quot;The Laurel &amp; Hardy Scrapbook&quot;. New York: Jonathan David Publishers, 1982. .
* Sendak, Maurice. &quot;In the Night Kitchen&quot;. New York: HarperCollins, 1970. .
* Skretvedt, Randy. &quot;Laurel and Hardy: The Magic Behind the Movies&quot;. Anaheim, California: Past Times Publishing Co., 1996; First edition 1987, Moonstone Press. .
* Smith, Leon. &quot;Following the Comedy Trail: A Guide to Laurel &amp; Hardy and Our Gang Film Locations&quot;. Littleton, Massachusetts: G.J. Enterprises, 1984. .
* Staveacre, Tony. &quot;Slapstick!: The Illustrated Story&quot;. London: Angus &amp; Robertson Publishers, 1987. .
* Stone, Rob, et al. &quot;Laurel or Hardy: The Solo Films of Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy&quot;. Manchester, New Hampshire: Split Reel, 1996. .
* Ward, Richard Lewis. &quot;A History of the Hal Roach Studios&quot;. Carbondale, Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press, 2006. .
* Weales, Gerald. &quot;Canned Goods as Caviar: American Film Comedy of the 1930s&quot;. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985. .
==External links==
*
*Official The Sons of the Desert website
*The &quot;Laurel and Hardy Magazine&quot; website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33497" start="0" end="16" title="Laurel and Hardy" label="Laurel and Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141470" start="41" end="52" title="double act" label="comedy team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166646" start="70" end="89" title="Classical Hollywood cinema" label="Classical Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q72869" start="139" end="150" title="Stan Laurel" label="Stan Laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q72911" start="176" end="188" title="Oliver Hardy" label="Oliver Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="240" end="251" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="303" end="310" title="sound film" label="talkies"/>
<link wikidata="Q624771" start="399" end="408" title="slapstick" label="slapstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906085" start="645" end="661" title="Marvin Hatley" label="T. Marvin Hatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q650570" start="755" end="765" title="bowler hat" label="bowler hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815435" start="983" end="996" title="The Lucky Dog" label="The Lucky Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q72792" start="1143" end="1152" title="Hal Roach" label="Hal Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627100" start="1249" end="1272" title="Putting Pants on Philip" label="Putting Pants on Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q223770" start="1344" end="1351" title="B movie" label="B movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="1365" end="1381" title="20th Century Studios" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="1386" end="1405" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q757548" start="1684" end="1691" title="Atoll K" label="Atoll K"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518163" start="1958" end="1973" title="Galaxy of Stars" label="Galaxy of Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q708784" start="2124" end="2137" title="Ralph Edwards" label="Ralph Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253942" start="2171" end="2188" title="This Is Your Life (American franchise)" label="This Is Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658835" start="2534" end="2556" title="The Sons of the Desert" label="The Sons of the Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217678" start="2601" end="2622" title="Sons of the Desert" label="film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q72869" start="2662" end="2673" title="Stan Laurel" label="Stan Laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q979357" start="2747" end="2756" title="Ulverston" label="Ulverston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="3017" end="3024" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751198" start="3072" end="3089" title="The Metropole Theatre" label="Metropole Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838924" start="3152" end="3172" title="Britannia Music Hall" label="Britannia Panopticon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="3354" end="3363" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q969031" start="3439" end="3449" title="Fred Karno" label="Fred Karno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309178" start="3483" end="3493" title="understudy" label="understudy"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="3498" end="3513" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615071" start="3878" end="3890" title="Mae Dahlberg" label="Mae Dahlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141470" start="3896" end="3906" title="double act" label="double act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377445" start="3947" end="3957" title="Common-law marriage" label="common-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q302399" start="4041" end="4052" title="Nuts in May (film)" label="Nuts in May"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691570" start="4351" end="4359" title="Joe Rock" label="Joe Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q72911" start="4920" end="4932" title="Oliver Hardy" label="Oliver Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013335" start="4995" end="5010" title="Harlem, Georgia" label="Harlem, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885071" start="5112" end="5134" title="Milledgeville, Georgia" label="Milledgeville, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q116439" start="5443" end="5456" title="Lubin Manufacturing Company" label="Lubin Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="5460" end="5481" title="Jacksonville, Florida" label="Jacksonville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q134583" start="5520" end="5533" title="talcum powder" label="talcum powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q975005" start="6127" end="6141" title="Outwitting Dad" label="Outwitting Dad"/>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="6186" end="6192" title="Short film" label="shorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559330" start="6210" end="6228" title="Vim Comedy Company" label="Vim Comedy Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141470" start="6424" end="6437" title="Double act" label="second banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="6489" end="6504" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903755" start="6514" end="6524" title="Billy West (silent film actor)" label="Billy West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179007" start="6558" end="6570" title="Jimmy Aubrey" label="Jimmy Aubrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q113814" start="6572" end="6583" title="Larry Semon" label="Larry Semon"/>
<link wikidata="Q726089" start="6589" end="6602" title="Charley Chase" label="Charley Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q72792" start="6981" end="6990" title="Hal Roach" label="Hal Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815435" start="7392" end="7405" title="The Lucky Dog" label="The Lucky Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q280995" start="7589" end="7606" title="panchromatic film" label="panchromatic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q332530" start="8150" end="8161" title="Leo McCarey" label="Leo McCarey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253942" start="8210" end="8227" title="This Is Your Life (American franchise)" label="This Is Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189589" start="8384" end="8397" title="Physical comedy" label="highly visual"/>
<link wikidata="Q624771" start="8404" end="8413" title="slapstick" label="slapstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684044" start="8522" end="8532" title="Cartoon violence" label="cartoonish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824282" start="9388" end="9408" title="toothbrush moustache" label="toothbrush moustache"/>
<link wikidata="Q650570" start="9492" end="9502" title="bowler hat" label="bowler hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q497903" start="9631" end="9642" title="Collar (clothing)" label="wing collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14125" start="9758" end="9765" title="bow tie" label="bow tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q55400351" start="9780" end="9793" title="Sport coat" label="sports jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037506" start="9874" end="9889" title="double-breasted" label="double-breasted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367487" start="9947" end="9958" title="tit for tat" label="tit for tat"/>
<link wikidata="Q153501" start="10035" end="10044" title="Mae Busch" label="Mae Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q282367" start="10046" end="10058" title="Anita Garvin" label="Anita Garvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221631" start="10063" end="10077" title="Daphne Pollard" label="Daphne Pollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q636496" start="10114" end="10126" title="Charlie Hall (actor, born 1899)" label="Charlie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q963194" start="10130" end="10145" title="James Finlayson (actor)" label="James Finlayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q858657" start="10600" end="10612" title="Big Business (1929 film)" label="Big Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="10650" end="10672" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217943" start="10760" end="10771" title="Tit for Tat (1935 film)" label="Tit for Tat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239556" start="11468" end="11473" title="Brats (1930 film)" label="Brats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012980" start="11577" end="11594" title="Oliver the Eighth" label="Oliver the Eighth"/>
<link wikidata="Q232227" start="11678" end="11690" title="Way Out West (1937 film)" label="Way Out West"/>
<link wikidata="Q20459" start="11905" end="11912" title="lighter" label="lighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213960" start="12201" end="12212" title="Block-Heads" label="Block-Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576621" start="12710" end="12726" title="Sailors, Beware!" label="Sailors, Beware!"/>
<link wikidata="Q741726" start="13301" end="13312" title="fourth wall" label="fourth wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q348513" start="13816" end="13829" title="W. S. Gilbert" label="W. S. Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195818" start="13844" end="13854" title="The Mikado" label="The Mikado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987345" start="13878" end="13892" title="The Grand Duke" label="The Grand Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589265" start="13943" end="13971" title="The Laurel-Hardy Murder Case" label="The Laurel-Hardy Murder Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209866" start="14230" end="14247" title="Another Fine Mess" label="Another Fine Mess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207294" start="14513" end="14531" title="Chickens Come Home" label="Chickens Come Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740107" start="14705" end="14723" title="Thicker than Water (1935 film)" label="Thicker than Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q374708" start="14740" end="14756" title="The Fixer Uppers" label="The Fixer Uppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q759472" start="14872" end="14883" title="Saps at Sea" label="Saps at Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q757548" start="15108" end="15115" title="Atoll K" label="Atoll K"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217998" start="15478" end="15500" title="Unaccustomed As We Are" label="Unaccustomed As We Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q963194" start="15605" end="15620" title="James Finlayson (actor)" label="James Finlayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409224" start="15796" end="15806" title="D&amp;#x27;oh!" label="D&amp;#x27;oh!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810" start="15826" end="15839" title="Homer Simpson" label="Homer Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44442" start="15851" end="15867" title="Dan Castellaneta" label="Dan Castellaneta"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="15911" end="15923" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815435" start="16052" end="16065" title="The Lucky Dog" label="The Lucky Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125893" start="16601" end="16618" title="Hal Roach Studios" label="Hal Roach Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q235339" start="16661" end="16686" title="45 Minutes from Hollywood" label="45 Minutes From Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960804" start="16894" end="16908" title="Charley Rogers" label="Charley Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627100" start="17145" end="17168" title="Putting Pants on Philip" label="Putting Pants on Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q151948" start="17297" end="17301" title="kilt" label="kilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3004552" start="17453" end="17478" title="The Battle of the Century" label="The Battle of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809466" start="17753" end="17764" title="John McCabe (writer)" label="John McCabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q332530" start="18291" end="18302" title="Leo McCarey" label="Leo McCarey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124683" start="18716" end="18728" title="H. M. Walker" label="H. M. Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q332530" start="18730" end="18741" title="Leo McCarey" label="Leo McCarey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161328" start="18743" end="18756" title="James Parrott" label="James Parrott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161467" start="18762" end="18776" title="James W. Horne" label="James W. Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q476300" start="19210" end="19239" title="One-upmanship" label="&amp;#x27;Can You Top This?&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q858657" start="20105" end="20117" title="Big Business (1929 film)" label="Big Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q963194" start="20301" end="20316" title="James Finlayson (actor)" label="James Finlayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="20424" end="20446" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="20508" end="20518" title="silent era" label="silent era"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="20612" end="20619" title="Sound film" label="talkies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217998" start="21144" end="21166" title="Unaccustomed As We Are" label="Unaccustomed As We Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="21333" end="21341" title="parody" label="spoofing"/>
<link wikidata="Q635167" start="21461" end="21474" title="The Music Box" label="The Music Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="21556" end="21569" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619597" start="22083" end="22092" title="Pardon Us" label="Pardon Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q531206" start="22154" end="22160" title="Blotto (film)" label="Blotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132680" start="22174" end="22182" title="Hog Wild (1930 film)" label="Hog Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984542" start="22199" end="22206" title="Be Big!" label="Be Big!"/>
<link wikidata="Q8859654" start="22263" end="22273" title="Night Owls (1930 film)" label="Night Owls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875983" start="22330" end="22340" title="Below Zero (1930 film)" label="Below Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207294" start="22357" end="22375" title="Chickens Come Home" label="Chickens Come Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q531332" start="22617" end="22630" title="The Big House (1930 film)" label="The Big House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217678" start="23187" end="23205" title="Sons of the Desert" label="Sons of the Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082561" start="23335" end="23347" title="Frank Craven" label="Frank Craven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361631" start="23457" end="23474" title="William A. Seiter" label="William A. Seiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803090" start="23509" end="23523" title="Reginald Denny (actor)" label="Reginald Denny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899217" start="23556" end="23575" title="Wheeler and Woolsey" label="Wheeler and Woolsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="23870" end="23878" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064189" start="24091" end="24107" title="Babes in Toyland (1934 film)" label="Babes in Toyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q232227" start="24866" end="24878" title="Way Out West (1937 film)" label="Way Out West"/>
<link wikidata="Q342723" start="24970" end="24980" title="Gene Autry" label="Gene Autry"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="25268" end="25287" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="25331" end="25345" title="United Artists" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213960" start="25426" end="25437" title="Block-Heads" label="Block-Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q189687" start="25724" end="25731" title="Zenobia (film)" label="Zenobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q965701" start="25751" end="25764" title="Harry Langdon" label="Harry Langdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q893733" start="25954" end="25966" title="Boris Morros" label="Boris Morros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167731" start="25996" end="26013" title="The Flying Deuces" label="The Flying Deuces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640911" start="26299" end="26323" title="Hal Roach&amp;#x27;s Streamliners" label="&amp;quot;streamliners&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388313" start="26404" end="26421" title="A Chump at Oxford" label="A Chump at Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q759472" start="26438" end="26449" title="Saps at Sea" label="Saps at Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="26679" end="26695" title="20th Century-Fox" label="20th Century-Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090360" start="27693" end="27728" title="Romney, Hythe and Dymchurch Railway" label="Romney, Hythe and Dymchurch Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="28028" end="28038" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016076" start="28069" end="28092" title="The Fighting Kentuckian" label="The Fighting Kentuckian"/>
<link wikidata="Q774682" start="28103" end="28120" title="Republic Pictures" label="Republic Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="28126" end="28137" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q51492" start="28162" end="28173" title="Frank Capra" label="Frank Capra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538430" start="28187" end="28198" title="Riding High (1950 film)" label="Riding High"/>
<link wikidata="Q757548" start="28289" end="28296" title="Atoll K" label="Atoll K"/>
<link wikidata="Q966760" start="28347" end="28358" title="Léo Joannon" label="Léo Joannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15453534" start="28629" end="28642" title="Monte Collins" label="Monte Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835202" start="28690" end="28705" title="Alfred J. Goulding" label="Alfred Goulding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268687" start="29774" end="29778" title="lost film" label="lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q748546" start="29858" end="29866" title="Hats Off (1927 film)" label="Hats Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024150" start="29932" end="29954" title="Now I&amp;#x27;ll Tell One" label="Now I&amp;#x27;ll Tell One"/>
<link wikidata="Q806331" start="30203" end="30217" title="The Rogue Song" label="The Rogue Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="30806" end="30815" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257250" start="30954" end="30967" title="Denis Gifford" label="Denis Gifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q733093" start="31574" end="31578" title="Cobh" label="Cobh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063873" start="31723" end="31737" title="Palace Theatre, Plymouth" label="Palace Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q708784" start="31856" end="31869" title="Ralph Edwards" label="Ralph Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253942" start="31903" end="31920" title="This Is Your Life (American franchise)" label="This Is Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893059" start="32016" end="32031" title="Bernard Delfont" label="Bernard Delfont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630352" start="32158" end="32167" title="kinescope" label="kinescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125895" start="32290" end="32303" title="Hal Roach Jr." label="Hal Roach Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="32326" end="32340" title="NBC" label="NBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="32559" end="32567" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="32741" end="32755" title="BBC Television" label="BBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594858" start="32774" end="32799" title="Grand Order of Water Rats" label="Grand Order of Water Rats"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007954" start="33612" end="33634" title="Valhalla Memorial Park Cemetery" label="Valhalla Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q390731" start="33777" end="33792" title="Robert Youngson" label="Robert Youngson"/>
<link wikidata="Q593353" start="33830" end="33854" title="The Golden Age of Comedy" label="The Golden Age of Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q73136" start="33951" end="33965" title="Stanley Kramer" label="Stanley Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306890" start="34022" end="34058" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World"/>
<link wikidata="Q213425" start="34218" end="34228" title="Danny Kaye" label="Danny Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525093" start="34405" end="34421" title="Leonard B. Stern" label="Leonard B. Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966207" start="34435" end="34470" title="I&amp;#x27;m Dickens, He&amp;#x27;s Fenster" label="I&amp;#x27;m Dickens, He&amp;#x27;s Fenster"/>
<link wikidata="Q458464" start="34490" end="34500" title="John Astin" label="John Astin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777444" start="34505" end="34517" title="Marty Ingels" label="Marty Ingels"/>
<link wikidata="Q375356" start="34854" end="34865" title="Dick Cavett" label="Dick Cavett"/>
<link wikidata="Q294927" start="34867" end="34878" title="Jerry Lewis" label="Jerry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q177984" start="34880" end="34893" title="Peter Sellers" label="Peter Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q157191" start="34895" end="34909" title="Marcel Marceau" label="Marcel Marceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q310819" start="34911" end="34924" title="Johnny Carson" label="Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34930" end="34943" title="Dick Van Dyke#Film career" label="Dick Van Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984921" start="35054" end="35065" title="The Bellboy" label="The Bellboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="35491" end="35503" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302545" start="35521" end="35548" title="Forest Lawn Memorial Park (Hollywood Hills)" label="Forest Lawn-Hollywood Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127789" start="35716" end="35729" title="Harry Bernard" label="Harry Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q153501" start="35838" end="35847" title="Mae Busch" label="Mae Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q726089" start="35958" end="35971" title="Charley Chase" label="Charley Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161328" start="36012" end="36025" title="James Parrott" label="James Parrott"/>
<link wikidata="Q439985" start="36104" end="36118" title="Dorothy Coburn" label="Dorothy Coburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880724" start="36168" end="36181" title="Baldwin Cooke" label="Baldwin Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597198" start="36287" end="36301" title="Richard Cramer" label="Richard Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q309589" start="36357" end="36370" title="Peter Cushing" label="Peter Cushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433745" start="36403" end="36416" title="Hammer Horror" label="Hammer Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388313" start="36460" end="36477" title="A Chump at Oxford" label="A Chump at Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934962" start="36486" end="36496" title="Bobby Dunn" label="Bobby Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217943" start="36598" end="36609" title="Tit for Tat (1935 film)" label="Tit for Tat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335988" start="36618" end="36628" title="Eddie Dunn (actor)" label="Eddie Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011149" start="36703" end="36716" title="Me and My Pal (1933 film)" label="Me and My Pal"/>
<link wikidata="Q963194" start="36726" end="36741" title="James Finlayson (actor)" label="James Finlayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q282367" start="36923" end="36935" title="Anita Garvin" label="Anita Garvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186798" start="37012" end="37025" title="Billy Gilbert" label="Billy Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q635167" start="37119" end="37132" title="The Music Box" label="The Music Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213960" start="37156" end="37167" title="Block-Heads" label="Block-Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q636496" start="37176" end="37188" title="Charlie Hall (actor, born 1899)" label="Charlie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q105719" start="37267" end="37278" title="Jean Harlow" label="Jean Harlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754638" start="37322" end="37336" title="Double Whoopee" label="Double Whoopee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865156" start="37404" end="37418" title="Arthur Housman" label="Arthur Housman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078247" start="37463" end="37477" title="Isabelle Keith" label="Isabelle Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142045" start="37564" end="37575" title="Perfect Day (1929 film)" label="Perfect Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984542" start="37592" end="37599" title="Be Big!" label="Be Big!"/>
<link wikidata="Q714724" start="37623" end="37636" title="Edgar Kennedy" label="Edgar Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q574529" start="37736" end="37747" title="Walter Long (actor)" label="Walter Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773099" start="37809" end="37819" title="Sam Lufkin" label="Sam Lufkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q713929" start="37882" end="37899" title="Charles B. Middleton" label="Charles Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806479" start="37965" end="37980" title="James C. Morton" label="James C. Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561605" start="38032" end="38046" title="Vivien Oakland" label="Vivien Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421512" start="38121" end="38127" title="Scram!" label="Scram!"/>
<link wikidata="Q232227" start="38144" end="38156" title="Way Out West (1937 film)" label="Way Out West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906010" start="38165" end="38179" title="Blanche Payson" label="Blanche Payson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098509" start="38290" end="38299" title="Helpmates" label="Helpmates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221631" start="38308" end="38322" title="Daphne Pollard" label="Daphne Pollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974696" start="38384" end="38397" title="Viola Richard" label="Viola Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q919331" start="38487" end="38503" title="Flying Elephants" label="Flying Elephants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960804" start="38519" end="38533" title="Charley Rogers" label="Charley Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342905" start="38593" end="38606" title="Tiny Sandford" label="Tiny Sandford"/>
<link wikidata="Q948329" start="38646" end="38661" title="character actor" label="character actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q271146" start="38712" end="38723" title="Thelma Todd" label="Thelma Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q153292" start="38795" end="38805" title="Ben Turpin" label="Ben Turpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720759" start="38811" end="38821" title="Esotropia" label="cross-eyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q317574" start="38822" end="38834" title="Mack Sennett" label="Mack Sennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365444" start="38881" end="38899" title="Ellinor Vanderveer" label="Ellinor Vanderveer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906085" start="39175" end="39188" title="Marvin Hatley" label="Marvin Hatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338978" start="39218" end="39222" title="KTNQ" label="KFVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q38253" start="39479" end="39491" title="Leroy Shield" label="Leroy Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769882" start="39689" end="39700" title="The Trail of the Lonesome Pine (song)" label="title track"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="39764" end="39780" title="UK singles chart" label="UK singles chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q23884" start="39916" end="39928" title="Lou Costello" label="Lou Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q23679" start="39949" end="39968" title="Abbott and Costello" label="Abbott and Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="40171" end="40185" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q294927" start="40187" end="40198" title="Jerry Lewis" label="Jerry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q209662" start="40200" end="40212" title="Lucille Ball" label="Lucille Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q177984" start="40214" end="40227" title="Peter Sellers" label="Peter Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q157191" start="40229" end="40243" title="Marcel Marceau" label="Marcel Marceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q16473" start="40244" end="40256" title="Steve Martin" label="Steve Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25014" start="40258" end="40269" title="John Cleese" label="John Cleese"/>
<link wikidata="Q41042" start="40271" end="40284" title="Harold Pinter" label="Harold Pinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q103894" start="40286" end="40299" title="Alec Guinness" label="Alec Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q79904" start="40301" end="40315" title="J. D. Salinger" label="J. D. Salinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836" start="40317" end="40330" title="René Magritte" label="René Magritte"/>
<link wikidata="Q49074" start="40335" end="40348" title="Kurt Vonnegut" label="Kurt Vonnegut"/>
<link wikidata="Q194383" start="40785" end="40790" title="16 mm film" label="16 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q270183" start="40795" end="40799" title="8 mm film" label="8 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q304366" start="41088" end="41102" title="The Great Race" label="The Great Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q56093" start="41161" end="41174" title="Blake Edwards" label="Blake Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967601" start="41300" end="41312" title="Chuck McCann" label="Chuck McCann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634411" start="41411" end="41420" title="colorized" label="colorized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125893" start="41588" end="41605" title="Hal Roach Studios" label="Hal Roach Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="42044" end="42048" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973" start="42072" end="42075" title="PAL" label="PAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942" start="42437" end="42445" title="Solingen" label="Solingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q314771" start="42456" end="42470" title="Maurice Sendak" label="Maurice Sendak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026417" start="42564" end="42577" title="Caldecott Medal" label="award-winning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308387" start="42610" end="42630" title="In the Night Kitchen" label="In the Night Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="42638" end="42649" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="42766" end="42808" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142946" start="43099" end="43111" title="Larry Harmon" label="Larry Harmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630303" start="43264" end="43301" title="Laurel and Hardy (animated series)" label="&amp;quot;Laurel and Hardy&amp;quot; cartoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q736464" start="43315" end="43340" title="Hanna-Barbera" label="Hanna-Barbera Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188675" start="43446" end="43471" title="The New Scooby-Doo Movies" label="The New Scooby-Doo Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985630" start="43564" end="43629" title="The All New Adventures of Laurel &amp;amp; Hardy in For Love or Mummy" label="The All New Adventures of Laurel &amp;amp; Hardy in For Love or Mummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q445337" start="43644" end="43659" title="Bronson Pinchot" label="Bronson Pinchot"/>
<link wikidata="Q436503" start="43664" end="43679" title="Gailard Sartain" label="Gailard Sartain"/>
<link wikidata="Q130244078" start="43895" end="43934" title="Chicken Soup for the Soul Entertainment" label="Chicken Soup for the Soul Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125108" start="44202" end="44217" title="Ghory and Dixit" label="Ghory and Dixit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073" start="44297" end="44301" title="Arte" label="Arte"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989" start="44355" end="44358" title="ZDF" label="ZDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658835" start="45572" end="45594" title="The Sons of the Desert" label="The Sons of the Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217678" start="45636" end="45652" title="Sons of the Desert" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809466" start="45736" end="45747" title="John McCabe (writer)" label="John McCabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120700" start="45754" end="45764" title="Orson Bean" label="Orson Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829367" start="45766" end="45776" title="Al Kilgore" label="Al Kilgore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967601" start="45778" end="45790" title="Chuck McCann" label="Chuck McCann"/>
<link wikidata="Q28434512" start="46374" end="46390" title="Stan &amp;amp; Ollie" label="Stan &amp;amp; Ollie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17232832" start="46409" end="46421" title="Jon S. Baird" label="Jon S. Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q316709" start="46435" end="46447" title="Steve Coogan" label="Steve Coogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q223110" start="46460" end="46474" title="John C. Reilly" label="John C. Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="46669" end="46684" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="46749" end="46761" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="46768" end="46773" title="British Academy Film Awards" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041522" start="46815" end="46843" title="Laurel and Hardy filmography" label="Laurel and Hardy filmography"/>
<link wikidata="Q644553" start="46846" end="46870" title="Oliver Hardy filmography" label="Oliver Hardy filmography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6351505" start="46873" end="46896" title="Stan Laurel filmography" label="Stan Laurel filmography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161109" start="46920" end="46935" title="Pekka and Pätkä" label="Pekka and Pätkä"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452260" start="48843" end="48855" title="Kyp Harness" label="Harness, Kyp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809466" start="50845" end="50857" title="John McCabe (writer)" label="McCabe, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436743" start="51377" end="51396" title="Scott MacGillivray" label="MacGillivray, Scott"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55913" wikidata="Q141529" url="?curid=55913" title="Gouraud shading">
<text>Gouraud shading ( ), named after Henri Gouraud, is an interpolation method used in computer graphics to produce continuous shading of surfaces represented by polygon meshes. In practice, Gouraud shading is most often used to achieve continuous lighting on triangle meshes by computing the lighting at the corners of each triangle and linearly interpolating the resulting colours for each pixel covered by the triangle. Gouraud first published the technique in 1971. However, enhanced hardware support for superior shading models has yielded Gouraud shading largely obsolete in modern rendering.

== Description ==
Gouraud shading works as follows: An estimate to the surface normal of each vertex in a polygonal 3D model is either specified for each vertex or found by averaging the surface normals of the polygons that meet at each vertex. Using these estimates, lighting computations based on a reflection model, e.g. the Phong reflection model, are then performed to produce colour intensities at the vertices. For each screen pixel that is covered by the polygonal mesh, colour intensities can then be interpolated from the colour values calculated at the vertices.

== Comparison with other shading techniques ==

Gouraud shading is considered superior to flat shading and requires significantly less processing than Phong shading, but usually results in a faceted look.

In comparison to Phong shading, Gouraud shading&#x27;s strength and weakness lies in its interpolation. If a mesh covers more pixels in screen space than it has vertices, interpolating colour values from samples of expensive lighting calculations at vertices is less processor intensive than performing the lighting calculation for each pixel as in Phong shading. However, highly localized lighting effects (such as specular highlights, e.g. the glint of reflected light on the surface of an apple) will not be rendered correctly, and if a highlight lies in the middle of a polygon, but does not spread to the polygon&#x27;s vertex, it will not be apparent in a Gouraud rendering; conversely, if a highlight occurs at the vertex of a polygon, it will be rendered correctly at this vertex (as this is where the lighting model is applied), but will be spread unnaturally across all neighboring polygons via the interpolation method.

The problem is easily spotted in a rendering which ought to have a specular highlight moving smoothly across the surface of a model as it rotates. Gouraud shading will instead produce a highlight continuously fading in and out across neighboring portions of the model, peaking in intensity when the intended specular highlight aligns with a vertex of the model. While this problem can be fixed by increasing the density of vertices in the object, at some point the diminishing returns of this approach will favour switching to a more detailed shading model.

== Linear vs. hyperbolic interpolation ==
Gouraud&#x27;s original paper described linear color interpolation. In 1992, Blinn published an efficient algorithm for hyperbolic interpolation that is used in GPUs as a perspective correct alternative to linear interpolation. Both the linear and hyperbolic variants of interpolation of colors from vertices to pixels are commonly called &quot;Gouraud shading&quot;.

== Mach bands ==
Any linear interpolation of intensity causes derivative discontinuities which triggers Mach bands, a common visual artifact of Gouraud shading.

==See also==

* List of common shading algorithms
* Blinn–Phong reflection model
* Phong shading

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q141529" start="0" end="15" title="Gouraud shading" label="Gouraud shading"/>
<link wikidata="Q93027" start="33" end="46" title="Henri Gouraud (computer scientist)" label="Henri Gouraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q187631" start="54" end="67" title="interpolation" label="interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="83" end="100" title="computer graphics" label="computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191981" start="123" end="130" title="shading" label="shading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154597" start="158" end="172" title="Polygon mesh" label="polygon meshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456889" start="256" end="269" title="triangle mesh" label="triangle mesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266329" start="334" end="356" title="Linear interpolation" label="linearly interpolating"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="388" end="393" title="pixel" label="pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q273176" start="667" end="681" title="Normal (geometry)" label="surface normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26401" start="690" end="696" title="Vertex (geometry)" label="vertex"/>
<link wikidata="Q678734" start="924" end="946" title="Phong reflection model" label="Phong reflection model"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="1023" end="1035" title="Pixel" label="screen pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q187631" start="1106" end="1118" title="interpolation" label="interpolated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191981" start="1261" end="1273" title="flat shading" label="flat shading"/>
<link wikidata="Q631518" start="1322" end="1335" title="Phong shading" label="Phong shading"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575328" start="1793" end="1811" title="specular highlight" label="specular highlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q9357547" start="2706" end="2740" title="Tessellation (computer graphics)" label="increasing the density of vertices"/>
<link wikidata="Q863946" start="2774" end="2793" title="diminishing returns" label="diminishing returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="3071" end="3075" title="Graphics processing unit" label="GPUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q655405" start="3383" end="3393" title="Mach bands" label="Mach bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612071" start="3457" end="3490" title="List of common shading algorithms" label="List of common shading algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q884409" start="3493" end="3521" title="Blinn–Phong reflection model" label="Blinn–Phong reflection model"/>
<link wikidata="Q631518" start="3524" end="3537" title="Phong shading" label="Phong shading"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55914" wikidata="Q4256394" url="?curid=55914" title="Richard Leveridge">
<text>Richard Leveridge (or Leueridge) (19 July 1670 – 22 March 1758) was an English bass singer of the London stage and a composer of baroque music, including many popular songs.

==Life==
Richard Leveridge was born in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, in 1670, and in 1695 became the leading bass singer in the United Company managed by Christopher Rich at Drury Lane, after the defection of several leading singers from Rich&#x27;s company. His first important role of which anything is known was as the magician Ismeron in Henry Purcell&#x27;s opera &quot;The Indian Queen&quot;, which included the aria &quot;Ye twice ten hundred deities&quot;. Purcell himself remained loyal to the company, and for several months Leveridge worked closely with him. It is likely that &quot;Arise, ye subterranean winds&quot; in the music (attributed to Purcell) for &quot;The Tempest&quot; was written for him. After Purcell&#x27;s death he continued to work with composers Daniel Purcell and Jeremiah Clarke, and took a leading part in Clarke&#x27;s Ode upon the death of Mr Purcell at Drury Lane. Leveridge also composed, and in February 1699 all three provided music for Motteux&#x27;s adaptation of Fletcher&#x27;s &quot;The Island Princess&quot;, in which Leveridge&#x27;s performance, particularly his &#x27;Enthusiastick Song&#x27;, engendered great enthusiasm among its hearers.

At various times between 1697 and 1728 Leveridge published volumes of his own songs, and numerous single items including his popular theatre songs appeared as separate printed sheets throughout his career. After a spell in Dublin he returned to London in 1702 for a revival of &quot;The Island Princess&quot; and a new production of &quot;Macbeth&quot; billed as &quot;with music Vocal and Instrumental, all new Composed by Mr Leveridge&quot;. He sang the role of Hecate in this work for nearly 50 years, and the music remained popular for more than a century after his death.
Leveridge continued to sing Purcell&#x27;s operas and masques in the revivals, at Drury Lane in 1703–08, of &quot;The Fairy-Queen&quot;, &quot;Timon of Athens&quot;, &quot;Amphitrion&quot;, &quot;Libertine Destroyed&quot;, &quot;Tempest&quot;, &quot;King Arthur&quot;, &quot;Indian Queen&quot;, and &quot;Œdipus&quot;. He also participated in the introduction of opera in the Italian style from 1705, appearing in &quot;Arsinoë&quot; (1705), &quot;Camilla&quot; (1706), &quot;Rosamond&quot; (1707), &quot;Thomyris&quot; (1707), and &quot;Love&#x27;s Triumph&quot; (1708). Some of these productions had mixed English and Italian singers (bilingual performances), but when the fashion became entirely Italian Leveridge was replaced in the bass roles by the Italian basso Giuseppe Maria Boschi. He then began a short association with Handel, in 1713 to 1714, and acted in the first performances of &quot;Il pastor fido&quot; and &quot;Teseo&quot; and played Argantes in a revival of &quot;Rinaldo&quot;. In this period he sang with Nicolini, who was in London from 1708 to 1712 and in the seasons of 1714–17. Later in his career, in 1731, he is known to have taken the role of Polypheme (who has the aria &quot;O ruddier than the cherry&quot;) in a performance of &quot;Acis and Galatea&quot;.

In 1714, he moved to work at the new theatre at Lincoln&#x27;s Inn Fields, managed by entrepreneur John Rich. Remaining there for most of his career, he returned to his English repertoire and a new form, the musical Afterpiece. These lightweight works were often comic, and in 1716 Leveridge produced his own afterpiece, &quot;Pyramus and Thisbe&quot;. For this comic parody of Italian opera, he wrote the music, adapting the words from Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;, and sang the role of Pyramus. He was apparently absent from the stage around 1720–24, during which time he was occupied with the coffee house in Tavistock Street near Covent Garden, at the sign of &#x27;The Harlequin and Pierot&#x27;, which he held by lease from 1714 to 1736. However Rich drew him back, and Leveridge scored a success in 1726 in &quot;Apollo and Daphne&quot; with Silenus&#x27;s song &quot;Tho&#x27; envious old age seems in part to impair me&quot;, composed by Johann Ernst Galliard. From that time forth he became the leading bass at Lincoln&#x27;s Inn Fields and later transferred to Covent Garden.

His repertoire exploited his firm and powerful voice, and several of his songs became popular favourites. Although most renowned for his comic-patriotic ballad &quot;The Roast Beef of Old England&quot;, and above all for his setting of John Gay&#x27;s lyric of &quot;Black Eyed Susan&quot;, others are lover&#x27;s complaints or addresses, anacreontics, hunting songs (notably &quot;The sweet rosy morning peeps over the hills&quot;), fairy songs, dramatic pieces, and the like, to the number of more than 150. In addition to &quot;A New Book of Songs&quot; 1697 and &quot;A Second Book of Songs&quot; 1699, and &quot;A New Book of Songs&quot; 1711, further volumes were printed in 1727 (with a frontispiece by William Hogarth), and 1728. A number of the 1727 songs are settings of words by Abraham Cowley. Some songs written no doubt for his own performance contain roulades and word-painting, giving an impression of his vocal range and flexibility, and some have recitatives or short sections of part-writing, introducing dramatic structure into the context of concise set-pieces.
Leveridge enjoyed good health and reduced his performances only in the last few seasons before retiring in 1751. He died aged 87 at his lodgings in High Holborn, London, in 1758.

==Descriptions==

Sir John Hawkins (1776) remarked, &quot;Though he had been a performer in the opera at the same time with Nicolino and Valentini&quot; (possibly meaning Roberto Valentini) &quot;he had no notion of grace or elegance in singing; it was all strength and compass...&quot; Hawkins&#x27;s opinion of Leveridge was coloured by social perceptions: &quot;Being a man of rather coarse manners, and able to drink a great deal, he was by some thought a good companion. The humour of his songs, and indeed of his conversation, consisted in exhortations to despise riches and the means of attaining them; to drown care by drinking; to enjoy the present hour, and to set reflection and death at defiance. With such a disposition as this, Leveridge could not fail to be a welcome visitor at all clubs and assemblies, where the avowed purpose of meeting was an oblivion of care; and being ever ready to contribute to the promotion of social mirth, he made himself many friends, from whose bounty he derived all the comforts that in an extreme old age he was capable of enjoying.&quot;

In 1789 Charles Burney wrote of him: &quot;I remember his singing &quot;Ghosts of every occupation&quot;, and several of Purcell&#x27;s base songs, occasionally, in a style which forty years ago seemed antediluvian: but as he generally was the representative of Pluto, Neptune, or some ancient divinity, it corresponded perfectly with his figure and character. He was not only a celebrated singer of convivial songs, but the writer and composer of many that were in great favour with singers and hearers of a certain class, who more piously performed the rites of Comus and Bacchus, than those of Minerva and Apollo.&quot;

==Portraits==

The National Portrait Gallery, London has an oil portrait of the young Richard Leveridge, c. 1710–20, by an unknown artist, which is on display at the Handel House Museum, London. It also has copies of two other likenesses, one a mezzotint by William Pether after the oil portrait by Thomas Frye, and the other a mezzotint by Andreas van der Mijn after the portrait by Frans van der Mijn. Both show Leveridge in advanced old age. There are more versions than one of the original oil portrait by Thomas Frye, including that in the collections of Warwick Town council, and the better-known example in the Gerald Coke Handel Collection at the Foundling Museum.

==Recorded works==

Recordings of works by Richard Leveridge include the songs &quot;Black and gloomy as the grave&quot;, &quot;When daisies pied and violets blue&quot;, and &quot;The Roast Beef of Old England&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
*National Portrait Gallery: Portraits of Richard Leveridge</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4256394" start="0" end="17" title="Richard Leveridge" label="Richard Leveridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4256394" start="22" end="31" title="Richard Leveridge" label="Leueridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q27911" start="79" end="83" title="Bass (voice type)" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="129" end="142" title="baroque music" label="baroque music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335201" start="228" end="251" title="St Martin-in-the-Fields" label="St Martin-in-the-Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q511837" start="320" end="334" title="United Company" label="United Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966642" start="346" end="362" title="Christopher Rich (theatre manager)" label="Christopher Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q9695" start="534" end="547" title="Henry Purcell" label="Henry Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521380" start="567" end="583" title="The Indian Queen (opera)" label="The Indian Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q372428" start="970" end="984" title="Daniel Purcell" label="Daniel Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q440020" start="989" end="1004" title="Jeremiah Clarke" label="Jeremiah Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382857" start="1170" end="1177" title="Peter Anthony Motteux" label="Motteux"/>
<link wikidata="Q312444" start="1199" end="1207" title="John Fletcher (playwright)" label="Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742681" start="1221" end="1240" title="The Island Princess" label="The Island Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="1607" end="1613" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283" start="1723" end="1730" title="Macbeth" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q131575" start="1848" end="1854" title="Hecate" label="Hecate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743188" start="2075" end="2090" title="The Fairy-Queen" label="The Fairy-Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428601" start="2211" end="2222" title="King Arthur (opera)" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q85743112" start="2381" end="2388" title="Arsinoe, Queen of Cyprus" label="Arsinoë"/>
<link wikidata="Q85750260" start="2409" end="2416" title="Camilla (Bononcini)" label="Camilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q80706120" start="2437" end="2445" title="Rosamond (Clayton)" label="Rosamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q85809336" start="2466" end="2474" title="Thomyris, Queen of Scythia" label="Thomyris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528416" start="2730" end="2751" title="Giuseppe Maria Boschi" label="Giuseppe Maria Boschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="2792" end="2798" title="Handel" label="Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q477990" start="2862" end="2876" title="Il pastor fido" label="Il pastor fido"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419652" start="2893" end="2898" title="Teseo" label="Teseo"/>
<link wikidata="Q767249" start="2947" end="2954" title="Rinaldo (opera)" label="Rinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q540477" start="2990" end="2998" title="Nicolo Grimaldi" label="Nicolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q341482" start="3228" end="3244" title="Acis and Galatea (Handel)" label="Acis and Galatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736153" start="3301" end="3326" title="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn Fields" label="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923560" start="3352" end="3361" title="John Rich (producer)" label="John Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913703" start="3461" end="3479" title="Afterpiece" label="musical Afterpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230688" start="3580" end="3598" title="Pyramus and Thisbe" label="Pyramus and Thisbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="3690" end="3701" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="3715" end="3745" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q464091" start="4135" end="4142" title="Silenus" label="Silenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q278887" start="4233" end="4254" title="Johann Ernst Galliard" label="Johann Ernst Galliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q55018" start="4358" end="4371" title="Royal Opera House" label="Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q685884" start="4421" end="4426" title="Voice instrumental music" label="voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989060" start="4540" end="4569" title="The Roast Beef of Old England" label="The Roast Beef of Old England"/>
<link wikidata="Q321660" start="4610" end="4618" title="John Gay" label="John Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q171344" start="5085" end="5100" title="William Hogarth" label="William Hogarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q329896" start="5165" end="5179" title="Abraham Cowley" label="Abraham Cowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4399990" start="5241" end="5249" title="roulade (music)" label="roulades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782648" start="5606" end="5618" title="High Holborn" label="High Holborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q661076" start="5656" end="5672" title="John Hawkins (author)" label="Sir John Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q331337" start="5809" end="5826" title="Roberto Valentini" label="Roberto Valentini"/>
<link wikidata="Q547002" start="6734" end="6748" title="Charles Burney" label="Charles Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q27911" start="6862" end="6866" title="bass (voice type)" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="7369" end="7394" title="National Portrait Gallery, London" label="National Portrait Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920095" start="7516" end="7535" title="Handel House Museum" label="Handel House Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568880" start="7608" end="7622" title="William Pether" label="William Pether"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893676" start="7649" end="7660" title="Thomas Frye" label="Thomas Frye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492428" start="7734" end="7752" title="Frans van der Mijn" label="Frans van der Mijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q549761" start="7910" end="7917" title="Warwick" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507268" start="7918" end="7930" title="Town council" label="Town council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474645" start="8005" end="8021" title="Foundling Museum" label="Foundling Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55915" wikidata="Q319751" url="?curid=55915" title="Keith Emerson">
<text>Keith Noel Emerson (2 November 194411 March 2016) was an English keyboardist, songwriter, composer and record producer. He played keyboards in a number of bands before finding his first commercial success with the Nice in the late 1960s. He became internationally famous for his work with the Nice, which included writing rock arrangements of classical music. After leaving the Nice in 1970, he was a founding member of Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer (ELP), one of the early progressive rock supergroups.

Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer were commercially successful through much of the 1970s, becoming one of the best-known progressive rock groups of the era. Emerson wrote and arranged much of ELP&#x27;s music on albums such as &quot;Tarkus&quot; (1971) and &quot;Brain Salad Surgery&quot; (1973), combining his own original compositions with classical or traditional pieces adapted into a rock format. Following ELP&#x27;s break-up at the end of the 1970s, Emerson pursued a solo career, composed several film soundtracks, and formed the bands Emerson, Lake &amp; Powell and 3 to carry on in the style of ELP. In the early 1990s, ELP reunited for two more albums and several tours before breaking up again in the late 1990s. Emerson also reunited The Nice in 2002 and 2003 for a tour.

During the 2000s, Emerson resumed his solo career, including touring with his own Keith Emerson Band featuring guitarist Dave Kilminster, then replaced by Marc Bonilla, and collaborating with several orchestras. He reunited with ELP bandmate Greg Lake in 2010 for a duo tour, culminating in a one-off ELP reunion show in London to celebrate the band&#x27;s 40th anniversary. Emerson&#x27;s last album, &quot;The Three Fates Project&quot;, with Marc Bonilla and Terje Mikkelsen, was released in 2012. Emerson reportedly suffered from depression, and since 1993 developed nerve damage that hampered his playing, making him anxious about upcoming performances. He died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound on 11 March 2016 at his home in Santa Monica, California.

Emerson is widely regarded as one of the greatest keyboard players of the progressive rock era. AllMusic describes Emerson as &quot;perhaps the greatest, most technically accomplished keyboardist in rock history&quot;. In 2019, readers of &quot;Prog&quot; voted him the greatest keyboard player in progressive rock.
==Early life==
Emerson was born on 2 November 1944 in Todmorden, West Riding of Yorkshire. The family had been evacuated from southern England during World War II, after which they returned south and settled in Goring-by-Sea, West Sussex. Emerson attended West Tarring School (now Thomas A’Becket Middle School) in Tarring. His mother Dorothy was not musical, but his father Noel was an amateur pianist and taught Emerson basic piano. When Emerson was eight, his parents arranged formal tuition, learning to play and read music with &quot;local little old ladies&quot; until he was around thirteen, with whom he studied to ABRSM Grade 7. Emerson&#x27;s teacher put him in competitions at the Worthing Music Festival and suggested he finish studying music in London, but Emerson had little interest in classical music at the time and chose jazz piano. His studies in Western classical music largely inspired his own style in his professional career which often incorporated jazz and rock elements.

Although Emerson did not own a record player, he enjoyed listening to music on the radio, particularly Floyd Cramer&#x27;s 1961 slip note-style &quot;On the Rebound&quot; and the work of Dudley Moore. He used jazz sheet music from Dave Brubeck and George Shearing and learned about jazz piano from books and Andre Previn&#x27;s version of &quot;My Fair Lady&quot;. He also listened to boogie-woogie, and to country-style pianists including Joe &quot;Mr Piano&quot; Henderson, Russ Conway and Winifred Atwell. Emerson later described himself: &quot;I was a very serious child. I used to walk around with Beethoven sonatas under my arm. However, I was very good at avoiding being beaten up by the bullies. That was because I could also play Jerry Lee Lewis and Little Richard songs. So, they thought I was kind of cool and left me alone.&quot;

Emerson became interested in the Hammond organ after hearing jazz organist Jack McDuff perform &quot;Rock Candy&quot;, and the Hammond became his instrument of choice in the late 1960s. Emerson acquired his first Hammond organ, an L-100 model, at the age of 15 or 16, on hire purchase and a loan from his father. He had saved money to buy a Bird electric organ with built-in speakers on each side, but then spotted a Hammond in the shop and thought it was a better purchase. Emerson&#x27;s initial plan was for a non-musical career while playing the piano on the side. Upon leaving school he worked at Lloyds Bank Registrars where he played the piano in the bar at lunch times and local pubs at nights. He was ultimately fired from the bank. Emerson played in a local 20-piece swing band run by Worthing Council, performing Count Basie and Duke Ellington tunes. This led to the formation of the Keith Emerson Trio, with the group&#x27;s drummer and bassist.

==Career==
===1965–1970: Early groups and The Nice===
While performing in the Worthing and Brighton area, Emerson played in John Brown&#x27;s Bodies where members of The T-Bones, the backing band of blues singer Gary Farr, offered him a place in their group. After a subsequent UK and European tour with the T-Bones, the band split. Emerson then joined The V.I.P.&#x27;s,
which he described as a &quot;purist blues band&quot;; his noted flamboyance began when a fight broke out during a performance in France. Instructed by the band to keep playing, he produced some explosion and machine gun sounds with the Hammond organ, which stopped the fight. His band members told him to repeat the stunt at the next concert, where Emerson played the organ back to front.

In 1967, Emerson formed The Nice with Lee Jackson, also of the T-Bones, David O&#x27;List, and Ian Hague, after soul singer P. P. Arnold asked him to form a backing band. After replacing Hague with Brian Davison, the group set out on its own, quickly developing a strong live following. The group&#x27;s sound was centred on Emerson&#x27;s Hammond organ showmanship and theatrical abuse of the instrument, and their radical rearrangements of classical music themes as &quot;symphonic rock&quot;. To increase the visual interest of his show, Emerson abused his Hammond L-100 organ by, among other things, hitting it, beating it with a whip, pushing it over, riding it across the stage like a horse, playing with it lying on top of him, and wedging knives into the keyboard. Some of these actions also produced musical sound effects: hitting the organ caused it to make explosion-like sounds, turning it over made it feed back, and the knives held down keys, thus sustaining notes. Emerson&#x27;s show with The Nice has been cited as having a strong influence on heavy metal musicians.

Away from The Nice, Emerson was involved in the 1969 &quot;Music from Free Creek&quot; &quot;supersession&quot; project that included Eric Clapton and Jeff Beck. For the session, Emerson performed with drummer Mitch Mitchell and bassist Chuck Rainey covering, among other tunes, the Eddie Harris instrumental &quot;Freedom Jazz Dance&quot;.

Emerson first heard a Moog synthesizer when a record shop owner played him &quot;Switched-On Bach&quot; (1968) by Wendy Carlos, and thought the instrument looked like &quot;an electronic skiffle&quot;. He got into contact with keyboardist Mike Vickers, who had paid £4,000 to have one shipped from the US, and organised to play it at an upcoming The Nice concert at the Royal Festival Hall with the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, in February and March 1970. Vickers helped patch the Moog, and the concert saw Emerson perform &quot;Also sprach Zarathustra&quot; by Richard Strauss with Vickers behind the machine to swap patches.

===1970–1979: Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer===
After The Nice split in March 1970, Emerson formed a new band, Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer (ELP), with bassist Greg Lake from King Crimson and drummer Carl Palmer from Atomic Rooster. After four months of rehearsal, the band played its first shows and recorded its first album, having quickly obtained a record deal with Atlantic Records. ELP became popular immediately after their 1970 Isle of Wight Festival performance, and continued to tour regularly throughout the 1970s. Not all were impressed, with BBC Radio 1 DJ John Peel describing their Isle of Wight set as a &quot;tragic waste of talent and electricity&quot;. Their set, with a half-million onlookers, involved &quot;annihilating their instruments in a classical-rock blitz&quot; and firing cannons from the stage, which had been tested out on a field near Heathrow Airport.

====Use of synthesizers====
ELP&#x27;s record deal provided funds for Emerson to buy his own Moog modular synthesiser from the US, which was a preset model that had fewer leads and punch cards to call up certain patches. He used the patch that Vickers provided, which contained six distinctive Moog sounds and became the foundation of ELP&#x27;s sound. It was a temperamental device, with the oscillators often going out of tune with temperature change. Emerson was the first artist to tour with a Moog synthesiser. His &quot;Monster Moog&quot;, built from numerous modules, weighed , stood tall and took four roadies to move. Even with its unpredictability, it became an indispensable component of not only ELP&#x27;s concerts, but also Emerson&#x27;s own. His use of the Moog was so critical to the development of new Moog models that he was given prototypes, such as the Constellation, which he took on one tour, and the Apollo, which had its début on &quot;Jerusalem&quot; on &quot;Brain Salad Surgery&quot; (1973). As synthesiser technology evolved, Emerson went on to use a variety of other synthesisers, including the Minimoog, Yamaha GX-1, and several models by Korg.

====As composer and arranger====
Emerson performed several notable rock arrangements of classical compositions, ranging from J. S. Bach and Modest Mussorgsky to 20th-century composers such as Béla Bartók, Aaron Copland, Leoš Janáček and Alberto Ginastera. Occasionally Emerson quoted from classical and jazz works without giving credit, particularly early in his career. An early example of Emerson&#x27;s arranging was the song &quot;Rondo&quot; by The Nice, which is a 4/4 interpretation of Dave Brubeck&#x27;s 9/8 composition &quot;Blue Rondo à la Turk&quot;. During live performances the piece is introduced by an extensive excerpt from the 3rd movement of Bach&#x27;s &quot;Italian Concerto&quot;.

On ELP&#x27;s eponymous first album, Emerson&#x27;s classical quotes went largely uncredited. In the 1973 reissue on the group&#x27;s personal label, Manticore Records, the songs are credited correctly. By 1971, with the releases &quot; Pictures at an Exhibition&quot; and &quot;Trilogy&quot;, ELP began to fully credit classical composers, including Modest Mussorgsky for the piano piece which inspired the &quot;Pictures&quot; album, and Aaron Copland for &quot;Hoedown&quot; on the &quot;Trilogy&quot; album. Emerson indicated in an interview that he based his version of &quot;Pictures at an Exhibition&quot; on Mussorgsky&#x27;s original piano composition, rather than on Maurice Ravel&#x27;s later orchestration of the work.

Following ELP&#x27;s 1974 tour, the members agreed to put the band on temporary hiatus and pursue individual solo projects. During this time, Emerson composed his &quot;Piano Concerto No. 1&quot; and recorded it with the London Philharmonic Orchestra. According to Emerson, he was motivated by critical comments suggesting that he relied upon adapting classical works because he was unable to write his own music, and further motivated by the London Philharmonic &quot;who weren&#x27;t that helpful to begin with&quot; and &quot;had the attitude of &#x27;What&#x27;s a rock musician doing writing a piano concerto?&#x27;&quot; Emerson said, &quot;I wanted people to say, look, I&#x27;m a composer, I do write my own music, and what greater challenge than to write a piano concerto.&quot; The recording later appeared on ELP&#x27;s album &quot;Works Volume 1&quot;. Emerson&#x27;s concerto has since been performed by classical pianists, most notably Jeffrey Biegel, who has performed it several times and recorded it with Emerson&#x27;s permission.

In 1976, while still in ELP, Emerson also released his first solo record, the single &quot;Honky Tonk Train Blues&quot; b/w &quot;Barrelhouse Shake-Down&quot;. &quot;Honky Tonk Train Blues&quot;, Emerson&#x27;s cover of a 1927 boogie-woogie piano song by Meade Lux Lewis, reached on the UK Singles Chart.

====Theatrics====
In addition to his technical skills at playing and composing, Emerson was a theatrical performer. He cited guitarist Jimi Hendrix and organist Don Shinn as his chief theatrical influences. While in ELP, Emerson continued to some degree the physical abuse of his Hammond organ that he had developed with The Nice, including playing the organ upside down while having it lie over him and using knives to wedge down specific keys and sustain notes during solos. He also engaged in knife throwing using a target fastened in front of his Leslie speakers. He was given his trademark knife, an authentic Nazi dagger, by Lemmy Kilmister, who was a roadie for The Nice in his earlier days.

Emerson toned down his theatrics with the organ when ELP used more stage props for their shows. While touring &quot;Brain Salad Surgery&quot; from 1973 to 1974, at the end of the show, a sequencer in Emerson&#x27;s Moog Modular synthesiser was set running at an increasing rate, with the synthesiser pivoting to face the audience while emitting smoke and deploying a large pair of silver bat wings from its back. The same tour featured one of Emerson&#x27;s memorable live show stunts with ELP, which involved playing a piano suspended as high as 20 feet in mid-air and then rotated end-over-end with Emerson sitting at it. This was purely for visual effect, as the piano was fake and had no works inside, leaving Emerson to mime playing. Emerson was introduced to Bob McCarthy, former circus employee on Long Island, New York who demonstrated the stunt piano for him at his home. It was used for shows at Madison Square Garden in December 1973 and the California Jam in April 1974, which was filmed. Emerson said: &quot;After that every TV show I did came the question ... Keith, how do you spin around on that piano? I&#x27;d say what about my music? The stunt caused Emerson to suffer multiple finger injuries and a broken nose. He wished to use it at the band&#x27;s reunion concert in 2010, but was forbidden by the local authority who said that the plans did not meet health and safety standards.

===1979–1991: Solo and group projects===
After ELP disbanded in 1979, Emerson pursued a variety of projects during the 1980s and 1990s, including solo releases, soundtrack work and other bands, including supergroup the Best. In the early 1990s, Emerson rejoined the reunited ELP, but the group broke up again by the end of that decade.

====Solo career====
In 1981, Emerson released his debut solo album, &quot;Honky&quot;. Recorded in the Bahamas with local musicians, it departed from Emerson&#x27;s usual style in featuring calypso and reggae songs, and was generally not well received, except in Italy where it was a hit. Emerson&#x27;s subsequent solo releases were sporadic, including a Christmas album in 1988, and the album &quot;Changing States&quot; (also known as &quot;Cream of Emerson Soup&quot;) recorded in 1989 but not released until 1995, after several of its songs had already been re-recorded and released in different versions on ELP&#x27;s 1992 comeback album &quot;Black Moon&quot;. &quot;Changing States&quot; also contained an orchestral remake of the ELP song &quot;Abaddon&#x27;s Bolero&quot; with the London Philharmonic Orchestra, and &quot;The Church&quot;, which Emerson composed for the 1989 Michele Soavi horror film of the same name.

====Soundtrack work====
In the 1980s, Emerson began to write and perform music for films, as his orchestral and classical style was more suited for film work than for the new wave-dominated pop/ rock market. He was given the script for &quot;Chariots of Fire&quot;, but turned down the offer to score it. Films for which Emerson contributed soundtrack music include Dario Argento&#x27;s &quot;Inferno&quot; (1980), the action thriller &quot;Nighthawks&quot; (1981) starring Sylvester Stallone, (1984 film) Best Revenge, notable because he collaborated with Brad Delp from the rock band Boston and Levon Helm from The Band both on vocals, and Garth Hudson also from The Band on accordion, that also featured an instrumental piece called &quot;Dream Runner&quot; that became a standard solo performance piece for Emerson during at ELP shows throughout the next decade, Lucio Fulci&#x27;s &quot;Murder Rock&quot; (1984), and Michele Soavi&#x27;s &quot;The Church&quot; (also known as &quot;La chiesa&quot;) (1989). He was also the composer for the short-lived 1994 US animated television series &quot;Iron Man&quot;.

====1980s and 1990s bands====
Starting in the mid-1980s, Emerson formed several short-lived supergroups. The first two, Emerson, Lake &amp; Powell (with Lake and ex-Rainbow drummer Cozy Powell) and 3 (with Palmer and American multi-instrumentalist Robert Berry), were intended to carry on in the general style of ELP in the absence of one of the original members. Emerson, Lake &amp; Powell had some success, and their sole album is considered one of the best of both Emerson&#x27;s and Lake&#x27;s careers. Stylistically, it was a departure from their 1980s progressive rock peers, Genesis and Asia. Progressive rock analyst Edward Macan wrote that Emerson, Lake &amp; Powell were closer to the &quot;classic ELP sound&quot; than ELP&#x27;s own late-1970s output. By contrast, 3&#x27;s only album sold poorly and drew comparisons to &quot;the worst moments of &quot;Love Beach&quot;&quot; (which had been a commercial disaster for ELP).

Emerson also toured briefly in 1990 with The Best, a supergroup including John Entwistle of The Who, Joe Walsh of the Eagles, Jeff &quot;Skunk&quot; Baxter of Steely Dan and The Doobie Brothers, and Simon Phillips. This project focused on covering songs from each of the members&#x27; past bands.

In the early 1990s, Emerson formed the short-lived group Aliens of Extraordinary Ability with Stuart Smith, Richie Onori, Marvin Sperling and Robbie Wyckoff. The group&#x27;s name came from the application process for a US work visa, and the members included several British musicians who, like Emerson, had come to Los Angeles to further their careers. The group turned down a record deal with Samsung because of Emerson&#x27;s commitment to an ELP reunion and Smith&#x27;s involvement with a possible reformation of The Sweet.

===1991–1998: Reunion with ELP===
In 1991, ELP reformed for two more albums (&quot;Black Moon&quot; (1992) and &quot;In the Hot Seat&quot; (1994)) and world tours in 1992–1993. After the 1993 tour, Emerson was forced to take a year off from playing due to a nerve condition affecting his right hand (see Health issues). Following his recovery, ELP resumed touring in 1996, including a successful US tour with Jethro Tull, but broke up again in August 1998.

===1998–2016===

Emerson participated in The Nice&#x27;s reunion tour and a 40th anniversary show for ELP, preceded by a short duo tour with Greg Lake. Apart from these reunions, he continued his solo career, releasing solo and soundtrack albums, touring with his own Keith Emerson Band, and making occasional guest appearances. Starting in 2010, he increasingly focused on orchestral collaborations. A documentary film based on his autobiography was reportedly in production at the time of his death in 2016.

====Reunion shows====
In 2002 Emerson reformed and toured with The Nice, though performing a longer set of ELP music using a backing band including guitarist/vocalist Dave Kilminster. During the spring of 2010, he toured with Greg Lake in the United States and Canada, doing a series of &quot;Intimate Evening&quot; duo shows in which they performed newly arranged versions of the music of Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer, The Nice, and King Crimson as well as Emerson&#x27;s new original composition. On 25 July 2010, a one-off Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer reunion concert closed the High Voltage Festival as the main act in Victoria Park, East London, to commemorate the band&#x27;s 40th anniversary.

====Solo career and Keith Emerson Band====
Emerson continued his solo and soundtrack work into the 2000s. His solo releases included the all-piano album &quot;Emerson Plays Emerson&quot; (2002), several compilations, and contributions to Pink Floyd and Led Zeppelin tribute albums (see Discography). He was also one of three composers who contributed to the soundtrack for the Japanese &quot;kaiju&quot; film &quot;&quot; (2004).

Following the August 2008 release of the album &quot;Keith Emerson Band Featuring Marc Bonilla&quot;, Emerson also toured with his own self-named band in Russia, the Baltic States and Japan between August and October 2008. The tour band members were Marc Bonilla, Travis Davis and Tony Pia.

====Orchestral collaborations====
Japanese composer Takashi Yoshimatsu worked with Emerson to create an arrangement of ELP&#x27;s song &quot;Tarkus&quot;, which premiered on 14 March 2010, performed by the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra. Yoshimatsu&#x27;s arrangement has been featured in multiple live performances and two live recordings.

In September 2011, Emerson began working with Norwegian conductor Terje Mikkelsen, along with the Keith Emerson Band featuring Marc Bonilla and the Munich Radio Orchestra, on new orchestral renditions of ELP classics and their new compositions. The project &quot;The Three Fates&quot; was premiered in Norway in early September 2012, supervised by Norwegian professor and musician Bjørn Ole Rasch for the Norwegian Simax label. The work received its UK live premiere on 10 July 2015 at London&#x27;s Barbican Centre, with the BBC Concert Orchestra, as part of the celebration of the life and work of Robert Moog.

Emerson made his conducting debut with Orchestra Kentucky of Bowling Green, Kentucky in September 2013. In October 2014, Emerson conducted the South Shore Symphony at his 70th birthday tribute concert at Molloy College in Rockville Centre, New York. The concert also featured the premiere of his &quot;Three String Quartets&quot;, and a performance of Emerson&#x27;s &quot;Piano Concerto No. 1&quot; by Jeffrey Biegel.

====Other appearances and activities====
In 2000, Emerson was a featured panelist and performer at &quot;The Keyboard Meets Modern Technology&quot;, an event honouring Moog presented by the Smithsonian in Washington, D.C., in conjunction with a gallery exhibition celebrating the 300th anniversary of the piano. Emerson later headlined both the first and third Moogfest, a festival held in honour of Robert Moog, at the B. B. King Blues Club &amp; Grill at Times Square in New York City, in 2004 and 2006 respectively.

Emerson opened the Led Zeppelin reunion/Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert at the O2 Arena in London on 10 December 2007, along with Chris Squire and Alan White (Yes) and Simon Kirke (Bad Company/Free). The supergroup played a new arrangement of &quot;Fanfare for the Common Man&quot;. Emerson also made a guest appearance in 2009 on Spinal Tap&#x27;s album &quot;Back from the Dead&quot;, and played on several songs at Spinal Tap&#x27;s &quot;One Night Only World Tour&quot; at Wembley Arena on 30 June 2009.

In 2004 Emerson published his autobiography entitled &quot;Pictures of an Exhibitionist&quot;, which dealt with his life up to his nearly career-ending nerve-graft surgery in 1993. In 2007, Emerson began working with Canadian independent filmmaker Jason Woodford to make a documentary film based on his autobiography. As of March 2016, production was still ongoing and the filmmakers were seeking funding to finish the film, according to the webpage of an artists&#x27; management company representing Emerson.

==Personal life==
Around the Christmas of 1969, Emerson married his Danish girlfriend Elinor Lund. They had two sons, Aaron and Damon, before they divorced in 1994. Emerson said it was his fault, as he had &quot;fallen in love with someone else.&quot; Emerson then had a long-term relationship with Mari Kawaguchi.

In April 1975, Emerson&#x27;s Sussex house burned down and he relocated to London.

Emerson enjoyed flying as a hobby, and he obtained his pilot&#x27;s licence in 1972. When Emerson moved to Santa Monica, California in the mid-1990s, John Lydon, who had openly and harshly criticised ELP during the 1970s when Lydon was a member of the punk rock band Sex Pistols, was Emerson&#x27;s neighbour. The two became friends, with Lydon saying in a 2007 interview, &quot;He&#x27;s a great bloke&quot;. In 2002, Emerson was in the process of returning to live in England.

===Health issues===
In 1993, Emerson was forced to take a year off from playing after he developed a nerve-related condition affecting his right hand that he likened to &quot;writer&#x27;s cramp&quot;, and that was also reported as a form of arthritis. It marked a low period for Emerson, who was going through a divorce and having financial difficulties. He turned to alcohol, before a course of psychotherapy led to his move to Santa Monica. During his time off, he ran marathons, customised a Harley-Davidson motorcycle, and wrote film scores and his autobiography, &quot;Pictures of an Exhibitionist&quot;, which opens and closes with an account of his illness and subsequent arm operation.

In 2002, Emerson had regained the full use of his hands and could play to his usual strength. In 2016, he was corresponding with a carpal-tunnel syndrome expert about his struggle with focal dystonia, who said &quot;Musicians can&#x27;t talk about it because they won&#x27;t get another gig if word gets out that they&#x27;re in pain so they keep quiet.&quot;

In September 2010, Emerson underwent immediate surgery after a routine colonoscopy had revealed a &quot;rather dangerous&quot; polyp in his lower colon.

==Death==
Emerson died on 11 March 2016 in Santa Monica, California, of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head. His body was found at his Santa Monica home. Following a post-mortem, the medical examiner ruled Emerson&#x27;s death a suicide, and concluded that he had also had heart disease and depression associated with alcohol. According to Emerson&#x27;s girlfriend Mari Kawaguchi, Emerson had become &quot;depressed, nervous, and anxious&quot; because nerve damage had hampered his playing, and he was worried that he would perform poorly at upcoming concerts in Japan and disappoint his fans.

Emerson was buried on 1 April 2016 at Lancing and Sompting Cemetery, Lancing, West Sussex. Although his death had been reported by news sources and an official Emerson, Lake and Palmer social media page as having occurred on the night of 10 March, his grave memorial gives his date of death as 11 March 2016.

His former ELP bandmates, Carl Palmer and Greg Lake, both issued statements on his death. Palmer said, &quot;Keith was a gentle soul whose love for music and passion for his performance as a keyboard player will remain unmatched for many years to come.&quot; Lake said, &quot;As sad and tragic as Keith&#x27;s death is, I would not want this to be the lasting memory people take away with them. What I will always remember about Keith Emerson was his remarkable talent as a musician and composer and his gift and passion to entertain. Music was his life and despite some of the difficulties he encountered I am sure that the music he created will live on forever.&quot; Lake died later that same year of pancreatic cancer.

A tribute concert featuring Brian Auger, Jordan Rudess, Eddie Jobson, Aaron Emerson, Steve Lukather, Steve Porcaro, Marc Bonilla, and Rachel Flowers took place at the El Rey Theatre. Proceeds from sales of the DVD go to the Dystonia Medical Research Foundation.

==Playing style==
Emerson sometimes reached into the interior of his piano and hit, plucked, or strummed the strings with his hand. He said that as a keyboard player, he hated the idea of being &quot;static&quot; and that to avoid it, he &quot;wanted to get inside the piano, brush the strings, stick Ping-Pong balls inside&quot;. &quot;Take a Pebble&quot; included Emerson strumming the strings of his piano, a technique pioneered by avant-garde composer Henry Cowell, referred to as string piano. In the Nice&#x27;s 1968 live performance of &quot;Hang on to a Dream&quot; on the German television program &quot;Beat-Club&quot; (later released on DVD in 1997), Emerson can be seen and heard reaching inside his grand piano at one point and plucking its strings.

In addition to such experimentation, Emerson also incorporated unique musical stylization into his work. Emerson is recognized for having integrated different sounds into his writing, utilizing methods of both horizontal and vertical contrast. Horizontal contrast is the use of distinct styles in a piece of music, combined by alternating between two different segments (in Emerson&#x27;s case, most frequently alternating classical and non-classical); this technique can be seen in numerous works, such as &quot;Rondo&quot;, &quot;Tantalising Maggie&quot;, &quot;The Thoughts of Emerlist Davjack&quot; and others. Vertical contrast is the combination of multiple styles simultaneously; Emerson frequently played a given style with one hand and a contrasting one with the other. This structure can be seen in works such as &quot;Intermezzo from the Karelia Suite&quot;, &quot;Rondo&quot;, and others. Emerson&#x27;s love of modern music such as Copland and Bartok was evident in his open voicings and use of fifths and fourths, &quot;Fanfare&quot; emulated guitar power chords. He also used dissonance, atonality, sonata and fugue forms, exposing rock and roll audiences to myriad classical styles from Bach to Stravinsky.

==Instrumentation==
Emerson used a variety of electronic keyboard instruments during his career, including several Hammond organs and synthesisers by Moog Music, Yamaha, and Korg. From time to time he also used other instruments such as pipe organs, a grand piano, a clavinet, and very briefly, a Mellotron. During his ELP years, Emerson toured with a large amount of gear, taking thirteen keyboard units to a December 1973 show at Madison Square Garden, and later travelling with a large Yamaha GX-1 that required eight roadies to move it. Michael &quot;Supe&quot; Granda of The Ozark Mountain Daredevils recalled Emerson&#x27;s organ rig as being &quot;as large as [the Daredevils&#x27;] entire stage plot&quot;.

===Pre-ELP equipment and Hammond organs===
Initially a piano player, Emerson obtained his first Hammond organ, an L-100, after hearing jazz organist Jack McDuff and becoming frustrated with broken hammers inside pianos. Around 1968, during his time with the Nice, he added a second Hammond organ, the more expensive C-3, and placed the two organs sideways and facing each other so he could stand between the two keyboards and play both with his unobstructed body facing the audience. Emerson preferred the sound of the C-3 as being &quot;far superior&quot; to the cheaper L-100, and used the L-100 to &quot;throw around and make it feed back&quot;. Emerson got the L-100 to feed back by placing it close to the onstage speakers and using a fuzzbox. He continued to perform physical abuse stunts with the L-100 to some degree throughout his years with ELP.

Throughout his career, Emerson owned a number of L-100 models in various states of repair to support his act. These organs were also specially reinforced and modified to enhance their sound and help prevent damage while on tour, and were reported to weigh 300 to 350 pounds. By contrast, his C-3 organ was not used for stunts and Emerson continued to play his original C-3 for many years, using it on all the ELP albums and tours throughout the 1970s. He also owned several other Hammond organ models in addition to the L-100s and the C-3. When Emerson sold much of his gear in the mid-1990s, his Hammond organs were among the items he kept as being &quot;too personal to let go&quot;. The remains of one L-100 that failed and burned during a 1990s ELP show in Boston were donated to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.

===ELP equipment and Moog synthesisers===
With ELP, Emerson added the Moog synthesiser behind the C-3 with the keyboard and ribbon controller stacked on the top of the organ. The ribbon controller allowed Emerson to vary pitch, volume or timbre of the output from the Moog by moving his finger up and down the length of a touch-sensitive strip. It also could be used as a phallic symbol, and outfitted with a small rocket launcher, it quickly became a feature of the act. He continued to divide his keyboard setup into two banks so that he could play between them with his body in view. When the ultra-compact Moog Minimoog first appeared it was placed where needed, such as on top of the grand piano. A Hohner clavinet L, with reversed black and white keys, was also part of Emerson&#x27;s keyboard rig. Although it could be heard on numerous album pieces, according to Emerson, it was only used for one song, &quot;Nut Rocker&quot; in concert.

During the &quot;Brain Salad Surgery&quot; tour of 1974, Emerson&#x27;s keyboard setup included the Hammond C-3 organ, run through multiple Leslie speakers driven by HiWatt guitar amplifiers, the Moog 3C modular synthesiser (modified by addition of various modules and an oscilloscope) with ribbon controller, a Steinway concert grand piano with a Minimoog synthesiser on top of it, an upright acoustic-electric piano that was used for honky-tonk piano sounds, a Hohner Clavinet and another Minimoog synthesiser. Emerson also used a prototype polyphonic synthesiser produced by Moog, which was the test bed for the Moog Polymoog polyphonic synthesiser. The original synthesiser setup as envisioned by Moog was called the Constellation, and consisted of three instruments – the polyphonic synthesiser, called the Apollo, a monophonic lead synthesiser called the Lyra, and a bass-pedal synthesiser, called the Taurus, but Emerson never used the Taurus.

===Pipe organs===
Occasionally Emerson used a pipe organ, when available, in live performances and on recordings. He played the Royal Albert Hall Organ at a show with The Nice on 26 June 1968, where the band controversially burned a painting of an American flag onstage to protest against the Vietnam War. The stunt caused a storm of objections in the US and The Nice received a lifetime ban from the venue.

With ELP, Emerson used the Royal Festival Hall organ for the &quot;Clotho&quot; segment of &quot;The Three Fates&quot; on the 1970 eponymous debut album by ELP. He played this organ again in 2002 to open The Nice reunion tour show, but according to a reviewer, the organ failed to operate at the expected volume.

The Newcastle City Hall organ was used for the introductory section of &quot;Pictures at an Exhibition&quot;, recorded there live on 26 March 1971. Emerson was recorded playing the organ at St. Mark&#x27;s Church in London for &quot;The Only Way (Hymn)&quot; on the 1971 ELP album &quot;Tarkus&quot;.

===Yamaha Electone GX-1 synthesiser===
After founder Robert Moog left Moog Music in the late 1970s, Emerson began to consider using synthesisers made by other companies. Emerson became one of the few buyers of the Yamaha GX-1 polyphonic synthesiser, which reportedly cost almost $50,000. The GX-1 was subsequently used on the ELP album &quot;Works Volume 1&quot;, particularly on the song &quot;Fanfare for the Common Man&quot;, and on tour. It can be seen in ELP&#x27;s &quot;Works Orchestral Tour&quot; video and in promotional photos and videos from 1977 featuring the band playing &quot;Fanfare&quot; outdoors during a snowstorm in Montreal&#x27;s Olympic Stadium. Emerson later bought a second GX-1 from John Paul Jones of Led Zeppelin, and used parts from it to repair his original GX-1, which was damaged by a tractor crashing into Emerson&#x27;s home studio.

Emerson sold much of his keyboard equipment in the 1990s when he relocated from England to Santa Monica, California. The John Paul Jones GX-1 was sold to film composer Hans Zimmer, while Emerson&#x27;s original GX-1 was sold to Italian keyboardist Riccardo Grotto.

===Korg synthesisers===
In the late 1970s, Emerson also began to use the Korg PS-3300 and PS-3100, which at the time were among the world&#x27;s first fully polyphonic synthesizers. These Korgs appeared on the ELP album &quot;Love Beach&quot;, and Emerson continued to use them into the 1980s for his solo album &quot;Honky&quot; and his soundtrack work. He also became an official endorser for the PS-3300 and PS-3100 in the early 1980s.

By the late 2000s, Emerson was employing &quot;a host of Korg gear&quot; including the Korg OASYS and Korg Triton Extreme music workstation synthesisers. A review of the DVD release of ELP&#x27;s 2010 one-off reunion show said that the Korg OASYS &quot;appear[ed] to be Emerson&#x27;s go-to instrument&quot;, although he also used a Hammond C-3 and a Moog with a ribbon controller onstage.

==Honours and awards==
In December 1980 &quot;Contemporary Keyboard&quot; magazine announced, in their Fifth Annual Readers&#x27; Poll, that Emerson had—for the fifth time in a row—captured first place in two categories - &#x27;&quot;Overall Best Keyboardist&quot; and &quot;Best Multi-Keyboardist&quot;. The five-time wins put Emerson in their &quot;Gallery Of The Greats&quot; for both categories. The same poll also saw Emerson take &quot;Best Rock Organist&quot; for the fourth time and &quot;Best Lead Synthesist&quot;.

In March 2010 Emerson received the annual Frankfurt Music Prize for his achievements, awarded in Frankfurt on the eve of the annual Musikmesse fair.

In September 2013 Orchestra Kentucky of Bowling Green gave Emerson their Lifetime Achievement Award in the Arts and Humanities &quot;for his role in bringing classical music to the masses&quot;.

In 2014 Emerson was inducted into the Hammond Hall of Fame by the Hammond Organ Company.

==Discography==
===Solo works===
====Studio albums====
* &quot;Honky&quot; (1981) (digitally re-mastered 2013)
* &quot;The Christmas Album&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Changing States&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Emerson Plays Emerson&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Keith Emerson Band featuring Marc Bonilla&quot; (2008)
* &quot;The Three Fates Project&quot; (with Marc Bonilla, Terje Mikkelsen) (2012)

====Live albums====
* &quot;Boys Club – Live from California&quot; (with Glenn Hughes, Marc Bonilla) (2009)
* &quot;Moscow&quot; (with Keith Emerson Band Featuring Marc Bonilla) CD &amp; DVD (2010)
* &quot;Live from Manticore Hall&quot; (with Greg Lake) (2010)

====Soundtrack albums====
* &quot;Inferno&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Nighthawks&quot; (1981)
* &quot;Murderock&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Best Revenge&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Harmageddon&quot;/&quot;China Free Fall&quot; (1987) — Split album with Derek Austin. Emerson did the &quot;Harmageddon&quot; soundtrack while Austin did the &quot;China Free Fall&quot; soundtrack.
* &quot;Iron Man Vol. 1&quot; (2001) 
* &quot;La Chiesa&quot; (2002) — Music from the 1989 horror film &quot;The Church&quot;, also known as &quot;La chiesa&quot;. Also contains material by Fabio Pignatelli and Goblin.
* &quot;&quot; (2004)

====Compilations====
* &quot;Chord Sampler&quot; (1984)
* &quot;The Emerson Collection&quot; (1986)
* &quot;At the Movies&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Hammer It Out – The Anthology&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Off the Shelf&quot; (2006)

====Singles====
* &quot;Honky Tonk Train Blues&quot; (Lewis) b/w &quot;Barrelhouse Shake-Down&quot; (1976) — 

===Contributions===
* &quot;In the Flesh?&quot; (2 versions) and &quot;Waiting for the Worms&quot; on Pink Floyd tribute album &quot;Back Against the Wall&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Black Dog&quot; on Led Zeppelin tribute album &quot;Led Box: The Ultimate Led Zeppelin Tribute&quot; (2008)
* Ayreon - &quot;Progressive Waves&quot; on &quot;The Theory of Everything&quot; (2013)
* Spinal Tap - &quot;Heavy Duty&quot; on &quot;Back from the Dead&quot;

===As part of a group===
* The Nice discography
* Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer discography
* Emerson, Lake &amp; Powell discography
* 3 discography
* The Best A band including Joe Walsh, Jeff &quot;Skunk&quot; Baxter, John Entwistle and Simon Phillips, they recorded a DVD of a live concert in Yokohama Japan, on the 26 September 1990 which was published in 2010.

==Pieces based on other works==

Emerson occasionally covered or sampled other musical works in his compositions. Permission to use pieces was sometimes denied by the composer or his family; for example Gustav Holst&#x27;s daughter refused to grant official permission for rock bands to perform her late father&#x27;s composition &quot;Mars, the Bringer of War&quot;. However, a number of composers did grant permission for their works to be used. Aaron Copland said that there was &quot;something that attracted [him]&quot; about ELP&#x27;s version of &quot;Fanfare for the Common Man&quot;, and so approved its use, although he said, &quot;What they do in the middle (i.e., the modal section between repeats of Copland&#x27;s theme), I&#x27;m not sure exactly how they connect that with my music&quot;. Alberto Ginastera, on the other hand, enthusiastically approved Emerson&#x27;s electronic realisation of the fourth movement of his first piano concerto, which appeared on their album &quot;Brain Salad Surgery&quot; under the title &quot;Toccata&quot;. Ginastera said, &quot;You have captured the essence of my music, and no one&#x27;s ever done that before.&quot;

===With The Nice===
* &quot;America, 2nd Amendment&quot;, from &quot;West Side Story&quot; &quot;America&quot;, by Leonard Bernstein, credited, quoting Antonín Dvořák&#x27;s Symphony No. 9, &quot;From the New World&quot;, uncredited.
* &quot;Rondo&quot;, derived from Dave Brubeck&#x27;s &quot;Blue Rondo à la Turk&quot;, uncredited, quoting Bach, &quot;Italian Concerto&quot; third movement, uncredited.
* &quot;Diary of an Empty Day&quot;, from &quot;Symphonie Espagnole&quot; by Édouard Lalo, credited.
* &quot;Azrael Revisited&quot;, quoting Sergei Rachmaninoff&#x27;s &quot;Prelude in C-sharp minor&quot;, credited.
* &quot;Ars Longa Vita Brevis&quot; – Bach, the third &quot;Brandenburg Concerto&quot;, Allegro, credited.
* &quot;Intermezzo from the Karelia Suite&quot; – Sibelius, credited.
* &quot;Pathetique&quot;, third movement from Tchaikovsky&#x27;s Symphony No. 6, credited.
* &quot;She Belongs to Me&quot;, by Bob Dylan, credited, quoting Bach, uncredited, and fragments of the theme from &quot;The Magnificent Seven&quot;, by Elmer Bernstein, uncredited.
* &quot;Country Pie&quot;, by Bob Dylan, credited, lyrics partly set to Bach, the sixth Brandenburg Concerto, credited.

===With ELP===
* &quot;The Barbarian&quot;, based on &quot;Allegro barbaro&quot;, Sz. 49, BB 63 by Béla Bartók, uncredited on US release of &quot;Emerson Lake &amp; Palmer&quot; (credited on the British Manticore re-pressing of the original LP).
* &quot;Knife-Edge&quot;, based on the Sinfonietta by Leoš Janáček, uncredited on US release (credited on the British Manticore re-pressing of the original LP); middle section based on the Allemande from &quot;French Suites&quot; No. 1 in D minor, by J. S. Bach, uncredited.
* &quot;The Only Way (Hymn)&quot;, incorporating (in the song&#x27;s introduction and bridge) J. S. Bach&#x27;s &#x27;Organ Toccata in F and Prelude VI from Book I of the Well-Tempered Clavier&#x27;, credited on &quot;Tarkus&quot;.
* &quot;Are You Ready Eddy?&quot;, based on the tune of Bobby Troup&#x27;s song &quot;The Girl Can&#x27;t Help It&quot; and including a quote from the Assembly bugle call, both uncredited (on &quot;Tarkus&quot;).
* &quot;Pictures at an Exhibition&quot;, by Modest Mussorgsky, credited.
* &quot;Blues Variation&quot; from &quot;Pictures at an Exhibition&quot; also contains an uncredited quote of the &#x27;head&#x27; of Bill Evans&#x27; minor blues piece &quot;Interplay&quot; (1:52), and Miles Davis&#x27; &quot;Weirdo&quot;(Ballads and Blues (Miles Davis album)), (aka Walkin&#x27;) (2:45).
* &quot;Nut Rocker&quot;, adapted by Kim Fowley, credited, from Tchaikovsky&#x27;s &quot;March of the Wooden Soldiers&quot;, uncredited.
* &quot;Hoedown&quot;, from &quot;Rodeo&quot; by Aaron Copland, credited, quoting &quot;Shortnin&#x27; Bread&quot; and &quot;Turkey in the Straw&quot;, both traditional.
* &quot;Abaddon&#x27;s Bolero&quot;, quoting &quot;The Girl I Left Behind&quot;, traditional.
* &quot;Jerusalem&quot;, by C. Hubert H. Parry, credited.
* &quot;Maple Leaf Rag&quot;, by Scott Joplin (in &quot;Works Volume 2&quot;), credited.
* &quot;Toccata&quot;, from a piano concerto by Alberto Ginastera, endorsed by the composer, credited.
* &quot;Karn Evil 9, 2nd Impression&quot;, quoting &quot;St. Thomas&quot;, a Caribbean melody sometimes attributed to Sonny Rollins, uncredited.
* &quot;Fanfare for the Common Man&quot;, by Aaron Copland, credited.
* &quot;Carmina Burana&quot;, by Carl Orff, quoted in an extended solo in live recordings from Poland.
* With Emerson, Lake &amp; Powell, the main theme to &quot;Touch &amp; Go&quot; is identical to the English folk song &quot;Lovely Joan&quot;, better known as the counterpoint tune in Ralph Vaughan Williams&#x27; &quot;Fantasia on Greensleeves&quot;. Not credited.
* With Emerson, Lake &amp; Powell, &quot;Mars&quot; is based on the equivalent movement from the suite &quot;The Planets&quot;, by Gustav Holst. Credited.
* &quot;Romeo &amp; Juliet&quot; from the &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot; suite by Sergei Prokofiev, credited.
* &quot;Love at First Sight&quot; intro, Étude Op. 10, No. 1, by Frédéric Chopin, uncredited.

== Songs composed by Emerson (alone or with contributions from others) ==
Besides his &quot;Piano Concerto&quot;, there are several examples of Emerson creativity in original composition. Since the late Sixties he wrote a wide typology of pieces in different musical styles ranging from pop rock songs such as &quot;Flower King of Flies&quot;, &quot;The Thoughts of Emerlist Davjack&quot;, &quot;Happy Freuds&quot; to complex pieces including transversal influences from baroque to contemporary and jazz, anticipating the progressive genre (&quot;For Example&quot;, &quot;Five Bridges Suite&quot;). During the seventies alongside arrangements of classic tracks and Lake&#x27;s ballads, a decisive element of EL&amp;P&#x27;s albums are the compositions featuring music entirely written by Emerson. His trademark is a very varied range of musical approach: songs with a hard rock impact with a jazz flavour such as &quot;Bitches Crystal&quot;, &quot;A Time and a Place&quot;, &quot;Living Sin&quot;, examples of country or stride piano such as &quot;Jeremy Bender&quot; or &quot;Benny the Bouncer&quot;, and adventurous instrumentals difficult to classify in one genre, such as &quot;The Three Fates&quot;, &quot;Tank&quot; and &quot;Abaddon&#x27;s Bolero&quot;. The more structured and complex epic tracks such as &quot;Tarkus&quot;, &quot;Trilogy&quot;, &quot;The Endless Enigma&quot;, &quot;Karn Evil 9&quot;, &quot;Pirates&quot;, &quot;Memoirs of an Officer and a Gentleman&quot; are all Emerson’s compositions. As a soloist, after his &quot;Piano Concerto&quot; a period of compositions recorded with the orchestra opened during the early Eighties (&quot;Inferno&quot;, &quot;Nighthawks&quot;, &quot;Orchestral Suite to Best Revenge&quot;). In the following decades Emerson composed many pieces for piano, such as &quot;The Dreamer&quot;, &quot;And Then January&quot;, &quot;Outgoing Tide&quot;, &quot;Broken Bough&quot; and &quot;Soulscapes&quot;, displaying an intimate and crepuscular inspiration, also reiterated in orchestral pieces such as &quot;Glorietta Pass&quot; and &quot;After All of This&quot;. Funky and dance rhythms can be found in several songs present in the &quot;Murderock&quot; and &quot;Nighthawks&quot; soundtracks, whereas in some tracks of &quot;Godzilla Final Wars&quot; the sound are those of the 2000s. A return to the visionary and tumultuous style of progressive music is represented by the album recorded under the name of the Keith Emerson Band, which includes the long suite &quot;The House Of Ocean Born Mary&quot; co-written with Marc Bonilla.

See the section below for a list of songs composed or co-composed by Emerson.

=== With Keith Emerson Trio ===

* &quot;Winkle Picker Stamp&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;56 Blues&quot; (Emerson)

=== With The Nice ===

* &quot;Flower King&quot; of Flies (Emerson; lyrics: Jackson)
* &quot;The Thoughts of Emerlist Davjack&quot; (O&#x27;List, Emerson)
* &quot;Tantalising Maggie&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Jackson)
* &quot;Dawn&quot; (Davison, Emerson, Jackson)
* &quot;The Cry of Eugene&quot; (O&#x27;List, Emerson, Jackson)
* &quot;The Diamond Hard Blue Apples Of The Moon&quot; (Emerson, O&#x27;List, Davison, Jackson)
* &quot;Daddy Where Did I Come From?&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Jackson)
* &quot;Little Arabella&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Jackson)
* &quot;Happy Freuds&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Jackson)
* &quot;Ars Longa Vita Brevis: Prelude, 2nd Movement&quot;, &quot;4th Movement e Coda&quot; (Emerson, O&#x27;List, Davison, Jackson)
* &quot;For Example&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Jackson)
* &quot;The Five Bridges Suite: Fantasia, Chorale, High Level Fugue, Finale&quot;
* &quot;One of Those People&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Jackson)

=== With Emerson Lake &amp; Palmer/Emerson Lake &amp; Powell/Three ===

* &quot;The Three Fates: Clotho, Lachesis, Atropos&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Tank&quot; (Emerson, Palmer)
* &quot;Rave Up&quot; (Emerson, Lake, Palmer)
* &quot;Tarkus: Eruption, Stones of Years, Iconoclast, Mass, Manticore, Aquatarkus&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;Jeremy Bender&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;Bitches Crystal&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;The Only Way/Infinite Space&quot; (Emerson, Bach; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;A Time and a Place&quot; (Emerson, Lake, Palmer)
* &quot;The Old Castle&quot; (Emerson, Mussorgsky)
* &quot;Blues Variation&quot; (Emerson, Lake, Palmer)
* &quot;The Curse Of Baba Yaga&quot; (Emerson, Lake, Palmer)
* &quot;The Endless Enigma&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;The Sheriff&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;Trilogy&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;Living Sin&quot; (Emerson, Lake, Palmer)
* &quot;Abaddon&#x27;s Bolero&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Benny the Bouncer&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;Karn Evil 9 1st, 2nd, 3rd Impression&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake, Sinfield)
* &quot;Piano Concerto n.1: Allegro Giojoso, Andante Molto Cantabile, Toccata con Fuoco&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;L.A.Nights&quot; (Emerson, Palmer)
* &quot;Pirates&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake, Sinfield)
* &quot;Tiger in a Spotlight&quot; (Emerson, Lake, Palmer, Sinfield)
* &quot;When The Apple Blossoms Bloom In The Windmills Of Your Mind I&#x27;ll Be Your Valentine&quot; (Emerson, Lake, Palmer)
* &quot;Brain Salad Surgery&quot; (Emerson, Lake, Sinfield)
* &quot;Barrelhouse Shake-Down&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;So Far To Fall&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake, Sinfield)
* &quot;The Gambler&quot; (Emerson, Lake, Sinfield)
* &quot;Memoirs Of An Officer And A Gentleman: Prologue / The Education Of A Gentleman, Love At First Sight, Letters From The Front, Honourable Company (A March)&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Sinfield)
* &quot;Introductory Fanfare&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;The Score&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Learning To Fly&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;The Miracle&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;Touch And Go&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;Love Blind&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;Step Aside&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;Lay Down Your Guns&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake, Gould)
* &quot;Vacant Possession&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;Lover to Lover&quot; (Emerson, Berry, Palmer)
* &quot;Desde la Vida&quot; (Emerson, Berry, Palmer)
* &quot;On My Way Home&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Black Moon&quot; (Emerson, Lake, Palmer)
* &quot;Paper Blood&quot; (Emerson, Lake, Palmer)
* &quot;Farewell To Arms&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;Changing States&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Close To Home&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Better Days&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;A Blade of Grass&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Hand of Truth&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;One By One&quot; (Emerson, Lake, Olsen)
* &quot;Thin Line&quot; (Emerson, Wray, Olsen)
* &quot;Change&quot; (Emerson, Wray, Olsen)
* &quot;Street War&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lake)
* &quot;A Cajun Alley&quot; (Emerson)

=== Solo ===

* &quot;Inferno&quot; (soundtrack): 15 tracks (Emerson; lyrics on &quot;Mater Tenebrarum&quot;: Emerson/Salmon)
* &quot;Nighthawks&quot; (soundtrack): 10 tracks (Emerson; lyrics on &quot;Nighthawking&quot;: Mark Mueller)
* &quot;Salt Cay&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Green Ice&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Rum-a-ting (Emerson)&quot;
* &quot;Jesus Loves Me (Emerson)&quot;
* &quot;Harmagedon&quot; (soundtrack): 6 tracks (Emerson; lyrics on Children of the Light: Tony Allen)
* &quot;Murderock&quot; (soundtrack): 11 tracks (Emerson; lyrics on 3 tracks: Doreen Chanter)
* &quot;Best Revenge&quot; (soundtrack): 5 tracks and 1 orchestral suite
* &quot;My Name is Rain&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lorna Wright)
* &quot;Snowman&#x27;s Land&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Captain Starship Christmas&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Lorna Wright)
* &quot;Up the Elephant and Round the Castle&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Jim Davidson)
* &quot;Empire of Delight&quot; (Emerson; lyrics: Peter Hammill)
* &quot;Airport Of Silence&quot; (Emerson, Tate; lyrics: Troy Tate)
* &quot;Last Ride Into The Sun&quot; (Emerson, Berry, Palmer)
* &quot;La Chiesa&quot; (soundtrack): 3 tracks (Emerson)
* &quot;Shelter from the Rain&quot; (Emerson, Bonilla, Gilbert)
* &quot;Another Frontier&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Ballade&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;The Band Keeps Playing&quot; (Emerson, Bonilla, Gilbert)
* &quot;Interlude&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Vagrant&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Solitudinous&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Broken Bough&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Outgoing Tide&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Roll&#x27;n Jelly&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;B &amp; W Blues&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;For Kevin&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Hammer It Out&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Ballad For A Common Man&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Nilu&#x27;s Dream&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Lament For Tony Stratton Smith&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;And Then January&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Rio&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Soulscapes&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Asian Pear&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Motor Bikin&#x27;&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Katoh-San&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Star Strike Theme&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Iron Man&quot; (soundtrack): 1 track and 5 suites (Emerson)
* &quot;Godzilla Final Wars&quot; (soundtrack): 13 tracks (Emerson)
* &quot;Land of the Rising Sun&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;New Orleans&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Middle of a Dream&quot; (Emerson, Bonilla, Hughes)
* &quot;The House Of Ocean Born Mary: Ignition, 1st Presence, Last Horizon, Crusaders Cross, Fugue, 2nd Presence, Blue Inferno, 3rd Presence, Prelude To A Hope&quot; (Emerson; 3 tracks: Emerson, Bonilla)
* &quot;The Art of Falling Down&quot; (Emerson, Bonilla)
* &quot;Gametime&quot; (Emerson, Bonilla)
* &quot;One By One&quot; (Emerson, Berry)
* &quot;What You&#x27;re Dreaming Now&quot; (Emerson, Berry)
* &quot;Somebody&#x27;s Watching&quot; (Emerson, Berry)
* &quot;Your Mark On The World&quot; (Emerson, Berry)
* &quot;Sailors Horn Pipe&quot; (Emerson, Berry)
* &quot;Never&quot; (Emerson, Berry)
* &quot;Beyond The Stars&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;Glorietta Pass&quot; (Emerson)
* &quot;After All Of This&quot; (Emerson)

==Literature==
* (Thesis M.A.)

==In popular culture==
On the UK surreal television comedy series &quot;Big Train&quot;, Kevin Eldon portrayed Emerson as a Roman slave fighting his enemies with progressive rock.

The long-running comic-strip character &quot;Keef da Blade&quot; in the Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, student newspaper &quot;Lachesis&quot; (1970s) is based largely on Emerson, the character&#x27;s name being presumably a reference to his trademark stage antics with knives.

==See also==
* List of Hammond organ players
* List of Moog synthesiser players

==Footnotes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Emerson, Keith (2003), &quot;Pictures of an Exhibitionist: From the Nice to Emerson, Lake and Palmer - The True Story of the Man Who Changed the Sound of Rock&quot;, John Blake, 
* Forrester, George, Martyn Hanson and Frank Askew. &quot;Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer, The Show That Never Ends, A Musical Biography&quot;. (2001) Helter Skelter Publishing .
* Macan, Edward (2006), &quot;Endless Enigma: A Musical Biography of Emerson, Lake and Palmer&quot;, Feedback Series in Contemporary Music, Vol. 4, Open Court, 

==External links==

* (archived)
* 
* Keith Emerson Interview at NAMM Oral History Collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q319751" start="0" end="18" title="Keith Emerson" label="Keith Noel Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q900864" start="210" end="218" title="the Nice" label="the Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q273171" start="420" end="446" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="471" end="487" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q920627" start="728" end="734" title="Tarkus" label="Tarkus"/>
<link wikidata="Q572651" start="758" end="777" title="Brain Salad Surgery" label="Brain Salad Surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335550" start="1039" end="1065" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Powell" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456149" start="1070" end="1071" title="3 (1980s band)" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q343075" start="1523" end="1532" title="Greg Lake" label="Greg Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="2136" end="2144" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351734" start="2285" end="2289" title="Prog (magazine)" label="Prog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327770" start="2410" end="2419" title="Todmorden" label="Todmorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379299" start="2567" end="2580" title="Goring-by-Sea" label="Goring-by-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2637" end="2666" title="Thomas A’Becket Middle School, Worthing, West Sussex" label="Thomas A’Becket Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686699" start="2671" end="2678" title="Tarring, West Sussex" label="Tarring"/>
<link wikidata="Q579517" start="2979" end="2984" title="ABRSM" label="ABRSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="3222" end="3245" title="Western classical music" label="Western classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q969629" start="3457" end="3469" title="Floyd Cramer" label="Floyd Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757335" start="3482" end="3497" title="appoggiatura" label="slip note-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042666" start="3504" end="3518" title="On the Rebound" label="On the Rebound"/>
<link wikidata="Q310343" start="3541" end="3553" title="Dudley Moore" label="Dudley Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q108597" start="3585" end="3597" title="Dave Brubeck" label="Dave Brubeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q349346" start="3602" end="3617" title="George Shearing" label="George Shearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q155712" start="3662" end="3674" title="Andre Previn" label="Andre Previn"/>
<link wikidata="Q591943" start="3699" end="3711" title="My Fair Lady" label="My Fair Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q212952" start="3739" end="3752" title="boogie-woogie" label="boogie-woogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="3761" end="3774" title="country music" label="country-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q544897" start="3794" end="3828" title="Joe &amp;quot;Mr Piano&amp;quot; Henderson" label="Joe &amp;quot;Mr Piano&amp;quot; Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q667912" start="3830" end="3841" title="Russ Conway" label="Russ Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q450978" start="3846" end="3861" title="Winifred Atwell" label="Winifred Atwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q145699" start="3957" end="3974" title="Piano sonatas (Beethoven)" label="Beethoven sonatas"/>
<link wikidata="Q202729" start="4093" end="4108" title="Jerry Lee Lewis" label="Jerry Lee Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q82222" start="4113" end="4127" title="Little Richard" label="Little Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="4230" end="4243" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677123" start="4272" end="4283" title="Jack McDuff" label="Jack McDuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q974034" start="4468" end="4481" title="hire purchase" label="hire purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152847" start="4799" end="4821" title="Lloyds Bank" label="Lloyds Bank Registrars"/>
<link wikidata="Q55098923" start="4992" end="5008" title="Worthing Borough Council" label="Worthing Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008" start="5021" end="5032" title="Count Basie" label="Count Basie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="5037" end="5051" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668537" start="5368" end="5377" title="Gary Farr" label="Gary Farr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106342" start="5509" end="5526" title="The V.I.P.&amp;#x27;s (band)" label="The V.I.P.&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q900864" start="5943" end="5951" title="The Nice" label="The Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q562590" start="5957" end="5968" title="Lee Jackson (bassist)" label="Lee Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355847" start="5991" end="6008" title="David O&amp;#x27;List" label="David O&amp;#x27;List"/>
<link wikidata="Q469825" start="6043" end="6055" title="P. P. Arnold" label="P. P. Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q912060" start="6117" end="6130" title="Brian Davison (drummer)" label="Brian Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="6259" end="6272" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q716215" start="6834" end="6843" title="Audio feedback" label="feed back"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="6980" end="6991" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328509" start="7063" end="7084" title="Music from Free Creek" label="Music from Free Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="7138" end="7150" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q192474" start="7155" end="7164" title="Jeff Beck" label="Jeff Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q315225" start="7214" end="7228" title="Mitch Mitchell" label="Mitch Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q971465" start="7241" end="7253" title="Chuck Rainey" label="Chuck Rainey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264273" start="7287" end="7299" title="Eddie Harris" label="Eddie Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q426035" start="7368" end="7384" title="Moog synthesizer" label="Moog synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283363" start="7427" end="7443" title="Switched-On Bach" label="Switched-On Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q44641" start="7460" end="7472" title="Wendy Carlos" label="Wendy Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q606089" start="7533" end="7540" title="skiffle" label="skiffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849166" start="7585" end="7597" title="Mike Vickers" label="Mike Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q647390" start="7716" end="7735" title="Royal Festival Hall" label="Royal Festival Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q856125" start="7745" end="7773" title="Royal Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Royal Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="7818" end="7823" title="Synthesizer patch" label="patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35720" start="7876" end="7899" title="Also sprach Zarathustra (Strauss)" label="Also sprach Zarathustra"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="7909" end="7924" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q273171" start="8082" end="8108" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q343075" start="8129" end="8138" title="Greg Lake" label="Greg Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="8144" end="8156" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q348277" start="8169" end="8180" title="Carl Palmer" label="Carl Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q757606" start="8186" end="8200" title="Atomic Rooster" label="Atomic Rooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="8339" end="8355" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920369" start="8400" end="8427" title="Isle of Wight Festival 1970" label="1970 Isle of Wight Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="8524" end="8535" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="8539" end="8548" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="8838" end="8854" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q426035" start="8950" end="8974" title="Moog modular synthesiser" label="Moog modular synthesiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q77425249" start="9818" end="9827" title="And did those feet in ancient time" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q572651" start="9843" end="9862" title="Brain Salad Surgery" label="Brain Salad Surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q734687" start="9982" end="9990" title="Minimoog" label="Minimoog"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047705" start="9992" end="10003" title="Yamaha GX-1" label="Yamaha GX-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q386773" start="10027" end="10031" title="Korg" label="Korg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="10159" end="10169" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="J. S. Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q132682" start="10174" end="10191" title="Modest Mussorgsky" label="Modest Mussorgsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q83326" start="10226" end="10237" title="Béla Bartók" label="Béla Bartók"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="10239" end="10252" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q184933" start="10254" end="10266" title="Leoš Janáček" label="Leoš Janáček"/>
<link wikidata="Q311389" start="10271" end="10288" title="Alberto Ginastera" label="Alberto Ginastera"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="10505" end="10508" title="time signature" label="4/4"/>
<link wikidata="Q108597" start="10527" end="10539" title="Dave Brubeck" label="Dave Brubeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742757" start="10569" end="10589" title="Blue Rondo à la Turk" label="Blue Rondo à la Turk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293299" start="10713" end="10729" title="Italian Concerto" label="Italian Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q845639" start="10752" end="10773" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer (album)" label="eponymous first album"/>
<link wikidata="Q769424" start="10975" end="11000" title="Pictures at an Exhibition (Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer album)" label="Pictures at an Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q132682" start="11089" end="11106" title="Modest Mussorgsky" label="Modest Mussorgsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="11415" end="11428" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Maurice Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747891" start="11639" end="11659" title="Piano Concerto No. 1 (Emerson)" label="Piano Concerto No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q863397" start="11691" end="11720" title="London Philharmonic Orchestra" label="London Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092972" start="12313" end="12327" title="Works Volume 1" label="Works Volume 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q212952" start="12747" end="12760" title="boogie-woogie" label="boogie-woogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399605" start="12775" end="12790" title="Meade Lux Lewis" label="Meade Lux Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="12807" end="12823" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="12961" end="12973" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293518" start="12987" end="12996" title="Don Shinn (musician)" label="Don Shinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q309926" start="13457" end="13472" title="Lemmy Kilmister" label="Lemmy Kilmister"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="14432" end="14453" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933988" start="14479" end="14493" title="California Jam" label="California Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q208152" start="14847" end="14862" title="London Borough of Tower Hamlets" label="local authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716611" start="15145" end="15153" title="the Best (band)" label="the Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="15366" end="15377" title="the Bahamas" label="the Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q752785" start="15457" end="15464" title="calypso music" label="calypso"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="15469" end="15475" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525440" start="16153" end="16166" title="Michele Soavi" label="Michele Soavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="16369" end="16377" title="new wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q207921" start="16440" end="16456" title="Chariots of Fire" label="Chariots of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q53011" start="16564" end="16577" title="Dario Argento" label="Dario Argento"/>
<link wikidata="Q971109" start="16591" end="16598" title="Inferno (1980 film)" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535201" start="16639" end="16649" title="Nighthawks (1981 film)" label="Nighthawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q40026" start="16672" end="16690" title="Sylvester Stallone" label="Sylvester Stallone"/>
<link wikidata="Q721474" start="16755" end="16764" title="Brad Delp" label="Brad Delp"/>
<link wikidata="Q204289" start="16784" end="16790" title="Boston (band)" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q356986" start="16795" end="16805" title="Levon Helm" label="Levon Helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q600344" start="16811" end="16819" title="The Band" label="The Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q554422" start="16840" end="16852" title="Garth Hudson" label="Garth Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q345217" start="17065" end="17076" title="Lucio Fulci" label="Lucio Fulci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867388" start="17090" end="17101" title="Murder Rock" label="Murder Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q378754" start="17147" end="17157" title="The Church (1989 film)" label="The Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q268679" start="17296" end="17304" title="Iron Man (TV series)" label="Iron Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q215048" start="17405" end="17415" title="supergroup (music)" label="supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335550" start="17433" end="17459" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Powell" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16005" start="17478" end="17485" title="Rainbow (rock band)" label="Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q14341" start="17494" end="17505" title="Cozy Powell" label="Cozy Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456149" start="17511" end="17512" title="3 (1980s band)" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q346123" start="17561" end="17573" title="Robert Berry" label="Robert Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716611" start="18293" end="18301" title="The Best (band)" label="The Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q215835" start="18326" end="18340" title="John Entwistle" label="John Entwistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="18344" end="18351" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q354033" start="18353" end="18362" title="Joe Walsh" label="Joe Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q189635" start="18370" end="18376" title="Eagles (band)" label="Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q490829" start="18378" end="18407" title="Jeff &amp;quot;Skunk&amp;quot; Baxter" label="Jeff &amp;quot;Skunk&amp;quot; Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q852435" start="18411" end="18421" title="Steely Dan" label="Steely Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q506670" start="18426" end="18445" title="The Doobie Brothers" label="The Doobie Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q366819" start="18451" end="18465" title="Simon Phillips (drummer)" label="Simon Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627106" start="18644" end="18656" title="Stuart Smith (musician)" label="Stuart Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q170404" start="18773" end="18782" title="visa (document)" label="work visa"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="18866" end="18877" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716" start="18945" end="18952" title="Samsung" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q487919" start="19068" end="19077" title="The Sweet" label="The Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q384180" start="19163" end="19173" title="Black Moon (album)" label="Black Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499736" start="19197" end="19212" title="In the Hot Seat" label="In the Hot Seat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19384" end="19397" title="#Health issues" label="Health issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q192353" start="19489" end="19500" title="Jethro Tull (band)" label="Jethro Tull"/>
<link wikidata="Q982832" start="20216" end="20231" title="Dave Kilminster" label="Dave Kilminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="20481" end="20493" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785549" start="20627" end="20648" title="High Voltage Festival" label="High Voltage Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q429540" start="20668" end="20694" title="Victoria Park, East London" label="Victoria Park, East London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="20984" end="20994" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="20999" end="21011" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21032" end="21043" title="#Discography" label="Discography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065444" start="21138" end="21143" title="kaiju" label="kaiju"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="21331" end="21337" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="21343" end="21356" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="21361" end="21366" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658821" start="21427" end="21439" title="Marc Bonilla" label="Marc Bonilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368689" start="21521" end="21539" title="Takashi Yoshimatsu" label="Takashi Yoshimatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981144" start="21610" end="21616" title="Tarkus (song)" label="Tarkus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142850" start="21675" end="21703" title="Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12005530" start="21875" end="21890" title="Terje Mikkelsen" label="Terje Mikkelsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q457183" start="21957" end="21979" title="Munich Radio Orchestra" label="Munich Radio Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="22111" end="22117" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592635" start="22190" end="22205" title="Bjørn Ole Rasch" label="Bjørn Ole Rasch"/>
<link wikidata="Q96055292" start="22224" end="22235" title="Grappa Music" label="Simax label"/>
<link wikidata="Q653858" start="22309" end="22324" title="Barbican Centre" label="Barbican Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217163" start="22335" end="22356" title="BBC Concert Orchestra" label="BBC Concert Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q694545" start="22484" end="22507" title="Bowling Green, Kentucky" label="Bowling Green, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896481" start="22627" end="22641" title="Molloy College" label="Molloy College"/>
<link wikidata="Q961808" start="22645" end="22661" title="Rockville Centre" label="Rockville Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="22663" end="22671" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="23033" end="23044" title="Smithsonian" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="23048" end="23064" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6907281" start="23204" end="23212" title="Moogfest" label="Moogfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q200883" start="23243" end="23254" title="Robert Moog" label="Robert Moog"/>
<link wikidata="Q188969" start="23263" end="23296" title="B.B. King" label="B. B. King Blues Club &amp;amp; Grill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="23300" end="23312" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="23382" end="23394" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649385" start="23403" end="23432" title="Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert" label="Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364202" start="23440" end="23448" title="The O2 Arena (London)" label="O2 Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q304885" start="23491" end="23503" title="Chris Squire" label="Chris Squire"/>
<link wikidata="Q355669" start="23508" end="23518" title="Alan White (Yes drummer)" label="Alan White"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="23520" end="23523" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q547947" start="23529" end="23540" title="Simon Kirke" label="Simon Kirke"/>
<link wikidata="Q745517" start="23542" end="23553" title="Bad Company" label="Bad Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q45650" start="23554" end="23558" title="Free (band)" label="Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433763" start="23610" end="23636" title="Fanfare for the Common Man (Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer song)" label="Fanfare for the Common Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q741661" start="23692" end="23702" title="Spinal Tap (band)" label="Spinal Tap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839242" start="23722" end="23740" title="Back from the Dead (Spinal Tap album)" label="Back from the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q815571" start="23838" end="23851" title="Wembley Arena" label="Wembley Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="24889" end="24913" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="24932" end="24942" title="John Lydon" label="John Lydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="25034" end="25043" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="25049" end="25060" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q192814" start="25758" end="25773" title="Harley-Davidson" label="Harley-Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428695" start="26143" end="26157" title="focal dystonia" label="focal dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41482" start="26646" end="26657" title="autopsy" label="post-mortem"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="26753" end="26766" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="26771" end="26781" title="Major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020014" start="27145" end="27165" title="Lancing, West Sussex" label="Lancing, West Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="27261" end="27273" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q348277" start="27412" end="27423" title="Carl Palmer" label="Carl Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q343075" start="27428" end="27437" title="Greg Lake" label="Greg Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q911779" start="28138" end="28149" title="Brian Auger" label="Brian Auger"/>
<link wikidata="Q175102" start="28151" end="28164" title="Jordan Rudess" label="Jordan Rudess"/>
<link wikidata="Q706756" start="28166" end="28178" title="Eddie Jobson" label="Eddie Jobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q318483" start="28195" end="28209" title="Steve Lukather" label="Steve Lukather"/>
<link wikidata="Q554164" start="28211" end="28224" title="Steve Porcaro" label="Steve Porcaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658821" start="28226" end="28238" title="Marc Bonilla" label="Marc Bonilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q29353461" start="28244" end="28258" title="Rachel Flowers" label="Rachel Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28277" end="28291" title=" El Rey Theatre (Los Angeles)" label="El Rey Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q906492" start="28334" end="28342" title="Dystonia" label="Dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332751" start="28808" end="28819" title="avant-garde music" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q434610" start="28829" end="28841" title="Henry Cowell" label="Henry Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623991" start="28858" end="28870" title="string piano" label="string piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q314503" start="28986" end="28995" title="Beat-Club" label="Beat-Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q738928" start="29701" end="29733" title="The Thoughts of Emerlist Davjack" label="The Thoughts of Emerlist Davjack"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="30476" end="30489" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650528" start="30511" end="30521" title="Moog Music" label="Moog Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q188454" start="30523" end="30529" title="Yamaha Corporation" label="Yamaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q386773" start="30535" end="30539" title="Korg" label="Korg"/>
<link wikidata="Q281460" start="30598" end="30609" title="pipe organs" label="pipe organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="30613" end="30624" title="grand piano" label="grand piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099153" start="30628" end="30636" title="clavinet" label="clavinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q212483" start="30658" end="30667" title="Mellotron" label="Mellotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="30793" end="30814" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047705" start="30850" end="30861" title="Yamaha GX-1" label="Yamaha GX-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003506" start="30937" end="30966" title="The Ozark Mountain Daredevils" label="The Ozark Mountain Daredevils"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="31173" end="31186" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677123" start="31226" end="31237" title="Jack McDuff" label="Jack McDuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410936" start="31274" end="31281" title="Action (piano)" label="hammers"/>
<link wikidata="Q899871" start="31817" end="31824" title="fuzzbox" label="fuzzbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="32722" end="32748" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q99234552" start="32875" end="32892" title="ribbon controller" label="ribbon controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q734687" start="33366" end="33374" title="Minimoog" label="Minimoog"/>
<link wikidata="Q677705" start="33455" end="33461" title="Hohner" label="Hohner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099153" start="33462" end="33470" title="clavinet" label="clavinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070396" start="33668" end="33678" title="Nut Rocker" label="Nut Rocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820781" start="33838" end="33852" title="Leslie speaker" label="Leslie speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q174320" start="33970" end="33982" title="oscilloscope" label="oscilloscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q156391" start="34010" end="34018" title="Steinway &amp;amp; Sons" label="Steinway"/>
<link wikidata="Q767833" start="34318" end="34326" title="Polymoog" label="Polymoog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516190" start="34606" end="34612" title="Moog Taurus" label="Taurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q281460" start="34696" end="34706" title="pipe organ" label="pipe organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373645" start="34778" end="34801" title="Royal Albert Hall Organ" label="Royal Albert Hall Organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="34898" end="34911" title="Flag of the United States" label="American flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="34943" end="34954" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35086" end="35111" title="Royal Festival Hall#The organ" label="Royal Festival Hall organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q845639" start="35190" end="35211" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer (album)" label="eponymous debut album"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35377" end="35402" title="Newcastle City Hall#Organ" label="Newcastle City Hall organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q920627" start="35660" end="35666" title="Tarkus" label="Tarkus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047705" start="35889" end="35900" title="Yamaha GX-1" label="Yamaha GX-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092972" start="36017" end="36031" title="Works Volume 1" label="Works Volume 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433763" start="36070" end="36096" title="Fanfare for the Common Man (Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer song)" label="Fanfare for the Common Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="36311" end="36319" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q285467" start="36327" end="36342" title="Olympic Stadium (Montreal)" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q190243" start="36384" end="36399" title="John Paul Jones (musician)" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="36403" end="36415" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="36634" end="36658" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q76364" start="36711" end="36722" title="Hans Zimmer" label="Hans Zimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173900" start="36882" end="36894" title="Korg PS-3300" label="Korg PS-3300"/>
<link wikidata="Q581488" start="37035" end="37045" title="Love Beach" label="Love Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193847" start="37336" end="37346" title="Korg OASYS" label="Korg OASYS"/>
<link wikidata="Q666449" start="37351" end="37362" title="Korg Triton" label="Korg Triton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753848" start="37371" end="37388" title="music workstation" label="music workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445005" start="38208" end="38229" title="Frankfurter Musikpreis" label="Frankfurt Music Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="38263" end="38272" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812441" start="38298" end="38308" title="Musikmesse Frankfurt" label="Musikmesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q694545" start="38356" end="38369" title="Bowling Green, Kentucky" label="Bowling Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658821" start="38941" end="38953" title="Marc Bonilla" label="Marc Bonilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q12005530" start="38955" end="38970" title="Terje Mikkelsen" label="Terje Mikkelsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q310749" start="39053" end="39065" title="Glenn Hughes (English singer)" label="Glenn Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q343075" start="39223" end="39232" title="Greg Lake" label="Greg Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798503" start="39276" end="39283" title="Inferno (soundtrack)" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535201" start="39305" end="39315" title="Nighthawks (1981 film)" label="Nighthawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867388" start="39337" end="39346" title="Murder Rock" label="Murderock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070686" start="39402" end="39413" title="Genma Taisen" label="Harmageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q378754" start="39646" end="39655" title="The Church (1989 film)" label="La Chiesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427858" start="39790" end="39806" title="Fabio Pignatelli" label="Fabio Pignatelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317474" start="39811" end="39817" title="Goblin (band)" label="Goblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399605" start="40118" end="40123" title="Meade Lux Lewis" label="Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q960719" start="40203" end="40216" title="In the Flesh?" label="In the Flesh?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723754" start="40246" end="40267" title="Waiting for the Worms" label="Waiting for the Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="40277" end="40287" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839053" start="40308" end="40329" title="Back Against the Wall" label="Back Against the Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764403" start="40351" end="40360" title="Black Dog (Led Zeppelin song)" label="Black Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="40370" end="40382" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q727362" start="40461" end="40467" title="Ayreon" label="Ayreon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14702640" start="40509" end="40533" title="The Theory of Everything (Ayreon album)" label="The Theory of Everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q741661" start="40549" end="40559" title="Spinal Tap (band)" label="Spinal Tap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839242" start="40594" end="40612" title="Back from the Dead (Spinal Tap album)" label="Back from the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40647" end="40667" title="The Nice#Discography" label="The Nice discography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709426" start="40670" end="40708" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer discography" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer discography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40711" end="40749" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Powell#Discography" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Powell discography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40752" end="40765" title="3 (1980s band)#Discography" label="3 discography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716611" start="40768" end="40776" title="The Best (band)" label="The Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q354033" start="40794" end="40803" title="Joe Walsh" label="Joe Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q490829" start="40805" end="40834" title="Jeff &amp;quot;Skunk&amp;quot; Baxter" label="Jeff &amp;quot;Skunk&amp;quot; Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q215835" start="40836" end="40850" title="John Entwistle" label="John Entwistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q366819" start="40855" end="40869" title="Simon Phillips (drummer)" label="Simon Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="41037" end="41044" title="Cover version" label="covered"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="41048" end="41055" title="Sampling (music)" label="sampled"/>
<link wikidata="Q200867" start="41186" end="41198" title="Gustav Holst" label="Gustav Holst"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="41431" end="41444" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q311389" start="41788" end="41805" title="Alberto Ginastera" label="Alberto Ginastera"/>
<link wikidata="Q669010" start="42223" end="42238" title="West Side Story (musical)" label="West Side Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742729" start="42251" end="42258" title="America (West Side Story song)" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="42269" end="42286" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298" start="42306" end="42320" title="Antonín Dvořák" label="Antonín Dvořák"/>
<link wikidata="Q11985" start="42350" end="42368" title="Symphony No. 9 (Dvořák)" label="From the New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q108597" start="42422" end="42434" title="Dave Brubeck" label="Dave Brubeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293299" start="42508" end="42524" title="Italian Concerto" label="Italian Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071972" start="42607" end="42626" title="Symphonie Espagnole" label="Symphonie Espagnole"/>
<link wikidata="Q224002" start="42636" end="42648" title="Édouard Lalo" label="Édouard Lalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131861" start="42700" end="42719" title="Sergei Rachmaninoff" label="Sergei Rachmaninoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q703971" start="42783" end="42804" title="Ars Longa Vita Brevis (album)" label="Ars Longa Vita Brevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q208224" start="42835" end="42855" title="Brandenburg Concerto" label="Brandenburg Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299710" start="42890" end="42923" title="Karelia Suite" label="Intermezzo from the Karelia Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q45682" start="42932" end="42940" title="Sibelius" label="Sibelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="42998" end="43009" title="Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504156" start="43051" end="43068" title="She Belongs to Me" label="She Belongs to Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="43079" end="43088" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19069" start="43164" end="43185" title="The Magnificent Seven" label="The Magnificent Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q111436" start="43196" end="43211" title="Elmer Bernstein" label="Elmer Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q120631" start="43233" end="43244" title="Nashville Skyline" label="Country Pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="43255" end="43264" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208224" start="43313" end="43333" title="Brandenburg Concerto" label="Brandenburg Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q264315" start="43405" end="43420" title="Allegro barbaro (Bartók)" label="Allegro barbaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q83326" start="43445" end="43456" title="Béla Bartók" label="Béla Bartók"/>
<link wikidata="Q845639" start="43492" end="43517" title="Emerson Lake &amp;amp; Palmer (album)" label="Emerson Lake &amp;amp; Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q845639" start="43600" end="43610" title="Knife-Edge (Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer song)" label="Knife-Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q113286" start="43631" end="43642" title="Sinfonietta (Janáček)" label="Sinfonietta"/>
<link wikidata="Q184933" start="43646" end="43658" title="Leoš Janáček" label="Leoš Janáček"/>
<link wikidata="Q751426" start="43802" end="43815" title="French Suites" label="French Suites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="43843" end="43853" title="J. S. Bach" label="J. S. Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567650" start="43985" end="44003" title="Toccata and Fugue in F major, BWV 540" label="Organ Toccata in F"/>
<link wikidata="Q211971" start="44038" end="44059" title="Well-Tempered Clavier" label="Well-Tempered Clavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q920627" start="44085" end="44091" title="Tarkus" label="Tarkus"/>
<link wikidata="Q655122" start="44155" end="44166" title="Bobby Troup" label="Bobby Troup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839134" start="44185" end="44212" title="The Girl Can&amp;#x27;t Help It (song)" label="The Girl Can&amp;#x27;t Help It"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808658" start="44250" end="44258" title="Assembly (bugle call)" label="Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547148" start="44259" end="44269" title="bugle call" label="bugle call"/>
<link wikidata="Q724981" start="44320" end="44345" title="Pictures at an Exhibition" label="Pictures at an Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q132682" start="44356" end="44373" title="Modest Mussorgsky" label="Modest Mussorgsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q769424" start="44426" end="44451" title="Pictures at an Exhibition (Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer album)" label="Pictures at an Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q208205" start="44519" end="44529" title="Bill Evans" label="Bill Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668116" start="44560" end="44569" title="Interplay (Bill Evans album)" label="Interplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="44588" end="44599" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q109340328" start="44625" end="44662" title="Ballads and Blues (Miles Davis album)" label="Ballads and Blues (Miles Davis album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512122" start="44670" end="44682" title="Walkin&amp;#x27;" label="Walkin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070396" start="44700" end="44710" title="Nut Rocker" label="Nut Rocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378199" start="44729" end="44739" title="Kim Fowley" label="Kim Fowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="44756" end="44767" title="Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821898" start="44863" end="44868" title="Rodeo (ballet)" label="Rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="44878" end="44891" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502208" start="44917" end="44937" title="Shortnin&amp;#x27; Bread" label="Shortnin&amp;#x27; Bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177219" start="44954" end="44973" title="Turkey in the Straw" label="Turkey in the Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q12005789" start="45050" end="45072" title="The Girl I Left Behind" label="The Girl I Left Behind"/>
<link wikidata="Q77425249" start="45101" end="45110" title="And did those feet in ancient time" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q354250" start="45121" end="45139" title="Hubert Parry" label="C. Hubert H. Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q277463" start="45159" end="45173" title="Maple Leaf Rag" label="Maple Leaf Rag"/>
<link wikidata="Q191499" start="45184" end="45196" title="Scott Joplin" label="Scott Joplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121027" start="45207" end="45221" title="Works Volume 2" label="Works Volume 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q311389" start="45288" end="45305" title="Alberto Ginastera" label="Alberto Ginastera"/>
<link wikidata="Q24232" start="45400" end="45410" title="St. Thomas (song)" label="St. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="45420" end="45429" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q299208" start="45461" end="45474" title="Sonny Rollins" label="Sonny Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629948" start="45496" end="45522" title="Fanfare for the Common Man" label="Fanfare for the Common Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="45533" end="45546" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q253716" start="45566" end="45580" title="Carmina Burana (Orff)" label="Carmina Burana"/>
<link wikidata="Q44086" start="45591" end="45600" title="Carl Orff" label="Carl Orff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692280" start="45785" end="45796" title="Lovely Joan" label="Lovely Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207947" start="45845" end="45867" title="Ralph Vaughan Williams" label="Ralph Vaughan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q303508" start="46035" end="46046" title="The Planets" label="The Planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q200867" start="46057" end="46069" title="Gustav Holst" label="Gustav Holst"/>
<link wikidata="Q911487" start="46129" end="46145" title="Romeo and Juliet (Prokofiev)" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q49481" start="46161" end="46177" title="Sergei Prokofiev" label="Sergei Prokofiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q146977" start="46230" end="46249" title="Étude Op. 10, No. 1 (Chopin)" label="Étude Op. 10, No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="46254" end="46269" title="Frédéric Chopin" label="Frédéric Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813109" start="47676" end="47687" title="Karn Evil 9" label="Karn Evil 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747779" start="51326" end="51346" title="Tiger in a Spotlight" label="Tiger in a Spotlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898108" start="53964" end="54000" title="Up the Elephant and Round the Castle" label="Up the Elephant and Round the Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559713" start="54025" end="54037" title="Jim Davidson" label="Jim Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q163063" start="54089" end="54102" title="Peter Hammill" label="Peter Hammill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846975" start="54161" end="54170" title="Troy Tate" label="Troy Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902362" start="56334" end="56343" title="Big Train" label="Big Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396222" start="56351" end="56362" title="Kevin Eldon" label="Kevin Eldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593880" start="56386" end="56397" title="Roman slave" label="Roman slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="56424" end="56440" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q863940" start="56515" end="56552" title="Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge" label="Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572814" start="56744" end="56773" title="List of Hammond organ players" label="List of Hammond organ players"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590740" start="56776" end="56808" title="List of Moog synthesiser players" label="List of Moog synthesiser players"/>
<link wikidata="Q6222152" start="57027" end="57037" title="John Blake (journalist)" label="John Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091115" start="57441" end="57469" title="NAMM Oral History Program" label="NAMM Oral History Collection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55917" wikidata="Q8605" url="?curid=55917" title="Simón Bolívar">
<text>Simón José Antonio de la Santísima Trinidad Bolívar Palacios Ponte y Blanco (24July 178317December 1830) was a Venezuelan statesman and military officer who led what are currently the countries of Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, Peru, Panama, and Bolivia to independence from the Spanish Empire. He is known colloquially as &quot;El Libertador&quot;, or the &quot;Liberator of America&quot;.

Simón Bolívar was born in Caracas in the Captaincy General of Venezuela into a wealthy family of American-born Spaniards (criollo) but lost both parents as a child. Bolívar was educated abroad and lived in Spain, as was common for men of upper-class families in his day. While living in Madrid from 1800 to 1802, he was introduced to Enlightenment philosophy and married María Teresa Rodríguez del Toro y Alaysa, who died in Venezuela from yellow fever in 1803. From 1803 to 1805, Bolívar embarked on a Grand Tour that ended in Rome, where he swore to end the Spanish rule in the Americas. In 1807, Bolívar returned to Venezuela and promoted Venezuelan independence to other wealthy creoles. When the Spanish authority in the Americas weakened due to Napoleon&#x27;s Peninsular War, Bolívar became a zealous combatant and politician in the Spanish-American wars of independence.

Bolívar began his military career in 1810 as a militia officer in the Venezuelan War of Independence, fighting Royalist forces for the first and second Venezuelan republics and the United Provinces of New Granada. After Spanish forces subdued New Granada in 1815, Bolívar was forced into exile on Jamaica. In Haiti, Bolívar met and befriended Haitian revolutionary leader Alexandre Pétion. After promising to abolish slavery in Spanish America, Bolívar received military support from Pétion and returned to Venezuela. He established a third republic in 1817 and then crossed the Andes to liberate New Granada in 1819. Bolívar and his allies defeated the Spanish in New Granada in 1819, Venezuela and Panama in 1821, Ecuador in 1822, Peru in 1824, and Bolivia in 1825. Venezuela, New Granada, Ecuador, and Panama were merged into the Republic of Colombia (Gran Colombia), with Bolívar as president there and in Peru and Bolivia.

In his final years, Bolívar became increasingly disillusioned with the South American republics, and distanced from them because of his centralist ideology. He was successively removed from his offices until he resigned the presidency of Colombia and died of tuberculosis in 1830. His legacy is diverse and far-reaching within Latin America and beyond. He is regarded as a hero and national and cultural icon throughout Latin America; the nations of Bolivia and Venezuela (as the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) are named after him, and he has been memorialized all over the world in the form of public art or street names and in popular culture.

==Early life and family==
Simón Bolívar was born on 24 July 1783 in Caracas, capital of the Captaincy General of Venezuela, the fourth and youngest child of and . He was baptized as Simón José Antonio de la Santísima Trinidad Bolívar y Palacios on 30 July. The first of Bolívar&#x27;s family to have emigrated to the Americas was a similarly named minor Spanish governmental official named Simón de Bolívar, who had been a notary in the Spanish Basque region, and who had later arrived in Venezuela in the 1580s. The earlier Simón de Bolívar&#x27;s descendants had served in the colonial bureaucracy and had married into various wealthy Caracas families over the years. By the time Simón Bolívar was born, the Bolívar family was one of the wealthiest and most prestigious &quot;criollo&quot; (creole) families in the Spanish Americas.

Simón Bolívar&#x27;s childhood was described by British historian John Lynch as &quot;at once privileged and deprived.&quot; Juan Vicente died of tuberculosis on 19 January 1786, leaving María de la Concepción Palacios and her father, , as legal guardians over the Bolívar children&#x27;s inheritances. Those children – (born 1777), (born 1779), (born 1781), and Simón – were raised separately from each other and their mother, and, following colonial custom, by African house slaves; Simón was raised by a slave named whom he viewed as both a motherly and fatherly figure. On 6 July 1792, María de la Concepción also died of tuberculosis. Believing that his family would inherit the Bolívars&#x27; wealth, Feliciano Palacios arranged marriages for María Antonia and Juana and, before dying on 5 December 1793, assigned custody of Juan Vicente and Simón to his sons, Juan Félix Palacios and , respectively. Bolívar came to loathe Carlos Palacios, who had no interest in the boy other than his inheritance.
===Education and first journey to Europe: 1793–1802===
As a child, Bolívar was notoriously unruly and neglected his studies. Before his mother died, he spent two years under the tutelage of the Venezuelan lawyer Miguel José Sanz at the direction of the , the Spanish court of appeals in Caracas. In 1793, Carlos enrolled Bolívar at a run by Venezuelan educator Simón Rodríguez. In June 1795, Bolívar fled his uncle&#x27;s custody for the house of his sister María Antonia and her husband. The couple sought formal recognition of his change of residence, but the Real Audiencia decided the matter in favor of Palacios, who sent Simón to live with Rodríguez.

After two months there, the Real Audiencia directed that he be returned to the Palacios family home. Bolívar promised the Real Audiencia that he would focus on his education and was subsequently taught full-time by Rodríguez and the Venezuelan intellectuals Andrés Bello and . In 1797, Rodríguez&#x27;s connection to the pro-independence Gual and España conspiracy forced him to go into exile, and Bolívar was enrolled in an honorary militia force. When he was commissioned as an officer after a year, his uncles Carlos and decided to send Bolívar to join the latter in Madrid. There, Esteban was friends with Queen Maria Luisa&#x27;s favorite, Manuel Mallo.


On 19 January 1799, Bolívar boarded the Spanish warship &quot;San Ildefonso&quot; at the port of La Guaira, bound for Cádiz. He arrived in Santoña, on the northern coast of Spain, in May 1799. A little over a week later, he arrived in Madrid and joined Esteban, who found Bolívar to be &quot;very ignorant.&quot; Esteban asked Gerónimo Enrique de Uztáriz y Tovar, a Caracas native and government official, to educate Bolívar. Bolívar moved into Uztáriz&#x27;s residence in February 1800 and was educated in the Classics, literature, and social studies.

At the same time, Mallo fell out of the Queen&#x27;s favor and Manuel Godoy, her previous favorite, returned to power. As members of Mallo&#x27;s faction at court, Esteban was arrested on pretense, and Bolívar was banished from court following a public incident at the Puerta de Toledo over the wearing of diamonds without royal permission. Bolívar also at this time met María Teresa Rodríguez del Toro y Alaysa, the daughter of another wealthy Caracas creole. They were engaged in August 1800, but were separated when the del Toros left Madrid for a summer home in Bilbao. After Uztáriz left Madrid for a government assignment in Teruel in 1801, Bolívar himself left for Bilbao and remained there when the del Toros returned to the capital in August 1801. Early in 1802, Bolívar traveled to Paris while he awaited permission to return to Madrid, which was granted in April.

===Return to Venezuela and second journey to Europe: 1802–1805===

Bolívar and del Toro, aged 18 and 21 respectively, were married in Madrid on 26 May 1802. The couple boarded the &quot;San Ildefonso&quot; in La Coruña on 15 June and sailed for La Guaira, where they arrived on 12 July. They settled in Caracas, where del Toro fell ill and died of yellow fever on 22 January 1803. Bolívar was devastated by del Toro&#x27;s death and later told Louis Peru de Lacroix, one of his generals and biographers, that he swore to never remarry. By July 1803, Bolívar had decided to leave Venezuela for Europe. He entrusted his estates to an agent and his brother and in October boarded a ship bound for Cádiz.

Bolívar arrived in Spain in December 1803, then traveled to Madrid to console his father-in-law. In March 1804, the municipal authorities of Madrid ordered all non-residents in the city to leave to alleviate a bread shortage brought about by Spain&#x27;s resumed hostilities with Britain. Over April, Bolívar and , a childhood friend and relative of his wife, made their way to Paris and arrived in time for Napoleon to be proclaimed Emperor of the French on 18 May 1804. They rented an apartment on the and met with other South Americans such as Carlos de Montúfar, Vicente Rocafuerte, and Simón Rodríguez, who joined Bolívar and del Toro in their apartment. While in Paris, Bolívar began a with the Countess Dervieu du Villars, at whose salon he likely met the naturalists Alexander von Humboldt and Aimé Bonpland, who had traveled through much of Spanish America from 1799 to 1804. Bolívar allegedly discussed Spanish American independence with them.

In April 1805, Bolívar left Paris with Rodríguez and del Toro on a Grand Tour to Italy. Beginning in Lyon, they traveled through the Savoy Alps and then to Milan. The trio arrived on 26 May 1805 and witnessed Napoleon&#x27;s coronation as King of Italy. From Milan, they traveled down the Po Valley to Venice, then to Florence, and then finally Rome, where Bolívar met, among others, Pope Pius VII, French writer Germaine de Staël, and Humboldt again. Rome&#x27;s sites and history excited Bolívar. On 18 August 1805, when he, del Toro, and Rodríguez traveled to the Mons Sacer, where the plebs had seceded from Rome in the 4th century BC, Bolívar swore to end Spanish rule in the Americas.

==Political and military career==

By April 1806, Bolívar had returned to Paris and desired passage to Venezuela, where Venezuelan revolutionary Francisco de Miranda had just attempted an invasion with American volunteers. Britain&#x27;s command of the sea after the 1805 Battle of Trafalgar obliged Bolívar to board an American ship in Hamburg in October 1806. Bolívar arrived in Charleston, South Carolina, in January 1807, and from there traveled to Washington, D.C., Philadelphia, New York City, and Boston. After six months in the United States, Bolívar returned to Philadelphia and sailed for Venezuela, where he arrived in June 1807. He began to meet with other creole elites to discuss independence from Spain. Finding himself to be far more radical than the rest of Caracas high society, however, Bolívar occupied himself with a property dispute with a neighbor, .

In 1807–08, Napoleon invaded the Iberian peninsula and replaced the rulers of Spain with his brother, Joseph. This news arrived in Venezuela in July 1808. Napoleonic rule was rejected and Venezuelan creoles, though still loyal to Ferdinand VII of Spain, sought to form their own local government in place of the existing Spanish government. On 24 November 1808, a group of creoles presented a petition demanding an independent government to Juan de Casas, the Captain-General of Venezuela, and were arrested. Bolívar, though he did not sign the petition and thus was not arrested, was warned to cease hosting or attending seditious meetings. In May 1809, Casas was replaced by Vicente Emparán and his staff, which included Fernando Rodríguez del Toro. The creoles also resisted Emparán&#x27;s government, despite his friendlier disposition towards them.

By February 1810, French victories in Spain prompted the dissolution of the anti-French Spanish government in favor of a five-man regency council for Ferdinand VII. This news, and two delegates that included Carlos de Montúfar, arrived in Venezuela on 17 April 1810. Two days later, the creoles succeeded in deposing and then expelling Emparán, and created the Supreme Junta of Caracas, independent from the Spanish regency but not Ferdinand VII. Absent from Caracas for the coup, Bolívar and his brother returned to the city and offered their services to the Supreme Junta as diplomats. In May 1810, Juan Vicente was sent to the United States to buy weapons, while Simón secured a place in a diplomatic mission to Britain with the lawyer and Andrés Bello by paying for the mission. The trio boarded a British ship in June 1810 and arrived at Portsmouth on 10 July 1810.

The three delegates first met Miranda at his London residence, despite instructions from the Supreme Junta to avoid him, and thereafter received the benefit of his connections and consultation. On 16 July 1810, the Venezuelan delegation met Britain&#x27;s foreign secretary, Richard Wellesley, at Apsley House. Led by Bolívar, the Venezuelans argued in favor of Venezuelan independence, which Wellesley stated that it was intolerable for Anglo-Spanish relations. Subsequent meetings produced no recognition or concrete support from Britain. Finding that he had many shared beliefs with Miranda, however, Bolívar convinced him to come back to Venezuela. On 22 September 1810, Bolívar left for Venezuela while López and Bello remained in London as diplomats, and arrived in La Guaira on 5 December. Although the British government wanted Miranda to remain in Britain, they could not prevent his departure, and he arrived in Venezuela later in December.

===Venezuela: 1811–1812===

While Bolívar was in England, the Supreme Junta passed liberal economic reforms and began to hold elections for representatives to a congress to be held in Caracas. It had also alienated Caracas from the Venezuelan provinces of Coro, Maracaibo, and Guayana, which professed loyalty to the regency council, and began hostilities with them. Co-founding the Patriotic Society, a political organization advocating for independence from Spain, Bolívar and Miranda campaigned for and secured the latter&#x27;s election to the congress. The congress first met on 2 March 1811 and declared its allegiance to Ferdinand VII. After it was discovered that one of the men leading the congress was a Spanish agent who had escaped with military documents, however, discourse – which Bolívar was prominent in – changed decidedly in favor of independence over 3 and 4 July. Finally, on 5 July, the congress declared Venezuela&#x27;s independence.

The declaration of independence created the first Republic of Venezuela. It had a weak base of support and enemies in conservative whites, disenfranchised people of color, and the already hostile Venezuelan provinces, which received troops and supplies from the Captaincy-Generals of Puerto Rico and Cuba. On 13 July 1811, the republic raised militias to fight the pro-Spanish Royalists. The congress appointed , the , to command these forces, which opened a breach between Bolívar and Miranda. Bolívar and del Toro were close friends, while del Toro and Miranda and their families were enemies. After he failed to suppress a Royalist uprising in the city of Valencia later in July, the congress replaced del Toro with Miranda, and he on 13 August. As a condition of assuming command of the Republican forces, Miranda had Bolívar stripped of his command of a militia unit. Bolívar nonetheless fought in the Valencia campaign as part of del Toro&#x27;s militia and was selected by Miranda to bring news of its recapture to Caracas, where he argued for more punitive and forceful campaigning against the Royalists.

Beginning in November 1811, Royalist forces began pushing back the Republicans from the north and east. On 26 March 1812, a powerful earthquake devastated Republican Venezuela; Caracas itself was almost totally destroyed. Bolívar, who was still near Caracas, rushed into the city to participate in the rescue of survivors and exhumation of the dead. The earthquake destroyed public support for the republic, as it was believed to have been divine retribution for declaring independence from Spain. By April, a Royalist army under the Spanish naval officer Juan Domingo de Monteverde overran western Venezuela. Miranda, retreating east with a disintegrating army, ordered Bolívar to assume command of the coastal city of Puerto Cabello and its fortress, which contained Royalist prisoners and most of the republic&#x27;s remaining arms and ammunition.

Bolívar arrived at Puerto Cabello on 4 May 1812. On 30 June, an officer of the fort&#x27;s garrison loyal to the Royalists released its prisoners, armed them, and turned its cannons on Puerto Cabello. Weakened by shelling, defections, and lack of supplies, Bolívar and his remaining troops fled for La Guaira on 6 July. Believing the republic to be doomed, Miranda decided to capitulate, shocking Bolívar and other Republican officers. After formally surrendering his command to Monteverde on 25 July, Miranda made his way to La Guaira, where a group of officers including Bolívar arrested Miranda on 30 July on charges of treason against the republic. La Guaira declared for the Royalists the next day and closed its port on Monteverde&#x27;s orders. Miranda was taken into Spanish custody and moved to a prison in Cádiz, where he died on 16 July 1816.

===New Granada and Venezuela: 1812–1815===
Bolívar escaped La Guaira early on 31 July 1812 and rode to Caracas, where he hid from arrest in the home of , the . Bolívar and Casa León convinced Francisco Iturbe, a friend of the Bolívar family and of Monteverde, to intercede on Bolívar&#x27;s behalf and secure escape from Venezuela for him. Iturbe persuaded Monteverde to issue Bolívar a passport for his role in Miranda&#x27;s arrest, and on 27 August he sailed for the island of Curaçao. He and his uncles&#x27; Francisco and José Félix Ribas arrived on 1 September. Late in October, the exiles arranged for passage west to the city of Cartagena to offer their services as military leaders to the United Provinces of New Granada against the Royalists. They arrived in November and were welcomed by Manuel Rodríguez Torices, president of the , who instructed his commanding general, Pierre Labatut, to give Bolívar a military command. Labatut, a former partisan of Miranda, begrudgingly obliged and on 1 December 1812 placed Bolívar in command of the 70-man garrison of a town on the lower Magdalena River.

While en route to his posting, Bolívar issued the Cartagena Manifesto, outlining what he believed to be the causes of the Venezuelan republic&#x27;s defeat and his political program. In particular, Bolívar called for the disparate New Granadan republics to help him invade Venezuela to prevent a Royalist invasion of New Granada. Bolívar arrived on the Magdalena River on 21 December and, in spite of orders from Labatut to not act without his direction, launched an offensive that secured control of the Magdalena River from Royalist forces by 8 January 1813. In February, he joined forces with Republican colonel Manuel del Castillo y Rada, who requested Bolívar&#x27;s assistance with stopping a Royalist advance into New Granada from Venezuela, and captured the city of Cúcuta from the Royalists.

In early March 1813, Bolívar set up his headquarters in Cúcuta and sent José Félix Ribas to request permission to invade Venezuela. Though rewarded with honorary citizenship in New Granada and a promotion to the rank of brigadier general, that permission did not come until 7 May because of del Castillo&#x27;s opposition to the invasion. When a limited invasion was permitted, Castillo resigned his command and was succeeded by Francisco de Paula Santander. On 14 May, Bolívar launched the Admirable Campaign, in which he issued the Decree of War to the Death, ordering the death of all Spaniards in South America not actively aiding his forces. Within six months, Bolívar pushed all the way to Caracas, which he entered on 6 August, and then drove Monteverde out of Venezuela in October. Bolívar returned to Caracas on 14 October and was named &quot;The Liberator&quot; (&quot;El Libertador&quot;) by its town council, a title first given to him by the citizens of the Venezuelan town of Mérida on 23 May.

On 2 January 1814, Bolívar was made the dictator of a Second Republic of Venezuela, which retained the weaknesses of the first republic. Though all of Venezuela but Maracaibo, Coro, and Guayana was controlled by Republicans, Bolívar only governed western Venezuela. The east was controlled by Santiago Mariño, a Venezuelan Republican who had fought Monteverde in the east throughout 1813 and was unwilling to subordinate himself to Bolívar. Venezuela was economically devastated and could not support the republic&#x27;s armies, and people of color remained disenfranchised and thus unsupportive of the republic. The republic was assailed from all sides by slave revolts and Royalist forces, especially the Legion of Hell, an army of &quot;llaneros&quot; – the horsemen of the Llanos, to the south – led by the Spanish warlord José Tomás Boves. Beginning in February 1814, Boves surged out of the Llanos and overwhelmed the republic, occupying Caracas on 16 July and then destroying Mariño&#x27;s powerbase on 5 December at the Battle of Urica, where Boves died.

As Boves approached Caracas, Bolívar ordered the city stripped of its gold and silver, which was moved through La Guaira to Barcelona, Venezuela, and from there to Cumaná. Bolívar then led 20,000 of its citizens east. He arrived in Barcelona on 2 August, but following another defeat at the Battle of Aragua de Barcelona on 17 August 1814, he moved to Cumaná. On 26 August, he sailed with Mariño to Margarita Island with the treasure. The officer in control of the island, Manuel Piar, declared Bolívar and Mariño to be traitors and forced them to return to the mainland. There, Ribas also accused Bolívar and Mariño of treachery, confiscated the treasure, and then exiled the two on 8 September.

Bolívar arrived in Cartagena on 19 September and then met with the New Granadan congress in Tunja, which tasked him with subduing the rival Free and Independent State of Cundinamarca. On 12 December, Bolívar captured Cundinamarca&#x27;s capital, Bogotá, and was given command of New Granada&#x27;s armies in January 1815. Bolívar next grappled with del Castillo, who had taken control of Cartagena. Bolívar for six weeks. His change of focus allowed the Royalist forces to regain control of the Magdalena. On 8 May, Bolívar made a truce with del Castillo, resigned his command, and sailed for self-exile on Jamaica as a result of this error. In July, 8,000 Spanish soldiers commanded by Spanish general Pablo Morillo landed at Santa Marta and then , which capitulated on 6 December; del Castillo was executed.

===Jamaica, Haiti, Venezuela, and New Granada: 1815–1819===
Bolívar arrived in Kingston, Jamaica, on 14 May 1815 and, as in his earlier exile on Curaçao, ruminated on the fall of the Venezuelan and New Granadan republics. He wrote extensively, requesting assistance from Britain and corresponding with merchants based in the Caribbean. This culminated in September 1815 with the Jamaica Letter, in which Bolívar again laid out his ideology and vision of the future of the Americas. On 9 December, the Venezuelan pirate Renato Beluche brought Bolívar news from New Granada and asked him to join the Republican community in exile in Haiti. Bolívar tentatively accepted and escaped assassination that night when his manservant mistakenly killed his paymaster as part of a Spanish plot. He left Jamaica eight days later, arrived in Les Cayes on 24 December, and on 2 January 1816 was introduced to Alexandre Pétion, President of the Republic of Haiti by a mutual friend. Bolívar and Pétion impressed and befriended each other and, after Bolívar pledged to free every slave in the areas he occupied, Pétion gave him money and military supplies.

Returning to Les Cayes, Bolívar held a conference with the Republican leaders in Haiti and was made supreme leader with Mariño as his chief of staff. The Republicans departed Les Cayes for Venezuela on 31 March 1816 and followed the Antilles eastward. After a delay to allow a lover of Bolívar&#x27;s to join the fleet, it arrived on 2 May at Margarita Island, controlled by Republican commander Juan Bautista Arismendi. Bolívar next moved to the mainland, where he declared the emancipation of all slaves and annulled of the Decree of War to the Death. He seized Carúpano on 31 May and sent Mariño and Piar into Guayana to build their own army, then took and held Ocumare de la Costa from 6 to 14 July, when it was recaptured by the Royalists. Bolívar fled by sea to Güiria where, on 22 August, he was deposed by Mariño and Venezuelan Republican José Francisco Bermúdez.

Bolívar returned to Haiti by early September, where Pétion again agreed to assist him. In his absence, the Republican leaders scattered across Venezuela, concentrating in the Llanos, and became disunited warlords. Unwilling to recognize Mariño&#x27;s leadership, Arismendi wrote to Bolívar and dispatched New Granadan Republican Francisco Antonio Zea to convince him to return. Bolívar and Zea set sail for Venezuela on 21 December with Luis Brión, a Dutch merchant, and arrived ten days later at Barcelona. There, Bolívar announced his return and called for a congress for a new, third republic. He wrote to the Republican leaders, especially José Antonio Páez, who controlled most of the western Llanos, to unite under his leadership. On 8 January 1817, Bolívar marched towards Caracas but was defeated at the Battle of Clarines and pursued to Barcelona by a larger Royalist force. At Bolívar&#x27;s request, Mariño arrived on 8 February with Bermúdez, who then reconciled with Bolívar, and forced a Royalist withdrawal. 

Even with their combined forces, however, Bolívar, Mariño, and Bermúdez could not hold Barcelona. Instead, on 25 March 1817, Bolívar began moving south to join Piar in Guayana, Piar&#x27;s power base, and establish his own economic and political base there. Bolívar met Piar on 4 April, promoted him to the rank of general of the army, and then joined a force of Piar&#x27;s troops besieging the city of Angostura (now Ciudad Bolívar) on 2 May. Meanwhile, Mariño went east to reestablish his power base and on 8 May convened a congress of ten men, including Brión and Zea, that named Mariño as supreme commander of the Republican forces. This backfired and provoked the defection of 30 officers, including Rafael Urdaneta and Antonio José de Sucre, to Bolívar. On 30 June, Bolívar granted Piar leave of absence at his request, and then issued an arrest warrant on 23 July after Piar began fomenting rebellion, alleging that Bolívar had dismissed him because of his mulatto heritage. Piar was captured on 27 September as he fled to join Mariño and was brought to Angostura, where he was executed by firing squad on 16 October. Bolívar then sent Sucre to reconcile with Mariño, who pledged loyalty to Bolívar on 26 January 1818.

On 17 July 1817, Angostura fell to Bolívar&#x27;s forces, which gained control of the Orinoco River in early August. Angostura became the provisional Republican capital and in September, Bolívar began creating formal political and military structures for the republic. Following a meeting at San Juan de Payara on 30 January 1818, Páez recognized Bolívar as supreme leader. In February 1818, the Republicans moved north and took Calabozo, where , who had returned to Venezuela a year earlier after conquering Republican New Granada. Bolívar next advanced towards Caracas, but was defeated while en route at the on 16 March. He escaped assassination by Spanish infiltrators in April. Illness and additional Republican defeats obliged Bolívar to return to Angostura in May. For the rest of the year, he focused on administering the republic, rebuilding its armed forces, and organizing elections for a national congress that would meet in 1819.

===Gran Colombia: 1819–1830===
The congress met in Angostura on 15 February 1819. There, Bolívar gave a speech in which he advocated for a centralized government modeled on the British government and racial equality, and relinquished civil authority to the congress. On 16 February, the congress elected Bolívar as president and Zea as vice president. On 27 February, Bolívar left Angostura to rejoin Páez in the west and against Morillo, albeit ineffectively. In May, as the annual wet season was beginning in the Llanos, Bolívar met with his officers and revealed his intention to invade and liberate New Granada from Royalist occupation, which he had prepared for by sending Santander to build up Republican forces in Casanare Province in August 1818. On 27 May, Bolívar marched with more than 2,000 soldiers toward the Andes and left Páez, Mariño, Urdaneta, and Bermúdez to tie down Morillo&#x27;s forces in Venezuela.

Bolívar entered Casanare Province with his army on 4 June 1819, then met up with Santander at Tame, Arauca, on 11 June. The combined Republican force reached the Eastern Range of the Andes on 22 June and began a grueling crossing. On 6 July, the Republicans descended from the Andes at Socha and into the plains of New Granada. After a brief convalescence, the Republicans made rapid progress against the forces of Spanish colonel José María Barreiro Manjón until, on 7 August, the Royalists were routed at the Battle of Boyacá. On 10 August, Bolívar entered Bogotá, which the Spanish officials had hastily abandoned, and captured the viceregal treasury and armories. After sending forces to secure Republican control of central New Granada, Bolívar paraded through Bogotá on 18 September with Santander.

Desiring to merge New Granada and Venezuela into a &quot;greater republic of Colombia&quot;, Bolívar first established a provisional government in Bogotá with Santander, and then left to resume campaigning against the Royalists in Venezuela on 20 September 1819. En route, he learned that Zea had been replaced as vice president in September 1819 by Arismendi, who was conspiring with Mariño against Urdaneta and Bermúdez. Bolívar arrived in Angostura on 11 December and, by being conciliatory, defused the plot. He then proposed the merging of New Granada and Venezuela to the congress on 14 December, which was approved. On 17 December, the congress issued a decree creating the Republic of Colombia, including the regions of Venezuela, New Granada, and the still Spanish-controlled Real Audiencia of Quito, and elected Bolívar and Zea president and vice president respectively.

After Christmas Day, 1819, Bolívar left Angostura to direct campaigns against Royalist forces along the Caribbean coasts of Venezuela and New Granada. He met with Santander in Bogotá in March 1820, then rode to Cúcuta and inspected Republican forces in northern Colombia over April and May 1820. Meanwhile, Morillo&#x27;s military and political position was fatally undermined by , which forced Ferdinand VII to accept a liberal constitution in March. News of the mutiny and its consequences arrived in Colombia in March and was followed by orders from Spain to Morillo to publicize the constitution and negotiate a peace that would return Colombia to the Spanish Empire. Bolívar and Morillo, seeking to gain leverage over each other, delayed talks until 21 November, when Colombian and Royalist delegates met in Trujillo, Venezuela. The delegates completed on 25 November, establishing a six-month truce, a prisoner exchange, and basic rights for combatants. Bolívar and Morillo signed the treaties on 25 and 26 November, then met the next day at . After this meeting, Morillo turned his command over to Spanish general Miguel de la Torre and departed for Spain on 17 December.

In February 1821, as Bolívar was traveling from Bogotá to Cúcuta in anticipation of the opening of a new congress there, he learned that Royalist-controlled Maracaibo had defected to Colombia and been occupied by Urdaneta. La Torre protested to Bolívar, who refused to return Maracaibo, leading to a renewal of hostilities on 28 April. Over May and June, Colombia&#x27;s armies made rapid progress until, on 24 June, Bolívar and Páez decisively defeated La Torre at the Battle of Carabobo. All Royalist forces remaining in Venezuela were eliminated by August 1823. Bolívar entered Caracas in triumph on 29 June, and issued a decree on 16 July dividing Venezuela into three military zones governed by Páez, Bermúdez, and Mariño. Bolívar then met with the Congress of Cúcuta, which had ratified the formation of Gran Colombia and elected him as president and Santander as vice president in September. Bolívar accepted and was sworn in on 3 October, although he protested the establishment of a precedent of military leaders as head of the Colombian state.

====Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia: 1821–1826====
After the Battle of Carabobo, Bolívar turned his attention south, to Pasto, Colombia; Quito and the Free Province of Guayaquil, Ecuador; and the Viceroyalty of Peru. Pasto and Quito were Royalist strongholds, while Guayaquil had declared its independence on 9 October 1820 and had been garrisoned by Sucre on Bolívar&#x27;s orders in January 1821. Panama declared its independence on 28 November 1821 and joined Colombia. Peru had been invaded by a Republican army led by Argentine general José de San Martín, who had liberated Chile and Peru, and Bolívar feared San Martín would absorb Ecuador into Peru. In October 1821, after congress empowered him to secure Ecuador for Colombia, Bolívar assembled an army in Bogotá that departed on 13 December 1821. His advance was halted by illness and a Pyrrhic victory at the in southern Colombia on 7 April 1822.

To the south, Sucre, who had been trapped in Guayaquil by Royalist advances from Quito, now advanced, decisively defeated the Royalists at the Battle of Pichincha on 24 May 1822, and occupied Quito. On 6 June, Pasto surrendered, and ten days later Bolívar paraded through Quito with Sucre. He also met the Ecuadorian Republican Manuela Sáenz, the wife of an English doctor, with whom he began a lasting affair. From Quito, Bolívar traveled to Guayaquil in anticipation of a meeting with San Martín to discuss the city&#x27;s status and to rally support for its annexation by Colombia. When San Martín arrived in Guayaquil on 26 July, Bolívar had already secured Guayaquil for Colombia, and the two-day Guayaquil Conference produced no agreement between Bolívar and San Martín. Ill, politically isolated, and disillusioned, San Martín resigned from his offices and went into exile.

Over the rest of 1822, Bolívar traveled around Ecuador to complete its annexation while dispatching officers to suppress repeated rebellions in Pasto and resisting calls to return to Bogotá or Venezuela. Meanwhile, Royalist forces under general José de Canterac . After initially refusing Colombian assistance, the Peruvian congress asked Bolívar several times in 1823 to assume command of their forces. Bolívar responded by sending an army under Sucre to assist, then delayed his own departure to Peru until he obtained permission from the Colombian congress on 3 August. When Bolívar arrived in Lima, Peru&#x27;s capital, on 1 September, Peru was split between two rival presidents, José de la Riva Agüero and José Bernardo de Tagle, and the Royalists under the Viceroy of Peru, José de la Serna.

In November 1823, Riva Agüero, who plotted with the Royalists against Bolívar, was betrayed by his officers to Bolívar and exiled from Peru. While Bolívar was bedridden with fever over the first two months of 1824, Tagle defected to the Royalists with the garrison and city of Callao and briefly took Lima. In response, the Peruvian congress named Bolívar dictator of Peru on 10 February 1824. Bolívar moved to northern Peru in March and began assembling an army. His repeated demands for additional men and money strained his relationship with Santander.

In May 1823, conservative Royalist general Pedro Antonio Olañeta, based in the region of Upper Peru, against la Serna. Bolívar seized the opportunity to advance into the Junín region, where he defeated Canterac at the Battle of Junín on 6 August, driving them out of Peru. Choosing to ignore Olañeta, la Serna ordered his forces to concentrate at Cuzco to face Bolívar. Heavy rainfall in September halted Bolívar&#x27;s advance, and on 6 October he gave command of the army to Sucre and moved to Huancayo to manage political affairs.

On 24 October, Bolívar received a letter from Santander informing him that because he had accepted the dictatorship of Peru the Colombian congress had stripped him of his military and civil authority in favor of Sucre and Santander, respectively. Although indignant and resentful of Santander, Bolívar wrote to him on 10 November to communicate his acquiescence and reoccupied Lima on 5 December 1824. On 9 December, Sucre decisively defeated La Serna&#x27;s Royalists at the Battle of Ayacucho and accepted of all Royalist forces in Peru. The garrison of Callao and Olañeta ignored the surrender. Shortly after arriving in Lima, Bolívar began a siege of Callao that lasted until January 1826, and sent Sucre into Upper Peru to eliminate Olañeta. However, Oleñeta was killed at the Battle of Tumusla prior to Sucre&#x27;s arrival. With Irish volunteer Francisco Burdett O&#x27;Connor serving as his second in command, Sucre completed the liberation of Upper Peru in April 1825.

In early 1825, Bolívar resigned from his offices in Colombia and Peru, but neither nation&#x27;s congress accepted his resignation; on 10 February 1825, the Peruvian congress extended his dictatorship for another year. Accepting the extension, Bolívar settled into governing Peru and passing reforms that were largely not carried out, such as a school system based on the principles of English educator Joseph Lancaster that was managed by Simón Rodríguez. In April 1825, Bolívar began a tour of southern Peru that took him to the cities of Arequipa and Cuzco by August. As Bolívar approached Upper Peru, a congress gathered in the city of Chuquisaca (now Sucre); on 6 August, it declared the region to be the nation of Bolivia, named Bolívar president, and asked him to write a constitution for Bolivia. Bolívar arrived in Potosí on 5 October and met with two Argentine agents, Carlos María de Alvear and José Miguel Díaz Vélez, who tried without success to convince him to intervene in the Cisplatine War against the Empire of Brazil.

From Potosí, Bolívar traveled to Chuquisaca and appointed Sucre to govern Bolivia on 29 December 1825; he departed for Peru on 1 January 1826. Bolívar arrived in Lima on 10 February and dispatched his draft of the Bolivian constitution to Sucre on 12 May. was ratified with modification by the Bolivian congress in July 1826. Peru, whose elites chafed at Bolívar&#x27;s rule and the presence of his soldiers, was also induced to accept a modified version of Bolívar&#x27;s constitution on 16 August. In Venezuela, Páez revolted against Santander, and in Panama, a congress of American nations organized by Bolívar convened without his attendance and produced no change in the hemispheric &quot;status quo&quot;. On 3 September, responding to pleas for his return to Colombia, Bolívar departed Peru and left it under a governing council led by Bolivian general Andrés de Santa Cruz.

====Final years: 1826–1830====

Bolívar arrived in Guayaquil on 13 September 1826 and heard complaints against Santander&#x27;s governance from the people of Guayaquil and Quito, who declared him their dictator. From Ecuador, he continued north and heard more complaints, promoted civil and military officers, and commuted prison sentences. As he approached Bogotá, Bolívar was met by Santander, who hoped to persuade Bolívar to his cause in the conflict with Páez. Although Santander was annoyed at Bolívar for his desire to return to power and ratify a version of the Bolivian constitution in Colombia, they reconciled and agreed that Bolívar would resume the presidency of Colombia; congress had reelected them to a second four-year term beginning on 2 January 1827. Bolívar arrived in Bogotá on 14 November 1826.

On 25 November, Bolívar left Bogotá with an army supplied by Santander and arrived at Puerto Cabello on 31 December, where he issued a general amnesty to Páez and his allies if they submitted to his authority. Páez accepted and in January 1827, Bolívar confirmed Páez&#x27;s military authority in Venezuela and entered Caracas with him to much jubilation; for two months, Bolívar attended balls celebrating his return and the amnesty. That amnesty, and clashes over Santander&#x27;s handling of Colombia&#x27;s finances, caused a break between Bolívar and Santander that became an open enmity in 1827. In February 1827, Bolívar submitted his resignation from the Presidency of Colombia, which its congress rejected. Meanwhile, the Colombian soldiers garrisoned in Lima mutinied, arrested their Venezuelan officers, and occupied Guayaquil until September 1827, allowing Bolívar&#x27;s opponents in Peru to depose him as president and repeal his constitution.

Bolívar departed Venezuela to return to Bogotá in July 1827. He arrived on 10 September with an army he had gathered at Cartagena and secured the calling of a new congress to meet at the city of Ocaña in early 1828 to modify the Colombian constitution. The elections for this congress were held in November 1827 and, as Bolívar declined to campaign because he did not wish to be perceived as personally influencing the elections, were very favorable to his political opponents. In January 1828, Bolívar was joined in Bogotá by Sáenz, but on 16 March 1828 he left the capital after being informed of a Spanish-backed rebellion in Venezuela. As that revolt was crushed before he arrived, Bolívar turned his attention to the occupation of Cartagena by José Prudencio Padilla, a New Granadan admiral and Santander loyalist. Padilla&#x27;s rebellion was also crushed before Bolívar arrived, however, and he was arrested and imprisoned in Bogotá. As the Convention of Ocaña opened on 9 April, Bolívar based himself at Bucaramanga to monitor its proceedings through his aides.

The convention appeared likely to adopt a federalist system. To prevent this, on 11 June 1828 Bolívar&#x27;s allies staged a walkout, leaving the convention without a quorum. Two days later, Pedro Alcántara Herrán, a Bolívar loyalist and the governor of New Granada, called a meeting of the city&#x27;s elite that denounced the Convention of Ocaña and called on Bolívar to assume absolute power in Colombia. Bolívar returned to Bogotá on 24 June and on 27 August assumed supreme power as the &quot;president-liberator&quot; of Colombia, abolished the office of the vice president, and assigned Santander to a diplomatic posting in Washington, D.C. On 25 September 1828, a group of young liberals that included Santander&#x27;s secretary made an attempt to assassinate Bolívar and overthrow his government. The attempt was thwarted by Sáenz, who bought time for Bolívar to escape as the assassins entered the Palacio de San Carlos, and the Colombian Army. Bolívar spent the night hiding under a bridge until soldiers loyal to his regime rescued him.

In the aftermath of the attempted coup, Santander and the conspirators were arrested. Bolívar, depressed and ill, considered resigning from politics and pardoning the conspirators, but was dissuaded from this by his officers. Padilla, though uninvolved with the attempted coup, was executed for treason for his earlier rebellion; Santander, whom Bolívar thought responsible for the plot, was pardoned but exiled from Colombia. In December 1828, Bolívar left Bogotá to respond to Peru&#x27;s intervention in Bolivia and invasion of Ecuador and a revolt in Popayán and Pasto led by José María Obando. He left behind a council of ministers led by Urdaneta to govern Colombia and announced that a congress would convene in January 1830 to devise a new constitution. Over 1829, Obando was defeated by Colombian general José María Córdova at Bolívar&#x27;s direction in January and then pardoned, while Sucre and Venezuelan general Juan José Flores defeated the Peruvians at the Battle of Tarqui in February, leading to an armistice in July and then the Treaty of Guayaquil in September.

While Bolívar was away, Urdaneta and the council of ministers planned with French envoys to have a member of the House of Bourbon succeed Bolívar on his death as King of Colombia. This plan was widely unpopular, and inspired Córdova to launch a revolt that was crushed in October 1829 by Daniel Florence O&#x27;Leary, Bolívar&#x27;s aide-de-camp. In November, Bolívar ordered the council to cease its planning; instead they resigned. Venezuelans, encouraged by a circular letter Bolívar had published in October, voted to secede from Colombia. On 15 January 1830, Bolívar arrived in Bogotá and on 20 January the convened in the city. Bolívar submitted his resignation from the presidency, which the congress did not accept until 27 April, following the appointment of New Granadan politician Domingo Caycedo as interim President.

==Death and burial==

Determined to go into exile, Bolívar, who had given away or lost his fortune over his career, sold most of his remaining possessions and departed from Bogotá on 8 May 1830. He traveled down the Magdalena to Cartagena, where he arrived by the end of June to wait for a ship to take him to England. On 1 July, Bolívar was informed that Sucre had been assassinated near Pasto while en route to Quito, and wrote to Flores to ask him to avenge Sucre. In September, Urdaneta installed a conservative government in Bogotá and asked Bolívar to return, but he refused. With his health deteriorating and no ship forthcoming, Bolívar was moved by his staff to Barranquilla in October and then, at the invitation of a Spanish landowner in the area, to the Quinta de San Pedro Alejandrino near Santa Marta. There, on 17 December 1830, at the age of 47, Bolívar died of tuberculosis.

Bolívar&#x27;s body, dressed in a borrowed shirt, was interred in the on 20 December 1830. In 1842, Páez secured the repatriation of Bolívar&#x27;s remains, which were paraded through Caracas and then laid to rest in its cathedral in December together with his wife and parents; Bolívar&#x27;s heart remained in Santa Marta. His remains were moved again in October 1876 into the National Pantheon of Venezuela in Caracas, created that year by President Antonio Guzmán Blanco. 

Bolívar&#x27;s death has been the subject of conspiracy theories advanced by the United Socialist Party of Venezuela. In January 2008, President Hugo Chávez set up a commission to investigate his claim that Bolívar had been poisoned by &quot;New Granada traitors.&quot; The commission exhumed Bolívar&#x27;s remains on 16 July 2010. The results, made public on 26 July 2011, were inconclusive; Vice President of Venezuela Elías Jaua announced that the commission could not prove Chávez&#x27;s claim. Chávez continued to claim that Bolívar had been assassinated via arsenic poisoning, citing a paper by infectious disease specialist Paul Auwaerter. Following Chávez&#x27;s remarks, Auwaerter stated that the arsenic likely came from medicines Bolívar had ingested to treat his illnesses.

==Personal beliefs==
Bolívar&#x27;s personal beliefs were liberal and republican, and formed by Classical and Enlightenment philosophy; among his favorite authors were Hobbes, Spinoza, the Baron d&#x27;Holbach, Hume, Montesquieu, and Rousseau. The tutelage of Simón Rodríguez, a student of Rousseau, has been traditionally seen as foundational for Bolívar&#x27;s beliefs. Also important to Bolívar&#x27;s intellectual development were his stays in Paris from 1804 to 1806 and in London in 1810. Bolívar was an Anglophile, and sought British aid in securing Latin American independence. The extent of Bolívar&#x27;s religiosity is debated; while Bolívar resented the social capital of the Catholic Church and its Royalist leanings during the wars of independence, he sought to co-opt its social capital for the benefit of the republics he established rather than dismember the Church.

Throughout his political career, Bolívar concerned himself with the construction of liberal democracy in Latin America and the region&#x27;s place in the Atlantic world. By the 1820s, his goal was to create a federation of Latin American republics in Spanish America, each governed by a strong executive and a constitution modeled on the British constitution. Inspired by Montesquieu, Bolívar believed that a government should conform to the needs and character of its region and inhabitants; in the Cartagena Manifesto, Bolívar stated that federalism as practiced in the United States was the &quot;perfect&quot; government but was unworkable in Spanish America because, he believed, Spanish imperialism had left Spanish Americans unprepared for federalism. Bolívar sought to prepare Colombia for a more liberal democracy via free, public education. Over the 1820s, Bolívar became increasingly disillusioned and authoritarian until, in 1830, he declared to Flores, &quot;all who have served the Revolution have plowed the sea.&quot;

==Legacy==
Bolívar has had an immense legacy, becoming the essential personality of Latin America. The currencies of Venezuela and Bolivia—the bolívar and boliviano respectively—are named after Bolívar. In the English-speaking world, Bolívar is known as Latin America&#x27;s George Washington. He has been memorialized across the world in literature, public monuments, and historiography, and paid tribute to in the names of towns, cities, provinces, and other people. The Quinta near Santa Marta has been preserved as a museum to Bolívar and the house in which he was born was opened as a museum and archive of his papers on 5 July 1921. In 1978, UNESCO created the International Simón Bolívar Prize &quot;to reward an activity of outstanding merit in accordance with the ideals of Simón Bolívar.&quot; In 1997, the Archive of the Liberator Simón Bolívar was inscribed by UNESCO in the International Memory of the World Register and in the Regional Register for Latin America and the Caribbean in 2011.

Initial historical evaluations of Bolívar were at first negative, consisting of criticism of his conduct of the war, execution of Piar, betrayal of Miranda, and authoritarianism. These and other criticisms endure in studies of Bolívar. Beginning in 1842, however, popular opinion about Bolívar in Venezuela became overwhelmingly positive and eventually became what has been described by scholars as the &quot;cult of Bolívar&quot;, led by succeeding heads of the Venezuelan state. In 1998, President Hugo Chávez, who had made extensive use of Bolívar&#x27;s image for government projects and initiatives, changed the official name of Venezuela to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. In Colombia, allegiance or opposition to Bolívar formed the bedrock of the Conservative and Liberal parties respectively. Bolívar continued to have such a cultural influence in Colombia that in 1974 the 19th of April Movement, an insurgent leftist group that later joined an alliance thereof called the Simón Bolívar Guerrilla Coordinating Board, alleged to belong to Bolívar from his Bogotá residence.

==See also==
* Libertadores
* Toussaint Louverture
* Crown of Simón Bolívar
* Bolivarianism
* Congress of Panama
* Father of the Nation
* Palomo (horse)

==References==
===Notes===
===Bibliography===
====Biographies of Simón Bolívar====
* 
* 


====Works by Simón Bolívar====
* 
====General reference====
* 
:* 
:* 
* 
* 
:* 
==Further reading==
* Bushnell, David. &quot;The Liberator, Simón Bolívar: Man and Image&quot;. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1970.
* Bushnell, David and Macaulay, Neill. &quot;The Emergence of Latin America in the Nineteenth Century&quot; (Second edition). Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1994. 
* Gómez Martínez, José Luis. &quot;La encrucijada del cambio: Simón Bolívar entre dos paradigmas (una reflexión ante la encrucijada postindustrial)&quot;. &quot;Cuadernos Americanos&quot; 104 (2004): 11–32.
* Lacroix, Luis Perú de. &quot;Diario de Bucaramanga&quot;. Caracas: Ministerio del Poder Popular para la Comunicación y la Información, 2009.
* Lynch, John. &quot;Simón Bolívar and the Age of Revolution&quot;. London: University of London Institute of Latin American Studies, 1983. 
* Marx, Karl. &quot;Bolívar y Ponte&quot; in the &quot;New American Cyclopaedia&quot;, Vol. III. New York: D. Appleton &amp; Co., 1858.
* Racine, Karen. &quot;Simón Bolívar and friends: Recent biographies of independence figures in Colombia and Venezuela&quot; &quot;History Compass&quot; 18#3 (Feb 2020) https://doi.org/10.1111/hic3.12608

==External links==
* &quot;Archivo del Libertador&quot; (In Spanish) –12,000+ transcribed documents of the &quot;Libertador&quot;, from 1799 to 1830.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8605" start="0" end="75" title="Simón Bolívar" label="Simón José Antonio de la Santísima Trinidad Bolívar Palacios Ponte y Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="197" end="205" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="207" end="216" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="218" end="225" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="227" end="231" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="233" end="239" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="245" end="252" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="278" end="292" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533" start="417" end="424" title="Caracas" label="Caracas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10463" start="432" end="462" title="Captaincy General of Venezuela" label="Captaincy General of Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242047" start="513" end="520" title="Criollo people" label="criollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="678" end="684" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="725" end="749" title="Enlightenment philosophy" label="Enlightenment philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004714" start="762" end="802" title="María Teresa Rodríguez del Toro y Alaysa" label="María Teresa Rodríguez del Toro y Alaysa"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="831" end="843" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682302" start="894" end="904" title="Grand Tour" label="Grand Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="919" end="923" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q111180987" start="951" end="979" title="Spanish America" label="Spanish rule in the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="1142" end="1172" title="Peninsular War" label="Napoleon&amp;#x27;s Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123201" start="1231" end="1268" title="Spanish American wars of independence" label="Spanish-American wars of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649182" start="1285" end="1304" title="Military career of Simón Bolívar" label="his military career"/>
<link wikidata="Q8934" start="1341" end="1371" title="Venezuelan War of Independence" label="Venezuelan War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375108" start="1382" end="1390" title="Royalist (Spanish American independence)" label="Royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8935" start="1406" end="1411" title="First Republic of Venezuela" label="first"/>
<link wikidata="Q8950" start="1416" end="1422" title="Second Republic of Venezuela" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249661" start="1452" end="1483" title="United Provinces of New Granada" label="United Provinces of New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8961" start="1506" end="1525" title="Spanish reconquest of New Granada" label="subdued New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="1568" end="1575" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="1580" end="1585" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q353464" start="1643" end="1659" title="Alexandre Pétion" label="Alexandre Pétion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8951" start="1806" end="1820" title="Third Republic of Venezuela" label="third republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935426" start="1859" end="1879" title="Bolívar&amp;#x27;s campaign to liberate New Granada" label="liberate New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="2104" end="2124" title="Republic of Colombia" label="Republic of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q199821" start="2126" end="2139" title="Gran Colombia" label="Gran Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="2459" end="2471" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918497" start="2582" end="2608" title="Father of the Nation" label="national and cultural icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533" start="2918" end="2925" title="Caracas" label="Caracas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10463" start="2942" end="2972" title="Captaincy General of Venezuela" label="Captaincy General of Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="3020" end="3028" title="baptized" label="baptized"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="3295" end="3308" title="Basque Country (greater region)" label="Basque region"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3560" end="3574" title="Bolívar family" label="Bolívar family"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242047" start="3628" end="3635" title="Criollo people" label="criollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889393" start="3752" end="3762" title="John Lynch (historian)" label="John Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q157509" start="3926" end="3941" title="legal guardians" label="legal guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915703" start="4157" end="4168" title="house slave" label="house slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844622" start="4904" end="4920" title="Miguel José Sanz" label="Miguel José Sanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695783" start="4951" end="4975" title="Real Audiencia" label="Spanish court of appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358685" start="5053" end="5068" title="Simón Rodríguez" label="Simón Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q439195" start="5608" end="5620" title="Andrés Bello" label="Andrés Bello"/>
<link wikidata="Q5784375" start="5688" end="5714" title="Gual and España conspiracy" label="Gual and España conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="5920" end="5926" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q229854" start="5966" end="5977" title="Maria Luisa of Parma" label="Maria Luisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996375" start="5985" end="5993" title="Favourite" label="favorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573465" start="6067" end="6092" title="Spanish ship San Ildefonso" label="&amp;quot;San Ildefonso&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q873405" start="6108" end="6117" title="La Guaira" label="La Guaira"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="6129" end="6134" title="Cádiz" label="Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442470" start="6150" end="6157" title="Santoña" label="Santoña"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="6522" end="6530" title="Classics" label="Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q316110" start="6628" end="6640" title="Manuel Godoy" label="Manuel Godoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657591" start="6834" end="6850" title="Puerta de Toledo" label="Puerta de Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004714" start="6936" end="6976" title="María Teresa Rodríguez del Toro y Alaysa" label="María Teresa Rodríguez del Toro y Alaysa"/>
<link wikidata="Q157512" start="7036" end="7043" title="engaged" label="engaged"/>
<link wikidata="Q5787273" start="7116" end="7127" title="summer home" label="summer home"/>
<link wikidata="Q8692" start="7131" end="7137" title="Bilbao" label="Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q14336" start="7196" end="7202" title="Teruel" label="Teruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="7357" end="7362" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q8757" start="7650" end="7659" title="La Coruña" label="La Coruña"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="7789" end="7801" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687964" start="7885" end="7906" title="Louis Peru de Lacroix" label="Louis Peru de Lacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065191" start="8398" end="8430" title="Anglo-Spanish War (1796–1808)" label="resumed hostilities with Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="8551" end="8559" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373953" start="8577" end="8598" title="Emperor of the French" label="Emperor of the French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752206" start="8690" end="8708" title="Carlos de Montúfar" label="Carlos de Montúfar"/>
<link wikidata="Q879030" start="8710" end="8728" title="Vicente Rocafuerte" label="Vicente Rocafuerte"/>
<link wikidata="Q576342" start="8882" end="8887" title="Salon (gathering)" label="salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="8918" end="8940" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q405702" start="8945" end="8958" title="Aimé Bonpland" label="Aimé Bonpland"/>
<link wikidata="Q111180987" start="8993" end="9008" title="Spanish America" label="Spanish America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682302" start="9165" end="9175" title="Grand Tour" label="Grand Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="9179" end="9184" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="9199" end="9203" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262" start="9231" end="9241" title="Savoy Alps" label="Savoy Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="9254" end="9259" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q223936" start="9337" end="9350" title="Kingdom of Italy (Napoleonic)" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202207" start="9387" end="9396" title="Po Valley" label="Po Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="9400" end="9406" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="9416" end="9424" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="9443" end="9447" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q124754" start="9482" end="9495" title="Pope Pius VII" label="Pope Pius VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q123041" start="9511" end="9528" title="Germaine de Staël" label="Germaine de Staël"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234576" start="9665" end="9675" title="Mons Sacer" label="Mons Sacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15651483" start="9683" end="9714" title="First secessio plebis" label="the plebs had seceded from Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q311447" start="9935" end="9955" title="Francisco de Miranda" label="Francisco de Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761621" start="10028" end="10046" title="command of the sea" label="command of the sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q171416" start="10062" end="10081" title="Battle of Trafalgar" label="Battle of Trafalgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="10127" end="10134" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="10171" end="10197" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="10243" end="10259" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="10261" end="10273" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="10275" end="10288" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="10294" end="10300" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="10326" end="10339" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="10686" end="10715" title="Peninsular War" label="invaded the Iberian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821316" start="10720" end="10748" title="Abdications of Bayonne" label="replaced the rulers of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726" start="10767" end="10773" title="Joseph Bonaparte" label="Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q186256" start="10895" end="10917" title="Ferdinand VII of Spain" label="Ferdinand VII of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953056" start="11106" end="11119" title="Juan de Casas" label="Juan de Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779244" start="11342" end="11357" title="Vicente Emparán" label="Vicente Emparán"/>
<link wikidata="Q592285" start="11592" end="11626" title="Supreme Central Junta" label="the anti-French Spanish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="11650" end="11665" title="regency council" label="regency council"/>
<link wikidata="Q616494" start="11881" end="11905" title="Supreme Junta" label="Supreme Junta of Caracas"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="11995" end="11999" title="coup" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="12235" end="12242" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="12363" end="12373" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="12648" end="12665" title="Foreign Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="foreign secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q335205" start="12667" end="12684" title="Richard Wellesley, 1st Marquess Wellesley" label="Richard Wellesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q622206" start="12689" end="12701" title="Apsley House" label="Apsley House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572948" start="12830" end="12853" title="Anglo-Spanish relations" label="Anglo-Spanish relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="13202" end="13220" title="British government" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="13427" end="13434" title="Liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172071" start="13600" end="13604" title="Coro Province" label="Coro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408381" start="13606" end="13615" title="Maracaibo Province (Spanish Empire)" label="Maracaibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610725" start="13621" end="13628" title="Guayana Province" label="Guayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130963" start="13727" end="13744" title="Patriotic Society (Venezuela)" label="Patriotic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382350" start="14262" end="14300" title="Venezuelan Declaration of Independence" label="declared Venezuela&amp;#x27;s independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8935" start="14353" end="14374" title="First Republic of Venezuela" label="Republic of Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q541745" start="14565" end="14598" title="Captaincy General of Puerto Rico" label="Captaincy-Generals of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039931" start="14603" end="14607" title="Captaincy General of Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375108" start="14680" end="14689" title="Royalist (Spanish American independence)" label="Royalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q54880" start="14962" end="14970" title="Valencia, Venezuela" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646645" start="15541" end="15560" title="1812 Caracas earthquake" label="powerful earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q226765" start="15857" end="15875" title="divine retribution" label="divine retribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350913" start="15973" end="15999" title="Juan Domingo de Monteverde" label="Juan Domingo de Monteverde"/>
<link wikidata="Q995695" start="16137" end="16151" title="Puerto Cabello" label="Puerto Cabello"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941437" start="16156" end="16168" title="San Felipe Castle" label="its fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="17604" end="17611" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q8962459" start="17637" end="17646" title="Francisco José Ribas" label="Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624022" start="17651" end="17667" title="José Félix Ribas" label="José Félix Ribas"/>
<link wikidata="Q657461" start="17761" end="17770" title="Cartagena, Colombia" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249661" start="17822" end="17853" title="United Provinces of New Granada" label="United Provinces of New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390096" start="17923" end="17947" title="Manuel Rodríguez Torices" label="Manuel Rodríguez Torices"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106302" start="18007" end="18021" title="Pierre Labatut" label="Pierre Labatut"/>
<link wikidata="Q191829" start="18214" end="18229" title="Magdalena River" label="Magdalena River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641709" start="18282" end="18301" title="Cartagena Manifesto" label="Cartagena Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935406" start="18696" end="18708" title="Magdalena campaign" label="an offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994814" start="18847" end="18873" title="Manuel del Castillo y Rada" label="Manuel del Castillo y Rada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888371" start="18985" end="18993" title="Battle of Cúcuta" label="captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q216847" start="19006" end="19012" title="Cúcuta" label="Cúcuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="19254" end="19271" title="brigadier general" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q452017" start="19463" end="19491" title="Francisco de Paula Santander" label="Francisco de Paula Santander"/>
<link wikidata="Q8940" start="19525" end="19543" title="Admirable Campaign" label="Admirable Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042944" start="19568" end="19594" title="Decree of War to the Death" label="Decree of War to the Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q23551" start="20024" end="20030" title="Mérida, Mérida" label="Mérida"/>
<link wikidata="Q183318" start="20083" end="20091" title="dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8950" start="20097" end="20125" title="Second Republic of Venezuela" label="Second Republic of Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q171632" start="20208" end="20217" title="Maracaibo" label="Maracaibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134454" start="20219" end="20223" title="Coro, Venezuela" label="Coro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256182" start="20336" end="20351" title="Santiago Mariño" label="Santiago Mariño"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866848" start="20783" end="20790" title="llanero" label="llanero"/>
<link wikidata="Q141501" start="20820" end="20826" title="Llanos" label="Llanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372535" start="20870" end="20886" title="José Tomás Boves" label="José Tomás Boves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5723109" start="21071" end="21086" title="Battle of Urica" label="Battle of Urica"/>
<link wikidata="Q391221" start="21231" end="21251" title="Barcelona, Venezuela" label="Barcelona, Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q319476" start="21271" end="21277" title="Cumaná" label="Cumaná"/>
<link wikidata="Q5657705" start="21398" end="21427" title="Battle of Aragua de Barcelona" label="Battle of Aragua de Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q334738" start="21506" end="21522" title="Margarita Island" label="Margarita Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q981389" start="21580" end="21591" title="Manuel Piar" label="Manuel Piar"/>
<link wikidata="Q236744" start="21897" end="21902" title="Tunja" label="Tunja"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591854" start="21945" end="21987" title="Free and Independent State of Cundinamarca" label="Free and Independent State of Cundinamarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="22051" end="22057" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="22412" end="22419" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364163" start="22508" end="22521" title="Pablo Morillo" label="Pablo Morillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q209016" start="22532" end="22543" title="Santa Marta" label="Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q34692" start="22695" end="22712" title="Kingston, Jamaica" label="Kingston, Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q633110" start="22995" end="23009" title="Jamaica Letter" label="Jamaica Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424810" start="23135" end="23149" title="Renato Beluche" label="Renato Beluche"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="23247" end="23252" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156771" start="23362" end="23371" title="paymaster" label="paymaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q984786" start="23444" end="23453" title="Les Cayes" label="Les Cayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q353464" start="23510" end="23526" title="Alexandre Pétion" label="Alexandre Pétion"/>
<link wikidata="Q97704156" start="23545" end="23562" title="Republic of Haiti (1806–1820)" label="Republic of Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q166131" start="23990" end="23998" title="Antilles" label="Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361160" start="24153" end="24176" title="Juan Bautista Arismendi" label="Juan Bautista Arismendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q153511" start="24321" end="24329" title="Carúpano" label="Carúpano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349025" start="24422" end="24441" title="Ocumare de la Costa" label="Ocumare de la Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919041" start="24525" end="24531" title="Güiria" label="Güiria"/>
<link wikidata="Q743460" start="24604" end="24627" title="José Francisco Bermúdez" label="José Francisco Bermúdez"/>
<link wikidata="Q726386" start="24959" end="24980" title="Francisco Antonio Zea" label="Francisco Antonio Zea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265391" start="25067" end="25077" title="Luis Brión" label="Luis Brión"/>
<link wikidata="Q8951" start="25211" end="25225" title="Third Republic of Venezuela" label="third republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q304900" start="25274" end="25291" title="José Antonio Páez" label="José Antonio Páez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722350" start="25442" end="25460" title="Battle of Clarines" label="Battle of Clarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q15730331" start="25970" end="25989" title="general of the army" label="general of the army"/>
<link wikidata="Q26906" start="26074" end="26088" title="Ciudad Bolívar" label="Ciudad Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q471325" start="26361" end="26376" title="Rafael Urdaneta" label="Rafael Urdaneta"/>
<link wikidata="Q189779" start="26381" end="26402" title="Antonio José de Sucre" label="Antonio José de Sucre"/>
<link wikidata="Q13561011" start="26449" end="26465" title="leave of absence" label="leave of absence"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="26620" end="26627" title="mulatto" label="mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q216169" start="26753" end="26765" title="firing squad" label="firing squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123581" start="26900" end="26914" title="Second Battle of Angostura" label="Angostura fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q131792" start="26969" end="26982" title="Orinoco River" label="Orinoco River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007275" start="27175" end="27193" title="San Juan de Payara" label="San Juan de Payara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026185" start="27312" end="27320" title="Calabozo" label="Calabozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8961" start="27381" end="27414" title="Spanish reconquest of New Granada" label="conquering Republican New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q847056" start="27862" end="27887" title="Congress of Angostura" label="congress met in Angostura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117517" start="28310" end="28320" title="wet season" label="wet season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408346" start="28548" end="28565" title="Casanare Province" label="Casanare Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="28650" end="28655" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434750" start="28845" end="28857" title="Tame, Arauca" label="Tame, Arauca"/>
<link wikidata="Q143014" start="28913" end="28926" title="Cordillera Oriental (Colombia)" label="Eastern Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574712" start="29037" end="29042" title="Socha" label="Socha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935426" start="29124" end="29143" title="Bolívar&amp;#x27;s campaign to liberate New Granada" label="made rapid progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186437" start="29182" end="29208" title="José María Barreiro Manjón" label="José María Barreiro Manjón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150410" start="29262" end="29278" title="Battle of Boyacá" label="Battle of Boyacá"/>
<link wikidata="Q199821" start="29614" end="29642" title="Gran Colombia" label="greater republic of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="30250" end="30258" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759249" start="30342" end="30365" title="Real Audiencia of Quito" label="Real Audiencia of Quito"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="30445" end="30454" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421412" start="30858" end="30880" title="Spanish Constitution of 1812" label="a liberal constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020535" start="31252" end="31271" title="Trujillo, Trujillo" label="Trujillo, Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001775" start="31347" end="31364" title="prisoner exchange" label="prisoner exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833880" start="31370" end="31397" title="Law of war" label="basic rights for combatants"/>
<link wikidata="Q204946" start="31560" end="31578" title="Miguel de la Torre" label="Miguel de la Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q943797" start="31718" end="31738" title="Congress of Cúcuta" label="a new congress there"/>
<link wikidata="Q388210" start="32089" end="32107" title="Battle of Carabobo" label="Battle of Carabobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q320015" start="32789" end="32804" title="Pasto, Colombia" label="Pasto, Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892131" start="32820" end="32846" title="Free Province of Guayaquil" label="Free Province of Guayaquil"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="32848" end="32855" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q211435" start="32865" end="32884" title="Viceroyalty of Peru" label="Viceroyalty of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="33068" end="33074" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q911652" start="33167" end="33184" title="Liberating Expedition of Peru" label="a Republican army"/>
<link wikidata="Q134160" start="33210" end="33228" title="José de San Martín" label="José de San Martín"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072889" start="33238" end="33253" title="Chilean War of Independence" label="liberated Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q170765" start="33515" end="33530" title="Pyrrhic victory" label="Pyrrhic victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402751" start="33720" end="33739" title="Battle of Pichincha" label="Battle of Pichincha"/>
<link wikidata="Q372074" start="33905" end="33918" title="Manuela Sáenz" label="Manuela Sáenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441451" start="34279" end="34299" title="Guayaquil Conference" label="Guayaquil Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486430" start="34704" end="34720" title="José de Canterac" label="José de Canterac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357543" start="34774" end="34791" title="Congress of the Republic of Peru" label="Peruvian congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="35056" end="35060" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392284" start="35144" end="35166" title="José de la Riva Agüero" label="José de la Riva Agüero"/>
<link wikidata="Q887033" start="35171" end="35193" title="José Bernardo de Tagle y Portocarrero, Marquis of Torre Tagle" label="José Bernardo de Tagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q886517" start="35223" end="35238" title="Viceroy of Peru" label="Viceroy of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394060" start="35240" end="35256" title="José de la Serna, 1st Count of the Andes" label="José de la Serna"/>
<link wikidata="Q105037" start="35536" end="35542" title="Callao" label="Callao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754515" start="35859" end="35880" title="Pedro Antonio Olañeta" label="Pedro Antonio Olañeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q769269" start="35905" end="35915" title="Upper Peru" label="Upper Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q207973" start="35986" end="35998" title="Junín region" label="Junín region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508820" start="36034" end="36049" title="Battle of Junín" label="Battle of Junín"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582862" start="36163" end="36168" title="Cuzco" label="Cuzco"/>
<link wikidata="Q468782" start="36312" end="36320" title="Huancayo" label="Huancayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q934157" start="36827" end="36845" title="Battle of Ayacucho" label="Battle of Ayacucho"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123901" start="36995" end="37012" title="Second siege of Callao" label="a siege of Callao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5778763" start="37133" end="37150" title="Battle of Tumusla" label="Battle of Tumusla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441900" start="37203" end="37234" title="Francisco Burdett O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Francisco Burdett O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q723877" start="37733" end="37749" title="Joseph Lancaster" label="Joseph Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q159273" start="37871" end="37879" title="Arequipa" label="Arequipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907" start="37986" end="37991" title="Sucre" label="Sucre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918225" start="38010" end="38018" title="Bolivian Declaration of Independence" label="declared"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="38050" end="38057" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q373548" start="38073" end="38082" title="President of Bolivia" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q35045" start="38154" end="38160" title="Potosí" label="Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q465493" start="38209" end="38231" title="Carlos María de Alvear" label="Carlos María de Alvear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5943924" start="38236" end="38258" title="José Miguel Díaz Vélez" label="José Miguel Díaz Vélez"/>
<link wikidata="Q288251" start="38322" end="38336" title="Cisplatine War" label="Cisplatine War"/>
<link wikidata="Q217230" start="38349" end="38365" title="Empire of Brazil" label="Empire of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5784603" start="38804" end="38822" title="Constitution of Peru (1826)" label="a modified version"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207843" start="38882" end="38913" title="La Cosiata" label="Páez revolted against Santander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164951" start="38930" end="38960" title="Congress of Panama" label="a congress of American nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q201610" start="39062" end="39072" title="status quo" label="status quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q467959" start="39228" end="39248" title="Andrés de Santa Cruz" label="Andrés de Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q478515" start="40458" end="40463" title="Ball (dance party)" label="balls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6102449" start="40888" end="40927" title="1827 Guayaquil uprising" label="occupied Guayaquil until September 1827"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283773" start="41223" end="41228" title="Ocaña, Norte de Santander" label="Ocaña"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645273" start="41777" end="41799" title="José Prudencio Padilla" label="José Prudencio Padilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893195" start="41976" end="41995" title="Convention of Ocaña" label="Convention of Ocaña"/>
<link wikidata="Q243766" start="42040" end="42051" title="Bucaramanga" label="Bucaramanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q685160" start="42224" end="42231" title="walkout" label="walkout"/>
<link wikidata="Q526999" start="42266" end="42272" title="quorum" label="quorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q390337" start="42290" end="42312" title="Pedro Alcántara Herrán" label="Pedro Alcántara Herrán"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994779" start="42841" end="42874" title="Septembrine Conspiracy" label="an attempt to assassinate Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9054546" start="43007" end="43028" title="Palacio de San Carlos, Bogotá" label="Palacio de San Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816677" start="43640" end="43663" title="1828 Peruvian–Bolivian War" label="intervention in Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972316" start="43668" end="43687" title="Gran Colombia–Peru War" label="invasion of Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318147" start="43729" end="43746" title="José María Obando" label="José María Obando"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645294" start="43963" end="43981" title="José María Córdova" label="José María Córdova"/>
<link wikidata="Q554933" start="44075" end="44091" title="Juan José Flores" label="Juan José Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q747266" start="44122" end="44138" title="Battle of Tarqui" label="Battle of Tarqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q6151946" start="44197" end="44216" title="Treaty of Guayaquil" label="Treaty of Guayaquil"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="44345" end="44361" title="House of Bourbon" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q971852" start="44520" end="44548" title="Daniel Florence O&amp;#x27;Leary" label="Daniel Florence O&amp;#x27;Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="44565" end="44577" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369751" start="45024" end="45039" title="Domingo Caycedo" label="Domingo Caycedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q62823" start="45734" end="45746" title="Barranquilla" label="Barranquilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414570" start="45829" end="45860" title="Quinta de San Pedro Alejandrino" label="Quinta de San Pedro Alejandrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="45941" end="45953" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q994694" start="46335" end="46365" title="National Pantheon of Venezuela" label="National Pantheon of Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942698" start="46399" end="46408" title="President of Venezuela" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q602420" start="46409" end="46430" title="Antonio Guzmán Blanco" label="Antonio Guzmán Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q197864" start="46515" end="46550" title="United Socialist Party of Venezuela" label="United Socialist Party of Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q8440" start="46579" end="46590" title="Hugo Chávez" label="Hugo Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556895" start="46828" end="46855" title="Vice President of Venezuela" label="Vice President of Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334512" start="46856" end="46866" title="Elías Jaua" label="Elías Jaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q730249" start="46999" end="47016" title="arsenic poisoning" label="arsenic poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="47292" end="47302" title="Republicanism" label="republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="47318" end="47327" title="Classical literature" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="47332" end="47356" title="Enlightenment philosophy" label="Enlightenment philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="47390" end="47396" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="47398" end="47405" title="Baruch Spinoza" label="Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104" start="47411" end="47431" title="Baron d&amp;#x27;Holbach" label="Baron d&amp;#x27;Holbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="47433" end="47437" title="David Hume" label="Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="47439" end="47450" title="Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="47456" end="47464" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q541557" start="47732" end="47742" title="Anglophile" label="Anglophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866235" start="47910" end="47925" title="Catholic Church in Latin America" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="48445" end="48465" title="Constitution of the United Kingdom" label="British constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q203757" start="49285" end="49292" title="Venezuelan bolívar" label="bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200737" start="49297" end="49306" title="Bolivian boliviano" label="boliviano"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="49417" end="49434" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754450" start="49685" end="49715" title="Birthplace of Simón Bolívar" label="the house in which he was born"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="49790" end="49796" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118528" start="49809" end="49842" title="International Simón Bolívar Prize" label="International Simón Bolívar Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q8440" start="50647" end="50658" title="Hugo Chávez" label="Hugo Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="50798" end="50830" title="Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela" label="Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q747333" start="50907" end="50919" title="Colombian Conservative Party" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q939021" start="50924" end="50931" title="Colombian Liberal Party" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789014" start="51035" end="51057" title="19th of April Movement" label="19th of April Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521436" start="51135" end="51177" title="Simón Bolívar Guerrilla Coordinating Board" label="Simón Bolívar Guerrilla Coordinating Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272369" start="51217" end="51233" title="Quinta de Bolívar" label="Bogotá residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377288" start="51251" end="51263" title="Libertadores" label="Libertadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q205783" start="51266" end="51286" title="Toussaint Louverture" label="Toussaint Louverture"/>
<link wikidata="Q130244212" start="51289" end="51311" title="Crown of Simón Bolívar" label="Crown of Simón Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8813" start="51314" end="51327" title="Bolivarianism" label="Bolivarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164951" start="51330" end="51348" title="Congress of Panama" label="Congress of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918497" start="51351" end="51371" title="Father of the Nation" label="Father of the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128639" start="51374" end="51388" title="Palomo (horse)" label="Palomo (horse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="52363" end="52373" title="Karl Marx" label="Marx, Karl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084139" start="52416" end="52440" title="New American Cyclopaedia" label="New American Cyclopaedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55918" wikidata="Q303680" url="?curid=55918" title="Stanley Fish">
<text>Stanley Eugene Fish (born April 19, 1938) is an American literary theorist, legal scholar, author and public intellectual. He is currently the Floersheimer Distinguished Visiting Professor of Law at Yeshiva University&#x27;s Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law in New York City. Fish has previously served as the Davidson-Kahn Distinguished University Professor of Humanities and a professor of law at Florida International University and is dean emeritus of the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences at the University of Illinois at Chicago.

Fish is associated with postmodernism, although he views himself instead as an advocate of anti-foundationalism. He is also viewed as having influenced the rise and development of reader-response theory.

During his career he has also taught at the Cardozo School of Law, University of California, Berkeley, Johns Hopkins University, The University of Pennsylvania, Yale Law School, Columbia University, The John Marshall Law School, and Duke University.

==Early life and education==
Fish was born in Providence, Rhode Island. He was raised Jewish. His father, an immigrant from Poland, was a plumber and contractor who made it a priority for his son to get a university education. Fish became the first member of his family to attend college in the US, earning a B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania in 1959 and an M.A. from Yale University in 1960. He completed his Ph.D. in 1962, also at Yale University.

==Academic career==
Fish taught English at the University of California at Berkeley and Johns Hopkins University before serving as Arts and Sciences Professor of English and professor of law at Duke University from 1986 to 1998. From 1999 to 2004, he was dean of the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences at the University of Illinois at Chicago, and he served as distinguished visiting professor at the John Marshall Law School from 2000 until 2002. Fish also held joint appointments in the Departments of Political Science and Criminal Justice and was the chairman of the Religious Studies Committee.

During his tenure there, he recruited professors respected in the academic community, and attracted attention to the college. After resigning as dean in a high-level dispute with the state of Illinois over funding UIC, Fish spent a year teaching in the Department of English. The Institute for the Humanities at UIC named a lecture series in his honor, which is still ongoing. In June 2005, he accepted the position of Davidson-Kahn Distinguished University Professor of Humanities and Law at Florida International University, teaching in the FIU College of Law.

In November 2010 he joined the board of visitors of Ralston College, a start-up institution in Savannah, Georgia. He has also been a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences since 1985.

In April 2024, New College of Florida described him as presidential scholar in residence in invitations to a discussion with Mark Bauerlein on free speech, academic freedom, and political expression.

==Milton==
Fish started his career as a medievalist. His first book, published by Yale University Press in 1965, was on the late-medieval/early-Renaissance poet John Skelton. Fish explains in his partly biographical essay, &quot;Milton, Thou Shouldst be Living at this Hour&quot; (published in &quot;There&#x27;s No Such Thing as Free Speech . . . And It&#x27;s a Good Thing, Too&quot;), that he came to Milton by accident. In 1963, the same year that Fish started as an assistant professor at the University of California, Berkeley, its resident Miltonist, Constantinos A. Patrides, received a grant. The chair of the department asked Fish to teach the Milton course, notwithstanding the fact that the young professor &quot;had never — either as an undergraduate or in graduate school — taken a Milton course&quot; (269). The eventual result was &quot;Surprised by Sin: The Reader in Paradise Lost&quot; (1967; rpt. 1997). Fish&#x27;s 2001 book, &quot;How Milton Works&quot;, reflects five decades&#x27; worth of his scholarship on Milton. About this book, academic and critic John Mullan disagrees with Fish&#x27;s interpretation that:
 Our every likely value is defeated by his poetry. His book needs to presume that we find Milton&#x27;s beliefs, and even more the sheer force of those beliefs, inimical. It never occurs to Fish that the ever-abused &quot;reader&quot; might share any values with Milton… Even when he has a point, Fish is wrestling Milton to his cause. There is no room to consider that Milton&#x27;s poetry might be wise about human weakness, and that &quot;Paradise Lost&quot;, for instance, might be more notable for its sense of tragedy than for its doctrinal correctness.

==Interpretive communities==
Fish is best known for his analysis of interpretive communities — an offshoot of reader-response criticism. His work in this field examines how the interpretation of a text is dependent upon each reader&#x27;s own subjective experience in one or more communities, each of which is defined as a &#x27;community&#x27; by a distinct epistemology. For Fish, a large part of what renders a reader&#x27;s subjective experience valuable — that is, why it may be considered &quot;constrained&quot; as opposed to an uncontrolled and idiosyncratic assertion of the self — comes from a concept native to the field of linguistics called linguistic competence.

In Fish&#x27;s source the term is explained as &quot;the idea that it is possible to characterize a linguistic system that every speaker shares.&quot; In the context of literary criticism, he uses this concept to argue that a reader&#x27;s approach to a text is not completely subjective, and that an internalized understanding of language shared by the native speakers of that given language makes possible the creation of normative boundaries for one&#x27;s experience with language.

==Fish and university politics==
Fish has written extensively on the politics of the university, having taken positions supporting campus speech codes and criticizing political statements by universities or faculty bodies on matters outside their professional areas of expertise.

He argued in January 2008 on his &quot;New York Times&quot;-syndicated blog that the humanities are of no instrumental value, but have only intrinsic worth. He explains, &quot;To the question &#x27;of what use are the humanities?&#x27;, the only honest answer is none whatsoever. And it is an answer that brings honor to its subject. Justification, after all, confers value on an activity from a perspective outside its performance. An activity that cannot be justified is an activity that refuses to regard itself as instrumental to some larger good. The humanities are their own good. There is nothing more to say, and anything that is said diminishes the object of its supposed praise.&quot;

Fish has lectured across the US at many universities and colleges including Florida Atlantic University, Brown University, the University of Pennsylvania, Harvard University, University of Toronto, Columbia University, the University of Vermont, the University of Georgia, the University of Louisville, San Diego State University, the University of Kentucky, Bates College, the University of Central Florida, the University of West Florida, and the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law.

==Fish as university politician==
As chair of the Duke English department from 1986 to 1992, Fish attracted attention and controversy. Fish, according to &quot;Lingua Franca,&quot; used &quot;shameless—and in academe unheard-of—entrepreneurial gusto&quot; to take &quot;a respectable but staid Southern English department and transform it into the professional powerhouse of the day&quot;, in part through the payment of lavish salaries. His time at Duke saw comparatively quite light undergraduate and graduate coursework requirements for students, matched by their heavy graduate teaching requirements. This permitted professors to reduce their own teaching. In April 1992, near the end of Fish&#x27;s time as department chair, an external review committee considered evidence that the English curriculum had become &quot;a hodgepodge of uncoordinated offerings&quot;, lacking in &quot;broad foundational courses&quot; or faculty planning. The department&#x27;s dissipating prominence in the 1990s was featured on the front page of &quot;The New York Times&quot;.

==Criticisms of his work==
As a frequent contributor to &quot;The New York Times&quot; and &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; editorial page, Fish has been the target of wide-ranging criticism.

Writing in &quot;Slate&quot; magazine, Judith Shulevitz reported that not only does Fish openly proclaim himself &quot;unprincipled&quot; but also rejects wholesale the concepts of &quot;fairness, impartiality, reasonableness.&quot; To Fish, &quot;ideas have no consequences.&quot; For taking this stance, Shulevitz characterizes Fish as &quot;not the unprincipled relativist he&#x27;s accused of being. He&#x27;s something worse. He&#x27;s a fatalist.&quot;

Likewise, among academics, Fish has endured vigorous criticism. The conservative R. V. Young writes, 

Terry Eagleton, a prominent British Marxist, excoriates Fish&#x27;s &quot;discreditable epistemology&quot; as &quot;sinister&quot;. According to Eagleton, &quot;Like almost all diatribes against universalism, Fish&#x27;s critique of universalism has its own rigid universals: the priority at all times and places of sectoral interests, the permanence of conflict, the a priori status of belief systems, the rhetorical character of truth, the fact that all apparent openness is secretly closure, and the like.&quot; Of Fish&#x27;s attempt to co-opt the critiques leveled against him, Eagleton responds, &quot;The felicitous upshot is that nobody can ever criticise Fish, since if their criticisms are intelligible to him, they belong to his cultural game and are thus not really criticisms at all; and if they are not intelligible, they belong to some other set of conventions entirely and are therefore irrelevant.&quot;

In the essay &quot;Sophistry about Conventions&quot;, philosopher Martha Nussbaum argues that Fish&#x27;s theoretical views are based on &quot;extreme relativism and even radical subjectivism.&quot; Discounting his work as nothing more than sophistry, Nussbaum claims that Fish &quot;relies on the regulative principle of non-contradiction in order to adjudicate between competing principles&quot;, thereby relying on normative standards of argumentation even as he argues against them. Offering an alternative, Nussbaum cites John Rawls&#x27;s work in &quot;A Theory of Justice&quot; to highlight &quot;an example of a rational argument; it can be said to yield, in a perfectly recognizable sense, ethical truth.&quot; Nussbaum appropriates Rawls&#x27;s critique of the insufficiencies of Utilitarianism, showing that a rational person will consistently prefer a system of justice that acknowledges boundaries between separate persons rather than relying on the aggregation of the sum total of desires. &quot;This&quot;, she claims, &quot;is altogether different from rhetorical manipulation.&quot;

Camille Paglia, author of &quot;Sexual Personae&quot; and public intellectual, denounced Fish as a &quot;totalitarian Tinkerbell,&quot; charging him with hypocrisy for lecturing about multiculturalism from the perspective of a tenured professor at the homogeneous and sheltered ivory tower of Duke.

David Hirsch, a critic of post-structuralist influences on hermeneutics, censured Fish for &quot;lapses in logical rigor&quot; and &quot;carelessness toward rhetorical precision.&quot; In an examination of Fish&#x27;s arguments, Hirsch attempts to demonstrate that &quot;not only was a restoration of New Critical methods unnecessary, but that Fish himself had not managed to rid himself of the shackles of New Critical theory.&quot; Hirsch compares Fish&#x27;s work to Penelope&#x27;s loom in the &quot;Odyssey&quot;, stating, &quot;what one critic weaves by day, another unweaves by night.&quot; &quot;Nor,&quot; he writes, &quot;does this weaving and unweaving constitute a dialectic, since no forward movement takes place.&quot; Ultimately, Hirsch sees Fish as left to &quot;wander in his own Elysian fields, hopelessly alienated from art, from truth, and from humanity.&quot;

==Personal life==
He is married to literary critic Jane Tompkins.

==Literary references==
Stanley Fish has been parodied in two novels by David Lodge in which he appears as &quot;Morris Zapp&quot;.

==Awards==
Fish received the PEN/Diamonstein-Spielvogel Award for the Art of the Essay in 1994 for &quot;There&#x27;s No Such Thing As Free Speech, and it&#x27;s a Good Thing, Too.&quot;

==Bibliography==

===Primary works by Fish===
*&quot;John Skelton&#x27;s Poetry&quot;. New Haven, CT: Yale UP, 1965.
*&quot;Surprised by Sin: The Reader in&quot; Paradise Lost. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1967. (10). (13).
* &quot;Self-Consuming Artifacts: The Experience of Seventeenth-Century Literature&quot;. Berkeley, CA: U of California P, 1972.
*&quot;Interpreting the Variorum.&quot; &quot;Critical Inquiry&quot; (1976).
*&quot;Why We Can&#x27;t All Just Get Along.&quot; &quot;First Things&quot; (1996).
*&quot;The Living Temple: George Herbert and Catechizing&quot;. Berkeley, CA: U of California P, 1978.
*&quot;Is There a Text in This Class? The Authority of Interpretive Communities&quot;. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1980. (10). (13).
*&quot;Doing What Comes Naturally: Change, Rhetoric, and the Practice of Theory in Literary and Legal Studies&quot;. Durham, NC: Duke UP, 1989.
*&quot;Professional Correctness: Literary Studies and Political Change&quot;. Cambridge, MA: Harvard U P, 1999.
*&quot;The Trouble with Principle&quot;. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1999.
*&quot;How Milton Works&quot;. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 2001.
*&quot;Save The World on Your Own Time&quot; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.
*&quot;The Fugitive in Flight: Faith, Liberalism, and Law in a Classic TV Show&quot;. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2010.
*&quot;How to Write a Sentence: And How to Read One&quot;. New York, NY: HarperCollins Publishers, 2011.
*Versions of Antihumanism: Milton and Others. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012. 
**&quot;Versions of Academic Freedom: From Professionalism to Revolution&quot;. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2014. .
*&quot;Winning Arguments: What Works and Doesn&#x27;t Work in Politics, the Bedroom, the Courtroom, and the Classroom&quot;. New York, NY: HarperCollins, 2016. .
*&quot;The First: How to Think About Hate Speech, Campus Speech, Religious Speech, Fake News, Post-Truth, and Donald Trump.&quot; Atria/One Signal Publishers. 2019 .

===Collections of works by Fish===
*&quot;There&#x27;s No Such Thing As Free Speech, and it&#x27;s a Good Thing, Too&quot;. New York: Oxford UP, 1994.
:The title essay and an additional essay, &quot;Jerry Falwell&#x27;s Mother,&quot; focus on free speech issues. In the latter piece, Fish argues that, if one has some answer in mind to the question &quot;what is free speech good for?&quot; along the lines of &quot;in the free and open clash of viewpoints the truth can more readily be known,&quot; then it makes no sense to defend deliberate malicious libel (such as that which was at issue in the U.S. Supreme Court case of &quot;Hustler Magazine v. Falwell&quot;) in the name of &quot;free speech.&quot;
*&quot;The Stanley Fish Reader&quot;. Ed. H. Aram Veeser. London: Blackwell Publishers, 1999.
*&quot;Think Again: Contrarian Reflections on Life, Culture, Politics, Religion, Law, and Education&quot;, Princeton, (2015), 

==See also==
*Formalism
*New Criticism

==Notes and references==
==Further reading==
*Robertson, Michael. &quot;Stanley Fish on Philosophy, Politics and Law&quot;. Cambridge University Press, 2014
*Olson, Gary A. &quot;Stanley Fish, America&#x27;s Enfant Terrible: The Authorized Biography.&quot; Carbondale: SIU P, 2016.
*Olson, Gary A. &quot;Justifying Belief: Stanley Fish and the Work of Rhetoric&quot;. Albany: SUNY P, 2002.
*&quot;Postmodern Sophistry: Stanley Fish and the Critical Enterprise&quot;. Ed. Gary Olson and Lynn Worsham. Albany, NY: SUNY P, 2004.
*Owen, J. Judd. &quot;Religion and the Demise of Liberal Rationalism&quot;. Chapters 6–8 and &quot;Appendix: A Reply to Stanley Fish.&quot; University of Chicago Press, 2001.
*Perez-Firmat, Gustavo: “Interpretive Assumptions and Interpreted Texts: On a Poem by Stanley Fish,” Essays in Literature, 11 (1984), 145–52.
*Lang, Chris &quot;The Reader-Response Theory of Stanley Fish&quot;
*Landa, José Ángel García &quot;Stanley E. Fish&#x27;s Speech Acts&quot;
*Pierre Schlag, &quot;Fish v. Zapp--The Case of the Relatively Autonomous Self,&quot; 76 Georgetown Law Journal 37 (1988) 

==External links==

*Interview with Stanley Fish published in &quot;The minnesota review&quot; March 3, 2000. Accessed December 23, 2006.
*&quot;Leading Professor Stanley Fish to Join FIU Law Faculty.&quot; Press release. Florida International University. June 29, 2005.
*Stanley Fish article published in the &quot;Johns Hopkins University Guide to Literary Theory &amp; Criticism&quot;.
*Stanley Fish. Florida International University Law School faculty biography.
*Stanley Fish&#x27;s blog at &quot;The New York Times&quot; Editorial section.
*Stanley Fish on Deconstruction . Radio interview with program host, Hugh LaFollette. WETS-FM. University of San Francisco. n.d. (Audio link.)

*WorldCat Identities page for Stanley Eugene Fish

;Archival collections
*Guide to the Stanley Fish Papers. Special Collections and Archives, The UC Irvine Libraries, Irvine, California</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q303680" start="0" end="19" title="Stanley Fish" label="Stanley Eugene Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q459381" start="57" end="74" title="literary theory" label="literary theorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q185351" start="76" end="89" title="legal scholar" label="legal scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q482980" start="91" end="97" title="author" label="author"/>
<link wikidata="Q58968" start="102" end="121" title="public intellectual" label="public intellectual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048851" start="199" end="217" title="Yeshiva University" label="Yeshiva University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11093399" start="225" end="258" title="Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law" label="Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065809" start="400" end="432" title="Florida International University" label="Florida International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q955764" start="505" end="538" title="University of Illinois at Chicago" label="University of Illinois at Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="565" end="578" title="postmodernism" label="postmodernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774361" start="632" end="652" title="anti-foundationalism" label="anti-foundationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479773" start="721" end="743" title="reader-response theory" label="reader-response theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11093399" start="790" end="811" title="Cardozo School of Law" label="Cardozo School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="813" end="847" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="849" end="873" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="875" end="905" title="The University of Pennsylvania" label="The University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143289" start="907" end="922" title="Yale Law School" label="Yale Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="924" end="943" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246903" start="945" end="973" title="John Marshall Law School (Chicago)" label="The John Marshall Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="979" end="994" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q18383" start="1043" end="1067" title="Providence, Rhode Island" label="Providence, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="1121" end="1127" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="1306" end="1310" title="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="B.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="1320" end="1346" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="1362" end="1366" title="Master of Arts" label="M.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="1372" end="1387" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="1414" end="1419" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Ph.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="1437" end="1452" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="1502" end="1538" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California at Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="1543" end="1567" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="1649" end="1664" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q955764" start="1766" end="1799" title="University of Illinois at Chicago" label="University of Illinois at Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246903" start="1858" end="1882" title="UIC John Marshall Law School" label="John Marshall Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065809" start="2551" end="2583" title="Florida International University" label="Florida International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461474" start="2601" end="2619" title="FIU College of Law" label="FIU College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288359" start="2674" end="2689" title="Ralston College" label="Ralston College"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="2769" end="2806" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982482" start="2835" end="2857" title="New College of Florida" label="New College of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766674" start="2945" end="2959" title="Mark Bauerlein" label="Mark Bauerlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q119190" start="3061" end="3072" title="Medieval studies" label="medievalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="3103" end="3124" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q638589" start="3182" end="3194" title="John Skelton (poet)" label="John Skelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="3250" end="3256" title="John Milton" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006250" start="3579" end="3603" title="Constantinos Patrides" label="Constantinos A. Patrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249752" start="4099" end="4110" title="John Mullan (academic)" label="John Mullan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479773" start="4363" end="4393" title="Reader-response theory" label="ever-abused &amp;quot;reader&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q28754" start="4601" end="4614" title="Paradise Lost" label="Paradise Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992868" start="4788" end="4812" title="interpretive communities" label="interpretive communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479773" start="4830" end="4855" title="reader-response criticism" label="reader-response criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q234460" start="4917" end="4921" title="Text (literary theory)" label="text"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346205" start="5374" end="5395" title="linguistic competence" label="linguistic competence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="5954" end="5962" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="5970" end="5980" title="university" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313185" start="6023" end="6034" title="speech code" label="speech code"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="6251" end="6261" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q112805359" start="6272" end="6290" title="instrumental value" label="instrumental value"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239172" start="6306" end="6321" title="Intrinsic value (ethics)" label="intrinsic worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q429863" start="6938" end="6965" title="Florida Atlantic University" label="Florida Atlantic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="6967" end="6983" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="7017" end="7035" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="7037" end="7058" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="7060" end="7079" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048898" start="7085" end="7106" title="University of Vermont" label="University of Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q761534" start="7112" end="7133" title="University of Georgia" label="University of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317143" start="7139" end="7163" title="University of Louisville" label="University of Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q913861" start="7165" end="7191" title="San Diego State University" label="San Diego State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360303" start="7197" end="7219" title="University of Kentucky" label="University of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q810771" start="7221" end="7234" title="Bates College" label="Bates College"/>
<link wikidata="Q143451" start="7240" end="7269" title="University of Central Florida" label="University of Central Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q659255" start="7275" end="7301" title="University of West Florida" label="University of West Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q11093399" start="7311" end="7344" title="Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law" label="Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899553" start="7507" end="7520" title="Lingua Franca (magazine)" label="Lingua Franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="8387" end="8405" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="8476" end="8494" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="8511" end="8534" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60497" start="8627" end="8632" title="Slate (magazine)" label="Slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303672" start="8649" end="8665" title="Judith Shulevitz" label="Judith Shulevitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274086" start="9151" end="9162" title="R. V. Young" label="R. V. Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q315349" start="9173" end="9187" title="Terry Eagleton" label="Terry Eagleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="9261" end="9273" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q875797" start="9368" end="9380" title="Universality (philosophy)" label="universalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q235470" start="10161" end="10176" title="Martha Nussbaum" label="Martha Nussbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750514" start="10336" end="10345" title="sophistry" label="sophistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q172544" start="10622" end="10632" title="John Rawls" label="John Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q300588" start="10654" end="10673" title="A Theory of Justice" label="A Theory of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q255463" start="11196" end="11210" title="Camille Paglia" label="Camille Paglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958586" start="11228" end="11243" title="Sexual Personae" label="Sexual Personae"/>
<link wikidata="Q58968" start="11254" end="11273" title="public intellectual" label="public intellectual"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="11555" end="11567" title="hermeneutics" label="hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="12000" end="12007" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q157128" start="12293" end="12300" title="Elysian" label="Elysian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277987" start="12429" end="12442" title="Jane Tompkins" label="Jane Tompkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q313001" start="12517" end="12528" title="David Lodge (author)" label="David Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118950" start="12607" end="12664" title="PEN/Diamonstein-Spielvogel Award for the Art of the Essay" label="PEN/Diamonstein-Spielvogel Award for the Art of the Essay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447961" start="12996" end="13020" title="Self-Consuming Artifacts" label="Self-Consuming Artifacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186621" start="13163" end="13179" title="Critical Inquiry" label="Critical Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072976" start="13251" end="13263" title="First Things" label="First Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814982" start="14425" end="14452" title="University of Chicago Press" label="University of Chicago Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="14601" end="14614" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="15391" end="15409" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704342" start="15424" end="15451" title="Hustler Magazine v. Falwell" label="Hustler Magazine v. Falwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655961" start="15735" end="15744" title="Formalism (literature)" label="Formalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q742302" start="15746" end="15759" title="New Criticism" label="New Criticism"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16065" end="16121" title="Justifying Belief: Stanley Fish and the Work of Rhetoric" label="Justifying Belief: Stanley Fish and the Work of Rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065809" start="17091" end="17123" title="Florida International University" label="Florida International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065809" start="17273" end="17305" title="Florida International University" label="Florida International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="17371" end="17389" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887879" start="17510" end="17537" title="University of San Francisco" label="University of San Francisco"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55919" wikidata="Q1065588" url="?curid=55919" title="Charles Murray">
<text>Charles Murray may refer to:
== Politicians ==
*Charles Murray, 1st Earl of Dunmore (1661–1710), British peer
*Charles Murray (author and diplomat) (1806–1895), British author and diplomat
*Charles Murray, 7th Earl of Dunmore (1841–1907), Scottish peer and Conservative politician
*Charles James Murray (1851–1929), British politician
*Charles Murray, Lord Murray (1866–1936), Scottish Conservative politician, lawyer and judge
*Charles Murray Turpin (1878–1946), member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Pennsylvania
*Ed Murray (Tennessee politician) (Charles Edward Murray, 1928–2009), US politician, who was speaker of the Tennessee House of Representatives

==Writers==
*Charles Murray (poet) (1864–1941), poet who wrote in the Doric dialect of Scots
*Charles Shaar Murray (born 1951), English rock music writer

== Entertainers ==
*Charles Murray (American actor) (1872–1941), American actor from the silent era, also called Charlie Murray
*Charles Murray (Scottish actor) (1754–1821), Scottish actor and dramatist

== Others ==
*Charles P. Murray Jr. (1921–2011), American soldier and Medal of Honor recipient
*Charles Murray (political scientist) (born 1943), American policy writer, co-wrote &quot;The Bell Curve&quot; and &quot;Losing Ground&quot;
*Charles Murray (boxer) (born 1968), American boxer, former Light Welterweight Champion
*Charles Murray (bishop) (1889–1950), Anglican Bishop of Riverina, Australia
*Charles Murray (trade unionist) (died 1889), British trade unionist and socialist activist
*Charles Fairfax Murray (1849–1919), English painter, dealer, collector, benefactor and art historian
*Charles I. Murray (1896–1977), United States Marine Corps general
*Charles Oliver Murray (1842–1923), Scottish engraver
*Charles Wilson Murray (1820–1873), English businessman and member of the Legislative Council of Hong Kong
*Charles Wyndham Murray (1844–1928), British Army officer and politician
== See also ==
*Charlie Murray (disambiguation)
*Chic Murray (Charles Murray, 1919–1985), Scottish comic</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1065588" start="0" end="14" title="Charles Murray" label="Charles Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081165" start="48" end="83" title="Charles Murray, 1st Earl of Dunmore" label="Charles Murray, 1st Earl of Dunmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063616" start="111" end="147" title="Charles Murray (author and diplomat)" label="Charles Murray (author and diplomat)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063510" start="190" end="225" title="Charles Murray, 7th Earl of Dunmore" label="Charles Murray, 7th Earl of Dunmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079454" start="282" end="302" title="Charles James Murray" label="Charles James Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081166" start="336" end="363" title="Charles Murray, Lord Murray" label="Charles Murray, Lord Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081169" start="429" end="450" title="Charles Murray Turpin" label="Charles Murray Turpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335211" start="527" end="559" title="Ed Murray (Tennessee politician)" label="Ed Murray (Tennessee politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081168" start="683" end="704" title="Charles Murray (poet)" label="Charles Murray (poet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960229" start="764" end="784" title="Charles Shaar Murray" label="Charles Shaar Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959874" start="845" end="876" title="Charles Murray (American actor)" label="Charles Murray (American actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239200" start="954" end="985" title="Charles Murray (Scottish actor)" label="Charles Murray (Scottish actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081434" start="1043" end="1064" title="Charles P. Murray Jr." label="Charles P. Murray Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1065595" start="1125" end="1161" title="Charles Murray (political scientist)" label="Charles Murray (political scientist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959875" start="1266" end="1288" title="Charles Murray (boxer)" label="Charles Murray (boxer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081167" start="1354" end="1377" title="Charles Murray (bishop)" label="Charles Murray (bishop)"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356845" start="1431" end="1462" title="Charles Murray (trade unionist)" label="Charles Murray (trade unionist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12062202" start="1523" end="1545" title="Charles Fairfax Murray" label="Charles Fairfax Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q41033702" start="1625" end="1642" title="Charles I. Murray" label="Charles I. Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q17308882" start="1692" end="1713" title="Charles Oliver Murray" label="Charles Oliver Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q17479403" start="1746" end="1767" title="Charles Wilson Murray" label="Charles Wilson Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083746" start="1853" end="1875" title="Charles Wyndham Murray" label="Charles Wyndham Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128626" start="1941" end="1972" title="Charlie Murray (disambiguation)" label="Charlie Murray (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095381" start="1974" end="1985" title="Chic Murray" label="Chic Murray"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55922" wikidata="Q372752" url="?curid=55922" title="Prostatitis">
<text>Prostatitis is an umbrella term for a variety of medical conditions that incorporate bacterial and non-bacterial origin illnesses in the pelvic region. In contrast with the plain meaning of the word (which means &quot;inflammation of the prostate&quot;), the diagnosis may not always include inflammation. Prostatitis is classified into acute, chronic, asymptomatic inflammatory prostatitis, and chronic pelvic pain syndrome.

In the United States, prostatitis is diagnosed in 8% of all male urologist visits and 1% of all primary care physician visits for male genitourinary symptoms.

==Classification==
The term &quot;prostatitis&quot; refers to inflammation of the tissue of the prostate gland. It may occur as an appropriate physiological response to an infection, or it may occur in the absence of infection.

In 1999, the National Institutes of Health devised a new classification system. For more specifics about each type of prostatitis, including information on symptoms, treatment, and prognosis, follow the links to the relevant full articles.

In 1968, Meares and Stamey determined a classification technique based on the culturing of bacteria. This classification is no longer used.

The conditions are distinguished by the different presentation of pain, white blood cells (WBCs) in the urine, duration of symptoms and bacteria cultured from the urine. To help express prostatic secretions that may contain WBCs and bacteria, prostate massage is sometimes used.

==See also==
* Interstitial cystitis — a related disease
* Granulomatous prostatitis
* IgG4-related prostatitis
* Male accessory gland infection (MAGI)

==References==
== External links ==

* Prostatitis Self Assessment Calculator</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q372752" start="0" end="11" title="Prostatitis" label="Prostatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="292" end="304" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630404" start="353" end="390" title="asymptomatic inflammatory prostatitis" label="asymptomatic inflammatory prostatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900222" start="396" end="424" title="chronic pelvic pain syndrome" label="chronic pelvic pain syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="434" end="447" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q105650" start="492" end="501" title="urologist" label="urologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q55379489" start="523" end="545" title="primary care physician" label="primary care physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q9625" start="683" end="697" title="prostate gland" label="prostate gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="829" end="858" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q42395" start="1270" end="1286" title="white blood cell" label="white blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="1334" end="1342" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125312" start="1343" end="1351" title="Microbiological culture" label="cultured"/>
<link wikidata="Q646522" start="1441" end="1457" title="prostate massage" label="prostate massage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671412" start="1493" end="1514" title="Interstitial cystitis" label="Interstitial cystitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596833" start="1537" end="1562" title="Granulomatous prostatitis" label="Granulomatous prostatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25091337" start="1565" end="1589" title="IgG4-related prostatitis" label="IgG4-related prostatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25091279" start="1592" end="1622" title="Male accessory gland infection" label="Male accessory gland infection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55924" wikidata="Q9625" url="?curid=55924" title="Prostate">
<text>The prostate is an accessory gland of the male reproductive system and a muscle-driven mechanical switch between urination and ejaculation. It is found in all male mammals. It differs between species anatomically, chemically, and physiologically. Anatomically, the prostate is found below the bladder, with the urethra passing through it. It is described in gross anatomy as consisting of lobes and in microanatomy by zone. It is surrounded by an elastic, fibromuscular capsule and contains glandular tissue, as well as connective tissue.

The prostate produces and contains fluid that forms part of semen, the substance emitted during ejaculation as part of the male sexual response. This prostatic fluid is slightly alkaline, milky or white in appearance. The alkalinity of semen helps neutralize the acidity of the vaginal tract, prolonging the lifespan of sperm. The prostatic fluid is expelled in the first part of ejaculate, together with most of the sperm, because of the action of smooth muscle tissue within the prostate. In comparison with the few spermatozoa expelled together with mainly seminal vesicular fluid, those in prostatic fluid have better motility, longer survival, and better protection of genetic material.

Disorders of the prostate include enlargement, inflammation, infection, and cancer. The word &quot;prostate&quot; is derived from Ancient Greek (), meaning &quot;one who stands before&quot;, &quot;protector&quot;, &quot;guardian&quot;, with the term originally used to describe the seminal vesicles.

==Structure==
The prostate is a exocrine gland of the male reproductive system. In adults, it is about the size of a walnut, and has an average weight of about , usually ranging between . The prostate is located in the pelvis. It sits below the urinary bladder and surrounds the urethra. The part of the urethra passing through it is called the prostatic urethra, which joins with the two ejaculatory ducts. The prostate is covered in a surface called the &quot;prostatic capsule&quot; or &quot;prostatic fascia&quot;.

The internal structure of the prostate has been described using both lobes and zones. Because of the variation in descriptions and definitions of lobes, the zone classification is used more predominantly.

The prostate has been described as consisting of three or four zones. Zones are more typically able to be seen on histology, or in medical imaging, such as ultrasound or MRI.

The &quot;lobe&quot; classification describes lobes that, while originally defined in the fetus, are also visible in gross anatomy, including dissection and when viewed endoscopically. The five lobes are the anterior lobe or isthmus, the posterior lobe, the right and left lateral lobes, and the middle or median lobe.

Inside of the prostate, adjacent and parallel to the prostatic urethra, there are two longitudinal muscle systems. On the front side (ventrally) runs the urethral dilator (&quot;musculus dilatator urethrae&quot;), on the backside (dorsally) runs the muscle switching the urethra into the ejaculatory state (&quot;musculus ejaculatorius&quot;).

===Blood and lymphatic vessels===
The prostate receives blood through the inferior vesical artery, internal pudendal artery, and middle rectal arteries. These vessels enter the prostate on its outer surface where it meets the bladder, and travel forward to the apex of the prostate. Both the inferior vesical and the middle rectal arteries often arise together directly from the internal iliac arteries. On entering the bladder, the inferior vesical artery splits into a urethral branch, supplying the urethral prostate; and a capsular branch, which travels around the capsule and has smaller branches, which perforate into the prostate.

The veins of the prostate form a network – the prostatic venous plexus, primarily around its front and outer surface. This network also receives blood from the deep dorsal vein of the penis, and is connected via branches to the vesical plexus and internal pudendal veins. Veins drain into the vesical and then internal iliac veins.

The lymphatic drainage of the prostate depends on the positioning of the area. Vessels surrounding the vas deferens, some of the vessels in the seminal vesicle, and a vessel from the posterior surface of the prostate drain into the external iliac lymph nodes. Some of the seminal vesicle vessels, prostatic vessels, and vessels from the anterior prostate drain into internal iliac lymph nodes. Vessels of the prostate itself also drain into the obturator and sacral lymph nodes.

===Microanatomy===
The prostate consists of glandular and connective tissue. Tall column-shaped cells form the lining (the epithelium) of the glands. These form one layer or may be pseudostratified. The epithelium is highly variable and areas of low cuboidal or flat cells can also be present, with transitional epithelium in the outer regions of the longer ducts. Basal cells surround the luminal epithelial cells in benign glands. The glands are formed as many follicles, which drain into canals and subsequently 12–20 main ducts, These in turn drain into the urethra as it passes through the prostate. There are also a small amount of flat cells, which sit next to the basement membranes of glands, and act as stem cells.

The connective tissue of the prostate is made up of fibrous tissue and smooth muscle. The fibrous tissue separates the gland into lobules. It also sits between the glands and is composed of randomly orientated smooth-muscle bundles that are continuous with the bladder.

Over time, thickened secretions called corpora amylacea accumulate in the gland.

===Gene and protein expression===
About 20,000 protein-coding genes are expressed in human cells and almost 75% of these genes are expressed in the normal prostate. About 150 of these genes are more specifically expressed in the prostate, with about 20 genes being highly prostate specific. The corresponding specific proteins are expressed in the glandular and secretory cells of the prostatic gland and have functions that are important for the characteristics of semen, including prostate-specific proteins, such as the prostate specific antigen (PSA), and the prostatic acid phosphatase.

===Development===
In the developing embryo, at the hind end lies an inpouching called the cloaca. This, over the fourth to the seventh week, divides into a urogenital sinus and the beginnings of the anal canal, with a wall forming between these two inpouchings called the urorectal septum. The urogenital sinus divides into three parts, with the middle part forming the urethra; the upper part is largest and becomes the urinary bladder, and the lower part then changes depending on the biological sex of the embryo.

The prostatic part of the urethra develops from the middle, pelvic, part of the urogenital sinus, which is of endodermal origin. Around the end of the third month of embryonic life, outgrowths arise from the prostatic part of the urethra and grow into the surrounding mesenchyme. The cells lining this part of the urethra differentiate into the glandular epithelium of the prostate. The associated mesenchyme differentiates into the dense connective tissue and the smooth muscle of the prostate.

Condensation of mesenchyme, urethra, and Wolffian ducts gives rise to the adult prostate gland, a composite organ made up of several tightly fused glandular and non-glandular components. To function properly, the prostate needs male hormones (androgens), which are responsible for male sex characteristics. The main male hormone is testosterone, which is produced mainly by the testicles. It is dihydrotestosterone (DHT), a metabolite of testosterone, that predominantly regulates the prostate. The prostate gland enlarges over time, until the fourth decade of life.

==Function==

===In ejaculation===
The prostate secretes fluid, which becomes part of the semen. Its secretion forms up to 30% of the semen. Semen is the fluid emitted (ejaculated) by males during the sexual response. When sperm are emitted, they are transmitted from the vas deferens into the male urethra via the ejaculatory duct, which lies within the prostate gland. Ejaculation is the expulsion of semen from the urethra. Semen is moved into the urethra following contractions of the smooth muscle of the vas deferens and seminal vesicles, following stimulation, primarily of the glans penis. Stimulation sends nerve signals via the internal pudendal nerves to the upper lumbar spine; the nerve signals causing contraction act via the hypogastric nerves. After traveling into the urethra, the seminal fluid is ejaculated by contraction of the bulbocavernosus muscle. The secretions of the prostate include proteolytic enzymes, prostatic acid phosphatase, fibrinolysin, zinc, and prostate-specific antigen. Together with the secretions from the seminal vesicles, these form the major fluid part of semen. The prostate contains various metals, including zinc, and is known to be the primary source of most metals found in semen, which are released during ejaculation.

===In urination===

The prostate&#x27;s changes of shape, which facilitate the mechanical switch between urination and ejaculation, are mainly driven by the two longitudinal muscle systems running along the prostatic urethra. These are the &quot;urethral dilator&quot; (&quot;musculus dilatator urethrae&quot;) on the urethra&#x27;s front side, which contracts during urination and thereby shortens and tilts the prostate in its vertical dimension thus widening the prostatic section of the urethral tube, and the muscle switching the urethra into the ejaculatory state (&quot;musculus ejaculatorius&quot;) on its backside.

In case of an operation, e.g. because of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), damaging or sparing of these two muscle systems varies considerably depending on the choice of operation type and details of the procedure of the chosen technique. The effects on postoperational urination and ejaculation vary correspondingly.

===In stimulation===
It is possible for some men to achieve orgasm solely through stimulation of the prostate gland, such as via prostate massage or anal intercourse. This has led to the area of the rectal wall adjacent to the prostate to be popularly referred to as the &quot;male G-spot&quot;.

==Clinical significance==

===Inflammation===

Prostatitis is inflammation of the prostate gland. It can be caused by infection with bacteria, or other noninfective causes. Inflammation of the prostate can cause painful urination or ejaculation, groin pain, difficulty passing urine, or constitutional symptoms such as fever or tiredness. When inflamed, the prostate becomes enlarged and is tender when touched during digital rectal examination. The bacteria responsible for the infection may be detected by a urine culture.
Acute prostatitis and chronic bacterial prostatitis are treated with antibiotics. Chronic non-bacterial prostatitis, or male chronic pelvic pain syndrome is treated by a large variety of modalities including the medications alpha blockers, non-steroidal anti-inflammatories and amitriptyline, antihistamines, and other anxiolytics. Other treatments that are not medications may include physical therapy, psychotherapy, nerve modulators, and surgery. More recently, a combination of trigger point and psychological therapy has proved effective for category III prostatitis as well.

===Prostate enlargement===

An enlarged prostate is called prostatomegaly, with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) being the most common cause. BPH refers to an enlargement of the prostate due to an increase in the number of cells that make up the prostate () from a cause that is not a malignancy. It is very common in older men. It is often diagnosed when the prostate has enlarged to the point where urination becomes difficult. Symptoms include needing to urinate often (urinary frequency) or taking a while to get started (urinary hesitancy). If the prostate grows too large, it may constrict the urethra and impede the flow of urine, making urination painful and difficult, or in extreme cases completely impossible, causing urinary retention. Over time, chronic retention may cause the bladder to become larger and cause a backflow of urine into the kidneys (hydronephrosis).
BPH can be treated with medication, a minimally invasive procedure or, in extreme cases, surgery that removes the prostate. In general, treatment often begins with an alpha-1 adrenergic receptor antagonist medication such as tamsulosin, which reduces the tone of the smooth muscle found in the urethra that passes through the prostate, making it easier for urine to pass through. For people with persistent symptoms, procedures may be considered. The surgery most often used in such cases is transurethral resection of the prostate, in which an instrument is inserted through the urethra to remove prostate tissue that is pressing against the upper part of the urethra and restricting the flow of urine. Minimally invasive procedures include transurethral needle ablation of the prostate and transurethral microwave thermotherapy. These outpatient procedures may be followed by the insertion of a temporary stent, to allow normal voluntary urination, without exacerbating irritative symptoms.

===Cancer===

Prostate cancer is one of the most common cancers affecting older men in the UK, US, Northern Europe and Australia, and a significant cause of death for elderly men worldwide. Often, a person does not have symptoms; when they do occur, symptoms may include urinary frequency, urgency, hesitation and other symptoms associated with BPH. Uncommonly, such cancers may cause weight loss, retention of urine, or symptoms such as back pain due to lesions that have spread outside of the prostate.
A digital rectal examination and the measurement of a prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level are usually the first investigations done to check for prostate cancer. PSA values are difficult to interpret, because a high value might be present in a person without cancer, and a low value can be present in someone with cancer. The next form of testing is often the taking of a prostate biopsy to assess for tumour activity and invasiveness. Because of the significant risk of overdiagnosis with widespread screening in the general population, prostate cancer screening is controversial. If a tumour is confirmed, medical imaging such as an MRI or bone scan may be done to check for the presence of tumour in other parts of the body.
Prostate cancer that is only present in the prostate is often treated with either surgical removal of the prostate or with radiotherapy or by the insertion of small radioactive particles of iodine-125 or palladium-103, called brachytherapy. Cancer that has spread to other parts of the body is usually treated also with hormone therapy, to deprive a tumour of sex hormones (androgens) that stimulate proliferation. This is often done through the use of GnRH analogues or agents (such as bicalutamide) that block the receptors that androgens act on; occasionally, surgical removal of the testes may be done instead. Cancer that does not respond to hormonal treatment, or that progresses after treatment, might be treated with chemotherapy such as docetaxel. Radiotherapy may also be used to help with pain associated with bony lesions.

Sometimes, the decision may be made not to treat prostate cancer. If a cancer is small and localised, the decision may be made to monitor for cancer activity at intervals (&quot;active surveillance&quot;) and defer treatment. If a person, because of frailty or other medical conditions or reasons, has a life expectancy less than ten years, then the impacts of treatment may outweigh any perceived benefits.

===Surgery===

Surgery to remove the prostate is called prostatectomy, and is usually done as a treatment for cancer limited to the prostate, or prostatic enlargement. When it is done, it may be done as open surgery or as laparoscopic (keyhole) surgery. These are done under general anaesthetic. Usually the procedure for cancer is a radical prostatectomy, which means that the seminal vesicles are removed and the vasa deferentia are also tied off. Part of the prostate can also be removed from within the urethra, called transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP). Open surgery may involve a cut that is made in the perineum, or via an approach that involves a cut down the midline from the belly button to the pubic bone. Open surgery may be preferred if there is a suspicion that lymph nodes are involved and they need to be removed or biopsied during a procedure. A perineal approach will not involve lymph node removal and may result in less pain and a faster recovery following an operation. A TURP procedure uses a tube inserted into the urethra via the penis and some form of heat, electricity or laser to remove prostate tissue.
The whole prostate can be removed. Complications that might develop because of surgery include urinary incontinence and erectile dysfunction because of damage to nerves during the operation, particularly if a cancer is very close to nerves. Ejaculation of semen will not occur during orgasm if the vasa deferentia are tied off and seminal vesicles removed, such as during a radical prosatectomy. This will mean a man becomes infertile. Sometimes, orgasm may not be able to occur or may be painful. The penis length may shorten slightly if the part of the urethra within the prostate is also removed. General complications due to surgery can also develop, such as infections, bleeding, inadvertent damage to nearby organs or within the abdomen, and the formation of blood clots.

==History==
The prostate was first formally identified by Venetian anatomist Niccolò Massa in &quot;Anatomiae libri introductorius&quot; (Introduction to Anatomy) in 1536 and illustrated by Flemish anatomist Andreas Vesalius in &quot;Tabulae anatomicae sex&quot; (six anatomical tables) in 1538. Massa described it as a &quot;glandular flesh upon which rests the neck of the bladder,&quot; and Vesalius as a &quot;glandular body&quot;. The first time a word similar to &quot;prostate&quot; was used to describe the gland is credited to André du Laurens in 1600, who described it as a term already in use by anatomists at the time. The term was however used at least as early as 1549 by French surgeon Ambroise Pare.

At the time, Du Laurens was describing what was considered to be a pair of organs (not the single two-lobed organ), and the Latin term &quot;prostatae&quot; that was used was a mistranslation of the term for the Ancient Greek word used to describe the seminal vesicles, &quot;parastatai&quot;; although it has been argued that surgeons in Ancient Greece and Rome must have at least seen the prostate as an anatomical entity. The term &quot;prostatae&quot; was taken rather than the grammatically correct &quot;prostator&quot; (singular) and &quot;prostatores&quot; (plural) because the gender of the Ancient Greek term was taken as female, when it was in fact male.

The fact that the prostate was one and not two organs was an idea popularised throughout the early 18th century, as was the English language term used to describe the organ, &quot;prostate&quot;, attributed to William Cheselden. A monograph, &quot;Practical observations on the treatment of the diseases of the prostate gland&quot; by Everard Home in 1811, was important in the history of the prostate by describing and naming anatomical parts of the prostate, including the median lobe. The idea of the five lobes of the prostate was popularized following anatomical studies conducted by American urologist Oswald Lowsley in 1912. John E. McNeal first proposed the idea of &quot;zones&quot; in 1968; McNeal found that the relatively homogeneous cut surface of an adult prostate in no way resembled &quot;lobes&quot; and thus led to the description of &quot;zones&quot;.
Prostate cancer was first described in a speech to the Medical and Chiurgical Society of London in 1853 by surgeon John Adams and increasingly described by the late 19th century. Prostate cancer was initially considered a rare disease, probably because of shorter life expectancies and poorer detection methods in the 19th century. The first treatments of prostate cancer were surgeries to relieve urinary obstruction. Samuel David Gross has been credited with the first mention of a prostatectomy, as &quot;too absurd to be seriously entertained&quot; The first removal for prostate cancer (radical perineal prostatectomy) was first performed in 1904 by Hugh H. Young at Johns Hopkins Hospital; partial removal of the gland was conducted by Theodore Billroth in 1867.

Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) replaced radical prostatectomy for symptomatic relief of obstruction in the middle of the 20th century because it could better preserve penile erectile function. Radical retropubic prostatectomy was developed in 1983 by Patrick Walsh. In 1941, Charles B. Huggins published studies in which he used estrogen to oppose testosterone production in men with metastatic prostate cancer. This discovery of &quot;chemical castration&quot; won Huggins the 1966 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.

The role of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) in reproduction was determined by Andrzej W. Schally and Roger Guillemin, who both won the 1977 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for this work. GnRH receptor agonists, such as leuprorelin and goserelin, were subsequently developed and used to treat prostate cancer. Radiation therapy for prostate cancer was first developed in the early 20th century and initially consisted of intraprostatic radium implants. External beam radiotherapy became more popular as stronger X-ray radiation sources became available in the middle of the 20th century. Brachytherapy with implanted seeds (for prostate cancer) was first described in 1983. Systemic chemotherapy for prostate cancer was first studied in the 1970s. The initial regimen of cyclophosphamide and 5-fluorouracil was quickly joined by multiple regimens using a host of other systemic chemotherapy drugs.

==Other animals==
The prostate is found only in mammals. The prostate glands of male marsupials are proportionally larger than those of placental mammals. The presence of a functional prostate in monotremes is controversial, and if monotremes do possess functional prostates, they may not make the same contribution to semen as in other mammals.

The structure of the prostate varies, ranging from tubuloalveolar (as in humans) to branched tubular. The gland is particularly well developed in carnivorans and boars, though in other mammals, such as bulls, it can be small and inconspicuous. In other animals, such as marsupials and small ruminants, the prostate is disseminate, meaning not specifically localisable as a distinct tissue, but present throughout the relevant part of the urethra; in other animals, such as red deer and American elk, it may be present as a specific organ and in a disseminate form. In some marsupial species, the size of the prostate gland changes seasonally. The prostate is the only accessory gland that occurs in male dogs. Dogs can produce in one hour as much prostatic fluid as a human can in a day. They excrete this fluid along with their urine to mark their territory. Additionally, dogs are the only species apart from humans seen to have a significant incidence of prostate cancer. The prostate is the only male accessory gland that occurs in cetaceans, consisting of diffuse urethral glands surrounded by a very powerful compressor muscle.

The prostate gland originates with tissues in the urethral wall. This means the urethra, a compressible tube used for urination, runs through the middle of the prostate; enlargement of the prostate can constrict the urethra so that urinating becomes slow and painful.

Prostatic secretions vary among species. They are generally composed of simple sugars and are often slightly alkaline. In eutherian mammals, these secretions usually contain fructose. The prostatic secretions of marsupials usually contain N-Acetylglucosamine or glycogen instead of fructose.

==Skene&#x27;s gland==
Because the Skene&#x27;s gland and the male prostate act similarly by secreting prostate-specific antigen (PSA), which is an ejaculate protein produced in males, and of prostate-specific acid phosphatase, the Skene&#x27;s gland is sometimes referred to as the &quot;female prostate&quot;. Although homologous to the male prostate (developed from the same embryological tissues), various aspects of its development in relation to the male prostate are widely unknown and a matter of research.

==See also==
* Ejaculatory duct
* List of distinct cell types in the adult human body
* Prostate evolution in monotreme mammals
* Seminal vesicles

==References==

===Citations===
===Sources===

===Attribution===
* Portions of the text of this article originate from NIH Publication No. 02-4806, a public domain resource. 

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9625" start="4" end="12" title="Prostate" label="prostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12229458" start="19" end="34" title="male accessory gland" label="accessory gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q842083" start="42" end="66" title="male reproductive system" label="male reproductive system"/>
<link wikidata="Q105726" start="113" end="122" title="urination" label="urination"/>
<link wikidata="Q14820885" start="127" end="138" title="ejaculation" label="ejaculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9382" start="293" end="300" title="bladder" label="bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386" start="311" end="318" title="urethra" label="urethra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625620" start="358" end="371" title="gross anatomy" label="gross anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168" start="402" end="414" title="microanatomy" label="microanatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25615" start="520" end="537" title="connective tissue" label="connective tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9715" start="600" end="605" title="semen" label="semen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14820885" start="636" end="647" title="ejaculation" label="ejaculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361002" start="668" end="683" title="human sexual response cycle" label="sexual response"/>
<link wikidata="Q432016" start="718" end="726" title="Alkalinity" label="alkaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880" start="818" end="831" title="vagina" label="vaginal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145" start="860" end="865" title="sperm" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q208453" start="989" end="1002" title="smooth muscle" label="smooth muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q27116486" start="1162" end="1170" title="sperm motility" label="motility"/>
<link wikidata="Q506659" start="1267" end="1278" title="benign prostatic hyperplasia" label="enlargement"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="1280" end="1292" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="1294" end="1303" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="1309" end="1315" title="prostate cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1363" end="1376" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q217259" start="1515" end="1531" title="seminal vesicles" label="seminal vesicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q754845" start="1566" end="1580" title="exocrine gland" label="exocrine gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q842083" start="1588" end="1612" title="male reproductive system" label="male reproductive system"/>
<link wikidata="Q208021" start="1651" end="1657" title="walnut" label="walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q9382" start="1779" end="1794" title="urinary bladder" label="urinary bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386" start="1813" end="1820" title="urethra" label="urethra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006435" start="1879" end="1896" title="prostatic urethra" label="prostatic urethra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063420" start="1923" end="1939" title="ejaculatory duct" label="ejaculatory duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168" start="2374" end="2383" title="histology" label="histology"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="2391" end="2406" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="2416" end="2426" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="2430" end="2433" title="Magnetic resonance imaging" label="MRI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2890" end="2899" title="Anatomical terms of location#Dorsal and ventral" label="ventrally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225425" start="2919" end="2926" title="dilator" label="dilator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2987" end="2995" title="Anatomical terms of location#Dorsal and ventral" label="dorsally"/>
<link wikidata="Q707686" start="3175" end="3198" title="inferior vesical artery" label="inferior vesical artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q707489" start="3200" end="3224" title="internal pudendal artery" label="internal pudendal artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115301" start="3230" end="3252" title="middle rectal arteries" label="middle rectal arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q532558" start="3480" end="3503" title="internal iliac arteries" label="internal iliac arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116887" start="3787" end="3810" title="prostatic venous plexus" label="prostatic venous plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759368" start="3900" end="3929" title="deep dorsal vein of the penis" label="deep dorsal vein of the penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117095" start="3968" end="3982" title="Vesical venous plexus" label="vesical plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116893" start="3987" end="4010" title="internal pudendal veins" label="internal pudendal veins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117091" start="4033" end="4040" title="Vesical veins" label="vesical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165743" start="4050" end="4069" title="internal iliac vein" label="internal iliac vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q735505" start="4176" end="4188" title="vas deferens" label="vas deferens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422034" start="4305" end="4331" title="external iliac lymph nodes" label="external iliac lymph nodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047876" start="4439" end="4465" title="internal iliac lymph nodes" label="internal iliac lymph nodes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4518" end="4527" title="Obturator lymph nodes" label="obturator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396918" start="4532" end="4550" title="sacral lymph nodes" label="sacral lymph nodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25615" start="4611" end="4628" title="connective tissue" label="connective tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="4635" end="4654" title="Columnar cell" label="column-shaped cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="4676" end="4686" title="epithelium" label="epithelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267446" start="4734" end="4750" title="Pseudostratified epithelium" label="pseudostratified"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="4803" end="4811" title="Cuboidal epithelia" label="cuboidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="4815" end="4819" title="squamous epithelium" label="flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q92767510" start="4918" end="4928" title="Basal cell" label="Basal cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q208453" start="5350" end="5363" title="smooth muscle" label="smooth muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172363" start="5589" end="5605" title="corpora amylacea" label="corpora amylacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q720988" start="5679" end="5699" title="protein-coding genes" label="protein-coding genes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9715" start="6098" end="6103" title="semen" label="semen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="6133" end="6140" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q409450" start="6155" end="6186" title="Prostate-specific antigen" label="prostate specific antigen (PSA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21151790" start="6196" end="6222" title="prostatic acid phosphatase" label="prostatic acid phosphatase"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="6261" end="6267" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134733" start="6315" end="6321" title="Cloaca (embryology)" label="cloaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251638" start="6381" end="6397" title="urogenital sinus" label="urogenital sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465231" start="6424" end="6434" title="anal canal" label="anal canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901043" start="6497" end="6513" title="urorectal septum" label="urorectal septum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9382" start="6646" end="6661" title="urinary bladder" label="urinary bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q331858" start="6853" end="6861" title="endoderm" label="endoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q32838" start="7011" end="7021" title="mesenchyme" label="mesenchyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q208453" start="7208" end="7221" title="Smooth muscle tissue" label="smooth muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q32838" start="7256" end="7266" title="mesenchyme" label="mesenchyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386" start="7268" end="7275" title="urethra" label="urethra"/>
<link wikidata="Q583232" start="7281" end="7294" title="Wolffian duct" label="Wolffian duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="7473" end="7481" title="hormones" label="hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q62614" start="7483" end="7491" title="androgen" label="androgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q290" start="7526" end="7529" title="sex" label="sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318776" start="7572" end="7584" title="testosterone" label="testosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384" start="7618" end="7626" title="testicle" label="testicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q411054" start="7635" end="7654" title="dihydrotestosterone" label="dihydrotestosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9715" start="7898" end="7903" title="semen" label="semen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14820885" start="7977" end="7987" title="ejaculated" label="ejaculated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490562" start="8009" end="8024" title="sexual stimulation" label="sexual response"/>
<link wikidata="Q735505" start="8080" end="8092" title="vas deferens" label="vas deferens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386" start="8107" end="8114" title="urethra" label="urethra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063420" start="8123" end="8139" title="ejaculatory duct" label="ejaculatory duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q14820885" start="8179" end="8190" title="Ejaculation" label="Ejaculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q650891" start="8393" end="8404" title="glans penis" label="glans penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753038" start="8446" end="8469" title="internal pudendal nerve" label="internal pudendal nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q405478" start="8484" end="8496" title="lumbar spine" label="lumbar spine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352024" start="8548" end="8565" title="hypogastric nerve" label="hypogastric nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757893" start="8656" end="8678" title="bulbocavernosus muscle" label="bulbocavernosus muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q212410" start="8719" end="8737" title="proteolytic enzyme" label="proteolytic enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q21151790" start="8740" end="8766" title="prostatic acid phosphatase" label="prostatic acid phosphatase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619971" start="8768" end="8780" title="fibrinolysin" label="fibrinolysin"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="8782" end="8786" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q409450" start="8792" end="8817" title="prostate-specific antigen" label="prostate-specific antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225425" start="9335" end="9342" title="dilator" label="dilator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887" start="10086" end="10092" title="orgasm" label="orgasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q646522" start="10155" end="10171" title="prostate massage" label="prostate massage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8398" start="10175" end="10191" title="Anal sex" label="anal intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q158716" start="10225" end="10236" title="Rectum" label="rectal wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q517807" start="10308" end="10314" title="G-spot" label="G-spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="10385" end="10397" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269399" start="10535" end="10552" title="painful urination" label="painful urination"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="10610" end="10633" title="constitutional symptoms" label="constitutional symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="10642" end="10647" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673323" start="10651" end="10660" title="malaise" label="tiredness"/>
<link wikidata="Q594341" start="10741" end="10767" title="digital rectal examination" label="digital rectal examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q632522" start="10833" end="10846" title="urine culture" label="urine culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="10917" end="10927" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900222" start="10930" end="11001" title="chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome" label="Chronic non-bacterial prostatitis, or male chronic pelvic pain syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927838" start="11072" end="11086" title="alpha blockers" label="alpha blockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188724" start="11088" end="11121" title="non-steroidal anti-inflammatories" label="non-steroidal anti-inflammatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q58397" start="11126" end="11139" title="amitriptyline" label="amitriptyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q324089" start="11141" end="11154" title="antihistamine" label="antihistamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q62903" start="11167" end="11177" title="anxiolytic" label="anxiolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="11234" end="11250" title="physical therapy" label="physical therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="11252" end="11265" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q905905" start="11267" end="11282" title="neuromodulation" label="nerve modulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="11289" end="11296" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q741032" start="11330" end="11343" title="trigger point" label="trigger point"/>
<link wikidata="Q352585" start="11905" end="11922" title="urinary frequency" label="urinary frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366695" start="11958" end="11975" title="urinary hesitancy" label="urinary hesitancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366695" start="12161" end="12178" title="urinary retention" label="urinary retention"/>
<link wikidata="Q730877" start="12296" end="12310" title="hydronephrosis" label="hydronephrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755504" start="12351" end="12379" title="minimally invasive procedure" label="minimally invasive procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q288060" start="12480" end="12507" title="alpha-1 adrenergic receptor" label="alpha-1 adrenergic receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q410943" start="12508" end="12518" title="receptor antagonist" label="antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q418480" start="12538" end="12548" title="tamsulosin" label="tamsulosin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208453" start="12580" end="12593" title="smooth muscle" label="smooth muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386" start="12607" end="12614" title="urethra" label="urethra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759552" start="12805" end="12844" title="transurethral resection of the prostate" label="transurethral resection of the prostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q40924" start="13010" end="13015" title="urine" label="urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q677069" start="13055" end="13100" title="transurethral needle ablation of the prostate" label="transurethral needle ablation of the prostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835387" start="13105" end="13142" title="transurethral microwave thermotherapy" label="transurethral microwave thermotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152178" start="13220" end="13225" title="prostatic stent" label="stent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="13363" end="13369" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931388" start="13455" end="13469" title="cause of death" label="cause of death"/>
<link wikidata="Q5781808" start="13745" end="13754" title="back pain" label="back pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q594341" start="13814" end="13840" title="digital rectal examination" label="digital rectal examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q409450" start="13866" end="13891" title="prostate-specific antigen" label="prostate-specific antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086927" start="14186" end="14201" title="prostate biopsy" label="prostate biopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541222" start="14216" end="14231" title="tumour grade" label="tumour activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q956131" start="14285" end="14298" title="overdiagnosis" label="overdiagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250979" start="14352" end="14377" title="prostate cancer screening" label="prostate cancer screening"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="14422" end="14437" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="14449" end="14452" title="MRI" label="MRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928938" start="14456" end="14465" title="bone scan" label="bone scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765251" start="14633" end="14656" title="prostatectomy" label="removal of the prostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="14665" end="14677" title="radiotherapy" label="radiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501879" start="14732" end="14742" title="iodine-125" label="iodine-125"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374075" start="14746" end="14759" title="palladium-103" label="palladium-103"/>
<link wikidata="Q896687" start="14768" end="14781" title="brachytherapy" label="brachytherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314721" start="14995" end="15009" title="GnRH analogues" label="GnRH analogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988832" start="15029" end="15041" title="bicalutamide" label="bicalutamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806228" start="15105" end="15135" title="orchidectomy" label="surgical removal of the testes"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="15267" end="15279" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q420436" start="15288" end="15297" title="docetaxel" label="docetaxel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="15299" end="15311" title="Radiotherapy" label="Radiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q177171" start="15628" end="15635" title="Frailty syndrome" label="frailty"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="15682" end="15697" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755504" start="15990" end="16002" title="open surgery" label="open surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q675754" start="16009" end="16039" title="laparoscopic surgery" label="laparoscopic (keyhole) surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755101" start="16062" end="16081" title="general anaesthetic" label="general anaesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765251" start="16121" end="16142" title="radical prostatectomy" label="radical prostatectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759552" start="16310" end="16349" title="transurethral resection of the prostate" label="transurethral resection of the prostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q105499" start="16409" end="16417" title="perineum" label="perineum"/>
<link wikidata="Q220815" start="16504" end="16514" title="pubic bone" label="pubic bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q281490" start="17025" end="17045" title="urinary incontinence" label="urinary incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="17050" end="17070" title="erectile dysfunction" label="erectile dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q14820885" start="17171" end="17182" title="Ejaculation" label="Ejaculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9715" start="17186" end="17191" title="semen" label="semen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887" start="17214" end="17220" title="orgasm" label="orgasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q179399" start="17355" end="17364" title="infertile" label="infertile"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="17593" end="17602" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q166019" start="17605" end="17613" title="bleeding" label="bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588755" start="17695" end="17705" title="blood clot" label="blood clot"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="17767" end="17775" title="Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q343358" start="17786" end="17799" title="Niccolò Massa" label="Niccolò Massa"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="17899" end="17906" title="Flanders" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q170267" start="17917" end="17933" title="Vesalius" label="Andreas Vesalius"/>
<link wikidata="Q426294" start="18245" end="18261" title="André du Laurens" label="André du Laurens"/>
<link wikidata="Q276480" start="18410" end="18423" title="Ambroise Paré" label="Ambroise Pare"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="18550" end="18555" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="18638" end="18651" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q217259" start="18678" end="18694" title="seminal vesicles" label="seminal vesicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="19012" end="19018" title="noun gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004984" start="19303" end="19320" title="William Cheselden" label="William Cheselden"/>
<link wikidata="Q193495" start="19324" end="19333" title="monograph" label="monograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q969604" start="19428" end="19440" title="Everard Home" label="Everard Home"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19701" end="19715" title="Oswald Lowsley" label="Oswald Lowsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292434" start="20019" end="20059" title="Medical and Chirurgical Society of London" label="Medical and Chiurgical Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20079" end="20089" title="John Adams (British surgeon)" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="20228" end="20245" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512038" start="20383" end="20401" title="Samuel David Gross" label="Samuel David Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765251" start="20573" end="20586" title="prostatectomy" label="prostatectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q538771" start="20619" end="20632" title="Hugh H. Young" label="Hugh H. Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472068" start="20636" end="20658" title="Johns Hopkins Hospital" label="Johns Hopkins Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q77242" start="20706" end="20723" title="Theodore Billroth" label="Theodore Billroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759552" start="20734" end="20773" title="Transurethral resection of the prostate" label="Transurethral resection of the prostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q155371" start="21025" end="21043" title="Charles B. Huggins" label="Charles B. Huggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="21079" end="21087" title="estrogen" label="estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q58929" start="21195" end="21205" title="castration" label="castration"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="21233" end="21270" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q318896" start="21289" end="21319" title="gonadotropin-releasing hormone" label="gonadotropin-releasing hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q141147" start="21361" end="21379" title="Andrzej W. Schally" label="Andrzej W. Schally"/>
<link wikidata="Q242169" start="21384" end="21399" title="Roger Guillemin" label="Roger Guillemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q907160" start="21508" end="21519" title="leuprorelin" label="leuprorelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992653" start="21524" end="21533" title="goserelin" label="goserelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="21598" end="21615" title="Radiation therapy" label="Radiation therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="21724" end="21730" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070621" start="21741" end="21767" title="External beam radiotherapy" label="External beam radiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="21800" end="21805" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q896687" start="21876" end="21889" title="Brachytherapy" label="Brachytherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="21971" end="21983" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q408524" start="22059" end="22075" title="cyclophosphamide" label="cyclophosphamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q238512" start="22080" end="22094" title="5-fluorouracil" label="5-fluorouracil"/>
<link wikidata="Q25336" start="22272" end="22281" title="marsupial" label="marsupial"/>
<link wikidata="Q25833" start="22323" end="22332" title="Placentalia" label="placental"/>
<link wikidata="Q21790" start="22383" end="22392" title="monotreme" label="monotreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428053" start="22585" end="22599" title="tubuloalveolar" label="tubuloalveolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129610" start="22618" end="22634" title="Branched tubular gland" label="branched tubular"/>
<link wikidata="Q25306" start="22680" end="22689" title="carnivora" label="carnivora"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="22825" end="22834" title="ruminants" label="ruminants"/>
<link wikidata="Q79794" start="23007" end="23015" title="red deer" label="red deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="23029" end="23032" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q105726" start="23372" end="23392" title="raised-leg urination" label="mark their territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="23570" end="23579" title="cetaceans" label="cetaceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386" start="23749" end="23756" title="urethra" label="urethra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092469" start="24060" end="24069" title="Eutheria" label="eutherian"/>
<link wikidata="Q122043" start="24112" end="24120" title="fructose" label="fructose"/>
<link wikidata="Q25336" start="24150" end="24159" title="marsupial" label="marsupial"/>
<link wikidata="Q284367" start="24177" end="24196" title="N-Acetylglucosamine" label="N-Acetylglucosamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174936" start="24200" end="24208" title="glycogen" label="glycogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762220" start="24266" end="24284" title="Skene&amp;#x27;s gland" label="Skene&amp;#x27;s gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q409450" start="24334" end="24359" title="prostate-specific antigen" label="prostate-specific antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14820885" start="24379" end="24388" title="ejaculate" label="ejaculate"/>
<link wikidata="Q418243" start="24441" end="24457" title="acid phosphatase" label="acid phosphatase"/>
<link wikidata="Q224180" start="24552" end="24562" title="Homology (biology)" label="homologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q131683" start="24609" end="24622" title="embryological" label="embryological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063420" start="24762" end="24778" title="Ejaculatory duct" label="Ejaculatory duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662727" start="24781" end="24832" title="List of distinct cell types in the adult human body" label="List of distinct cell types in the adult human body"/>
<link wikidata="Q65065201" start="24835" end="24874" title="Prostate evolution in monotreme mammals" label="Prostate evolution in monotreme mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q217259" start="24877" end="24893" title="Seminal vesicles" label="Seminal vesicles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55927" wikidata="Q181100" url="?curid=55927" title="Urinary system">
<text>The human urinary system, also known as the urinary tract or renal system, consists of the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and the urethra. The purpose of the urinary system is to eliminate waste from the body, regulate blood volume and blood pressure, control levels of electrolytes and metabolites, and regulate blood pH. The urinary tract is the body&#x27;s drainage system for the eventual removal of urine. The kidneys have an extensive blood supply via the renal arteries which leave the kidneys via the renal vein. Each kidney consists of functional units called nephrons. Following filtration of blood and further processing, wastes (in the form of urine) exit the kidney via the ureters, tubes made of smooth muscle fibres that propel urine towards the urinary bladder, where it is stored and subsequently expelled through the urethra during urination. The female and male urinary system are very similar, differing only in the length of the urethra.

8002,000 milliliters (mL) of urine are normally produced every day in a healthy human. This amount varies according to fluid intake and kidney function.

==Structure== 
The urinary system refers to the structures that produce and transport urine to the point of excretion. In the human urinary system there are two kidneys that are located between the dorsal body wall and parietal peritoneum on both the left and right sides. 

The formation of urine begins within the functional unit of the kidney, the nephrons. Urine then flows through the nephrons, through a system of converging tubules called collecting ducts. These collecting ducts then join to form the minor calyces, followed by the major calyces that ultimately join the renal pelvis. From here, urine continues its flow from the renal pelvis into the ureter, transporting urine into the urinary bladder. The anatomy of the human urinary system differs between males and females at the level of the urinary bladder. In males, the urethra begins at the internal urethral orifice in the trigone of the bladder, continues through the external urethral orifice, and then becomes the prostatic, membranous, bulbar, and penile urethra. Urine exits the male urethra through the urinary meatus in the glans penis. The female urethra is much shorter, beginning at the bladder neck and terminating in the vulval vestibule.

===Development===
===Microanatomy===
Under microscopy, the urinary system is covered in a unique lining called urothelium, a type of transitional epithelium. Unlike the epithelial lining of most organs, transitional epithelium can flatten and distend. Urothelium covers most of the urinary system, including the renal pelvis, ureters, and bladder.

==Function==
The main functions of the urinary system and its components are to:
* Regulate blood volume and composition (e.g. sodium, potassium and calcium) 
* Regulate blood pressure.
* Regulate pH homeostasis of the blood. 
* Contributes to the production of red blood cells by the kidney.
* Helps synthesize calcitriol (the active form of Vitamin D). 
* Stores waste products (mainly urea and uric acid) before it and other products are removed from the body.

===Urine formation===

Average urine production in adult humans is about 12 litres (L) per day, depending on state of hydration, activity level, environmental factors, weight, and the individual&#x27;s health. Producing too much or too little urine requires medical attention. Polyuria is a condition of excessive urine production (&gt; 2.5 L/day). Conditions involving low output of urine are oliguria (&lt; 400 mL/day) and anuria (&lt; 100 mL/day).

The first step in urine formation is the filtration of blood in the kidneys. In a healthy human, the kidney receives between 12 and 30% of cardiac output, but it averages about 20% or about 1.25 L/min.

The basic structural and functional unit of the kidney is the nephron. Its chief function is to regulate the concentration of water and soluble substances like sodium by filtering the blood, reabsorbing what is needed and excreting the rest as urine.

In the first part of the nephron, Bowman&#x27;s capsule filters blood from the circulatory system into the tubules. Hydrostatic and osmotic pressure gradients facilitate filtration across a semipermeable membrane. The filtrate includes water, small molecules, and ions that easily pass through the filtration membrane. However, larger molecules such as proteins and blood cells are prevented from passing through the filtration membrane. The amount of filtrate produced every minute is called the glomerular filtration rate or GFR and amounts to 180 litres per day. About 99% of this filtrate is reabsorbed as it passes through the nephron and the remaining 1% becomes urine.

The urinary system is regulated by the endocrine system by hormones such as antidiuretic hormone, aldosterone, and parathyroid hormone.

====Regulation of concentration and volume====

The urinary system is under influence of the circulatory system, nervous system, and endocrine system.

Aldosterone plays a central role in regulating blood pressure through its effects on the kidney. It acts on the distal tubules and collecting ducts of the nephron and increases reabsorption of sodium from the glomerular filtrate. Reabsorption of sodium results in retention of water, which increases blood pressure and blood volume. Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), is a neurohypophysial hormone found in most mammals. Its two primary functions are to retain water in the body and vasoconstriction. Vasopressin regulates the body&#x27;s retention of water by increasing water reabsorption in the collecting ducts of the kidney nephron. Vasopressin increases water permeability of the kidney&#x27;s collecting duct and distal convoluted tubule by inducing translocation of aquaporin-CD water channels in the kidney nephron collecting duct plasma membrane.

===Urination===
Urination, also sometimes referred to as micturition, is the ejection of urine from the urinary bladder to the outside of the body. Urine is ejected through the urethra from the penis or vulva in placental mammals and through the cloaca in other vertebrates. In healthy humans (and many other animals), the process of urination is under voluntary control. In infants, some elderly individuals, and those with neurological injury, urination may occur as an involuntary reflex. Physiologically, micturition involves coordination between the central, autonomic, and somatic nervous systems. Brain centers that regulate urination include the pontine micturition center, periaqueductal gray, and the cerebral cortex.

==Clinical significance==


Urologic disease can involve congenital or acquired dysfunction of the urinary system. As an example, urinary tract obstruction is a urologic disease that can cause urinary retention.

Diseases of the kidney tissue are normally treated by nephrologists, while diseases of the urinary tract are treated by urologists. Gynecologists may also treat female urinary incontinence.

Diseases of other bodily systems also have a direct effect on urogenital function. For instance, it has been shown that protein released by the kidneys in diabetes mellitus sensitizes the kidney to the damaging effects of hypertension.

Diabetes also can have a direct effect in urination due to peripheral neuropathies, which occur in some individuals with poorly controlled blood sugar levels.

Urinary incontinence can result from a weakening of the pelvic floor muscles caused by factors such as pregnancy, childbirth, aging, and being overweight. Findings recent systematic reviews demonstrate that behavioral therapy generally results in improved urinary incontinence outcomes, especially for stress and urge UI, than medications alone. Pelvic floor exercises known as Kegel exercises can help in this condition by strengthening the pelvic floor. There can also be underlying medical reasons for urinary incontinence which are often treatable. In children, the condition is called enuresis.

Some cancers also target the urinary system, including bladder cancer, kidney cancer, ureteral cancer, and urethral cancer. Due to the role and location of these organs, treatment is often complicated.

==History==
Kidney stones have been identified and recorded about as long as written historical records exist. The urinary tract including the ureters, as well as their function to drain urine from the kidneys, has been described by Galen in the second century AD.

The first to examine the ureter through an internal approach, called ureteroscopy, rather than surgery was Hampton Young in 1929. This was improved on by VF Marshall who is the first published use of a flexible endoscope based on fiber optics, which occurred in 1964. The insertion of a drainage tube into the renal pelvis, bypassing the ureters and urinary tract, called nephrostomy, was first described in 1941. Such an approach differed greatly from the open surgical approaches within the urinary system employed during the preceding two millennia.

== See also ==
*Excretory system
*Major systems of the human body

== References ==

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q181100" start="10" end="24" title="Urinary system" label="urinary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q181100" start="44" end="57" title="Urinary system" label="urinary tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q181100" start="61" end="73" title="Urinary system" label="renal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="91" end="98" title="kidneys" label="kidneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q9385" start="100" end="107" title="ureters" label="ureters"/>
<link wikidata="Q9382" start="109" end="116" title="urinary bladder" label="bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386" start="126" end="133" title="urethra" label="urethra"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="266" end="278" title="Electrolyte" label="electrolytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q407595" start="283" end="294" title="Metabolite" label="metabolites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275718" start="309" end="317" title="Acid–base homeostasis" label="blood pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q40924" start="400" end="405" title="urine" label="urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q707540" start="458" end="472" title="Renal artery" label="renal arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q132318" start="505" end="515" title="renal vein" label="renal vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q58184" start="565" end="573" title="nephrons" label="nephrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q244772" start="585" end="595" title="filtration" label="filtration"/>
<link wikidata="Q40924" start="652" end="657" title="urine" label="urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q208453" start="706" end="719" title="smooth muscle" label="smooth muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386" start="831" end="838" title="urethra" label="urethra"/>
<link wikidata="Q105726" start="846" end="855" title="urination" label="urination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200632" start="1619" end="1632" title="Renal calyx" label="minor calyces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582250" start="2189" end="2203" title="urinary meatus" label="urinary meatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q650891" start="2211" end="2222" title="glans penis" label="glans penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q496246" start="2313" end="2329" title="vulval vestibule" label="vulval vestibule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779259" start="2443" end="2453" title="urothelium" label="urothelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779259" start="2465" end="2488" title="transitional epithelium" label="transitional epithelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="2501" end="2511" title="epithelium" label="epithelial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896673" start="2773" end="2785" title="blood volume" label="blood volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="2808" end="2814" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="2816" end="2825" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="2830" end="2837" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="2851" end="2865" title="blood pressure" label="blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="2878" end="2880" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q103191" start="2881" end="2892" title="homeostasis" label="homeostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="2966" end="2972" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q139195" start="2993" end="3003" title="calcitriol" label="calcitriol"/>
<link wikidata="Q175621" start="3024" end="3033" title="Vitamin D" label="Vitamin D"/>
<link wikidata="Q48318" start="3069" end="3073" title="urea" label="urea"/>
<link wikidata="Q105522" start="3078" end="3087" title="uric acid" label="uric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11582" start="3222" end="3228" title="litres" label="litres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124286" start="3423" end="3431" title="Polyuria" label="Polyuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q961326" start="3540" end="3548" title="oliguria" label="oliguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q612681" start="3571" end="3577" title="anuria" label="anuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q596579" start="3737" end="3751" title="cardiac output" label="cardiac output"/>
<link wikidata="Q58184" start="3863" end="3870" title="nephron" label="nephron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686031" start="3910" end="3923" title="concentration" label="concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="3927" end="3932" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508568" start="3961" end="3967" title="sodium salt" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="3985" end="3990" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q40924" start="4045" end="4050" title="urine" label="urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066345" start="4087" end="4108" title="Bowman&amp;#x27;s capsule" label="Bowman&amp;#x27;s capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="4132" end="4150" title="circulatory system" label="circulatory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="4406" end="4414" title="proteins" label="proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q211709" start="4419" end="4429" title="blood cell" label="blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542839" start="4550" end="4576" title="glomerular filtration rate" label="glomerular filtration rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11078" start="4769" end="4785" title="endocrine system" label="endocrine system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="4789" end="4796" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q21124841" start="4806" end="4826" title="antidiuretic hormone" label="antidiuretic hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="4828" end="4839" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q202476" start="4845" end="4864" title="parathyroid hormone" label="parathyroid hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="4960" end="4978" title="circulatory system" label="circulatory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="4980" end="4994" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11078" start="5000" end="5016" title="endocrine system" label="endocrine system"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="5019" end="5030" title="Aldosterone" label="Aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q24780201" start="5385" end="5409" title="neurohypophysial hormone" label="neurohypophysial hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="5424" end="5431" title="mammals" label="mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067506" start="5495" end="5511" title="vasoconstriction" label="vasoconstriction"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="5551" end="5569" title="Water retention (medicine)" label="retention of water"/>
<link wikidata="Q40924" start="5959" end="5964" title="urine" label="urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9382" start="5974" end="5989" title="urinary bladder" label="urinary bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386" start="6047" end="6054" title="urethra" label="urethra"/>
<link wikidata="Q58" start="6064" end="6069" title="penis" label="penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192288" start="6073" end="6078" title="vulva" label="vulva"/>
<link wikidata="Q25833" start="6082" end="6099" title="Placentalia" label="placental mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q19035" start="6116" end="6122" title="cloaca" label="cloaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="6132" end="6142" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6168" end="6186" title="Urination#Animals" label="many other animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q179405" start="6354" end="6360" title="reflex" label="reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="6425" end="6432" title="central nervous system" label="central"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="6434" end="6443" title="autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q505535" start="6449" end="6471" title="somatic nervous system" label="somatic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228295" start="6524" end="6550" title="pontine micturition center" label="pontine micturition center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243765" start="6552" end="6571" title="periaqueductal gray" label="periaqueductal gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="6581" end="6596" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900883" start="6627" end="6643" title="Urologic disease" label="Urologic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957524" start="6729" end="6754" title="urinary tract obstruction" label="urinary tract obstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366695" start="6792" end="6809" title="urinary retention" label="urinary retention"/>
<link wikidata="Q177635" start="6866" end="6878" title="nephrologist" label="nephrologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q105650" start="6932" end="6941" title="urologist" label="urologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221899" start="6944" end="6957" title="Gynecology" label="Gynecologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="7123" end="7130" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="7158" end="7175" title="diabetes mellitus" label="diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="7225" end="7237" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="7240" end="7248" title="Diabetes" label="Diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q105726" start="7282" end="7291" title="urination" label="urination"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="7299" end="7322" title="peripheral neuropathy" label="peripheral neuropathies"/>
<link wikidata="Q281490" start="7400" end="7420" title="Urinary incontinence" label="Urinary incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q813683" start="7456" end="7468" title="pelvic floor" label="pelvic floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="7503" end="7512" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34581" start="7514" end="7524" title="childbirth" label="childbirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q332154" start="7526" end="7531" title="ageing" label="aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q332428" start="7543" end="7553" title="overweight" label="overweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797702" start="7702" end="7708" title="Stress incontinence" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q331231" start="7713" end="7717" title="Urge incontinence" label="urge"/>
<link wikidata="Q813690" start="7778" end="7792" title="Kegel exercise" label="Kegel exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448862" start="7990" end="7998" title="enuresis" label="enuresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q504775" start="8056" end="8070" title="bladder cancer" label="bladder cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242950" start="8072" end="8085" title="kidney cancer" label="kidney cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900422" start="8087" end="8102" title="ureteral cancer" label="ureteral cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199902" start="8108" end="8123" title="urethral cancer" label="urethral cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q178623" start="8216" end="8229" title="Kidney stones" label="Kidney stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="8437" end="8442" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8577" end="8590" title="Hampton Young" label="Hampton Young"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8624" end="8635" title="VF Marshall" label="VF Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q580725" start="8681" end="8690" title="endoscope" label="endoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="8700" end="8712" title="fiber optics" label="fiber optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q955020" start="8780" end="8792" title="renal pelvis" label="renal pelvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598820" start="8842" end="8853" title="nephrostomy" label="nephrostomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755504" start="8927" end="8940" title="open surgery" label="open surgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112860" start="9040" end="9056" title="Excretory system" label="Excretory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q23852" start="9058" end="9089" title="Major systems of the human body" label="Major systems of the human body"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55929" wikidata="Q382844" url="?curid=55929" title="Governor-general">
<text>Governor-general (plural governors-general), or governor general (plural governors general), is the title of an official, most prominently associated with the British Empire. In the context of the governors-general and former British colonies, governors-general continue to be appointed as viceroy to represent the monarch of a personal union in any sovereign state over which the monarch does not normally reign in person (non-UK Commonwealth realm). Governors-general have also previously been appointed in respect of major colonial states or other territories held by either a monarchy or republic, such as Japan in Korea and Taiwan and France in Indochina.

== Current uses ==
In modern usage, in the context of governors-general and former British colonies, the term &quot;governor-general&quot; originated in those British colonies that became self-governing within the British Empire. Before World War I, the title was used only in federated colonies in which its constituents had had &quot;governors&quot; prior to federating, namely Canada, Australia, and the Union of South Africa. In these cases, the Crown&#x27;s representative in the federated Dominion was given the superior title of &quot;governor-general&quot;. The first exception to this rule was New Zealand, which was granted Dominion status in 1907, but it was not until 28 June 1917 that Arthur Foljambe, 2nd Earl of Liverpool, was appointed the first governor-general of New Zealand.

Since the 1950s, the title &quot;governor-general&quot; has been given to all representatives of the sovereign in independent non-UK Commonwealth realms. In these cases, the former office of colonial governor was altered (sometimes for the same incumbent) to become governor-general upon independence, as the nature of the office became an entirely independent constitutional representative of the monarch rather than a symbol of previous colonial rule. In these countries the governor-general acts as the monarch&#x27;s representative, performing the ceremonial and constitutional functions of a head of state.

The only other nation which currently uses the governor-general designation is Iran, which has no connection with any monarchy or the Commonwealth. In Iran, the provincial authority is headed by a governor general (Persian: استاندار &quot;ostāndār&quot;), who is appointed by the minister of the interior.

==British Empire and the Commonwealth==
===British Empire===
Until the 1920s, governors-general were British subjects, appointed on the advice of the British government, who acted as agents of the British government in each Dominion, as well as being representatives of the monarch. As such they notionally held the prerogative powers of the monarch, and also held the executive power of the country to which they were assigned. The governor-general could be instructed by the colonial secretary on the exercise of some of his functions and duties, such as the use or withholding of royal assent from legislation; history shows many examples of governors-general using their prerogative and executive powers. The monarch or imperial government could overrule any governor-general, though this could often be cumbersome, due to the remoteness of the territories from London.

The governor-general was also usually the commander-in-chief of the armed forces in his or her territory and, because of the governor-general&#x27;s control of the military, the post was as much a military appointment as a civil one. The governors-general are entitled to wear a unique uniform, which is not generally worn today. If of the rank of major general, equivalent or above, they were entitled to wear that military uniform.

===Commonwealth realms===
Following the Imperial Conference, and subsequent issuing of the Balfour Declaration in 1926, the role and responsibilities of the governor-general began to shift, reflecting the increased independence of the Dominions (which were in 1952 renamed &quot;realms&quot;; a term which includes the UK itself). As the sovereign came to be regarded as monarch of each territory independently, and, as such, advised only by the ministers of each country in regard to that country&#x27;s national affairs (as opposed to a single British monarch ruling all the Dominions as a conglomerate and advised only by an imperial parliament), so too did the governor-general become a direct representative of the national monarch only, who no longer answered to the British government. The report resulting from the 1926 Imperial Conference stated: &quot;It is an essential consequence of the equality of status existing among the members of the British Commonwealth of Nations that the Governor General of a Dominion is the representative of the Crown, holding in all essential respects the same position in relation to the administration of public affairs in the Dominion as is held by His Majesty the King in Great Britain, and that he is not the representative or agent of His Majesty&#x27;s Government in Great Britain or of any Department of that Government.&quot; These concepts were entrenched in legislation with the enactment of the Statute of Westminster in 1931, and governmental relations with the United Kingdom were placed in the hands of a British High Commissioner in each country.

In other words, the political reality of a self-governing Dominion within the British Empire with a governor-general answerable to the sovereign became clear. British interference in the Dominion was not acceptable and independent country status was clearly displayed. Canada, Australia, and New Zealand were clearly not controlled by the United Kingdom. The monarch of these countries (Charles III) is in law King of Canada, King of Australia, and King of New Zealand and only acts on the advice of the ministers in each country and is ostensibly in no way influenced by the British government. Today, therefore, in former British colonies that are now independent Commonwealth realms, the governor-general is constitutionally the representative of the monarch in his or her state and may exercise the reserve powers of the monarch according to their own constitutional authority. The governor-general, however, is still appointed by the monarch and takes an oath of allegiance to the monarch in right of his or her own country. Executive authority is also vested in the monarch, though much of it can be exercisable only by the governor-general on behalf of the sovereign of the independent realm. Letters of credence or letters of recall are in some realms received or issued in the name of the monarch, but in others (such as Canada and Australia) are issued in the name of the governor-general alone.

At diplomatic functions where the governor-general is present, the visiting diplomat or head of state toasts &quot;The King&quot; or &quot;The Queen&quot; of the relevant realm, not the governor-general, with any reference to the governor-general being subsidiary in later toasts if featuring at all, and will involve a toast to the governor-general by name, not office. (e.g., &quot;Mrs. Smith&quot;, not &quot;Her Excellency, the Governor-General&quot;. Sometimes a toast might be made using name and office, e.g., &quot;Governor-General Smith&quot;.)

Except in rare cases (for example, a constitutional crisis), the governor-general usually acts in accordance with constitutional convention and upon the advice of the national prime minister (who is head of the nation&#x27;s government). The governors-general are still the local representatives of the sovereign and perform the same duties as they carried out historically, though their role is for the most part ceremonial (or partly ceremonial). Rare and controversial exceptions occurred in 1926, when Canadian governor general the Viscount Byng of Vimy refused Prime Minister Mackenzie King&#x27;s request for a dissolution of parliament; in 1953 and 1954 when the governor-general of Pakistan, Ghulam Mohammad, staged a constitutional coup against the prime minister and then the Constituent Assembly; and in 1975, when the governor-general of Australia, Sir John Kerr, dismissed the prime minister, Gough Whitlam (to name a few). It should be remembered that while governors-general do not normally take drastic action, he or she still has a responsibility to ensure that the constitution is respected and followed at all times. In many ways, the governor-general acts as an umpire/mediator (who must remain independent/non-partisan and objective) in the political scene. In some realms, the monarch could in principle overrule a governor-general, as governors-general are representatives of the monarch rather than holding power in their own right, but this has not happened in recent times.

In Australia, the present king is generally assumed to be the head of state, since the governor-general and the state governors are defined as his &quot;representatives&quot;. However, since the governor-general performs almost all national regal functions, the governor-general has occasionally been referred to as the head of state in political and media discussion. To a lesser extent, uncertainty has been expressed in Canada as to which officeholder—the monarch, the governor-general, or both—can be considered the head of state.

A governor-general is usually a person with a distinguished record of public service, often a retired politician, judge or military commander; however, some countries have also appointed prominent academics, members of the clergy, philanthropists, or figures from the news media to the office.

Traditionally, the governor-general&#x27;s official attire was a unique uniform, but this practice has been abandoned except on occasions when it is appropriate to be worn (and in some countries abandoned altogether). In South Africa, the governor-general of the Union of South Africa nominated by the Afrikaner Nationalist government chose not to wear uniform on any occasion. Most governors-general continue to wear appropriate medals on their clothing when required.

The governor-general&#x27;s official residence is usually called &quot;Government House.&quot; The governor-general of the Irish Free State resided in the then Viceregal Lodge in Phoenix Park, Dublin, but the government of Éamon de Valera sought to downgrade the office and the last governor-general, Domhnall Ua Buachalla, did not reside there. The office was abolished there in 1936.

In most Commonwealth realms, the flag of the governor-general has been the standard pattern of a blue field with the royal crest (a lion standing on a crown) above a scroll with the name of the jurisdiction. In Canada, however, this was replaced with a crowned lion clasping a maple leaf. In the Solomon Islands, the scroll was replaced with a two-headed frigate bird motif, while in Fiji, the former governor general&#x27;s flag featured a whale&#x27;s tooth. In New Zealand, the flag was replaced in 2008 with the shield of the coat of arms of New Zealand surmounted by a crown on a blue field.

Governors-general are accorded the style of &quot;His/Her Excellency&quot;. This style is also extended to their spouses, whether male or female.

====Appointment====

Until the 1920s, governors general were British, and appointed on the advice of the British Government.

Following the changes to the structure of the Commonwealth in the late 1920s, in 1929, the Australian prime minister James Scullin established the right of a Dominion prime minister to advise the monarch directly on the appointment of a governor-general, by insisting that his choice (Isaac Isaacs, an Australian) prevail over the recommendation of the British government. The convention was gradually established throughout the Commonwealth that the governor-general would be a citizen of the country concerned, and would be appointed on the advice of the government of that country, with no input from the British government; governor general of Canada since 1952 and governor-general of New Zealand since 1967. Since 1931 as each former Dominion has patriated its constitution from the UK, the convention has become law, or, since 1947, when the first realms established with a patriated constitution, India and Pakistan, were established, was always law, and no government of any realm can advise the Monarch on any matter pertaining to another realm, including the appointment of a governor-general. The monarch appoints a governor-general (in Canada: &quot;governor general&quot;) as a personal representative only on the advice of the prime minister of each realm; for example, the governor-general of New Zealand is appointed by the king of New Zealand on the advice of the New Zealand prime minister, the governor-general of Tuvalu is appointed by the king of Tuvalu on the advice of the Tuvaluan prime minister, and the governor-general of Jamaica is appointed by the king of Jamaica on the advice of the Jamaican prime minister. In Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands, the prime minister&#x27;s advice is based on the result of a vote in the national parliament.

The formalities for appointing governors-general are not the same in all realms. For example: When appointed, a governor-general of Australia issues a proclamation in his own name, countersigned by the head of government and under the Great Seal of Australia, formally announcing that he has been appointed by the monarch&#x27;s commission, previously issued also under the Great Seal of Australia. The practice in Canada is to include in the governor general&#x27;s proclamation of appointment, issued under the Great Seal of Canada, the monarch&#x27;s commission naming the governor general as commander-in-chief of the Canadian Forces. Also dissimilar among the realms are the powers of governors-general. The Belizean constitution provides the governor-general with the power to assent or to withhold assent to laws, while Papua New Guinea has no requirement for royal assent at all, with laws entering into force when certified as having been passed in Parliament by the Speaker.

====Temporary replacement====
Different realms have different constitutional arrangements governing who acts in place of the governor-general in the event of his or her death, resignation, or incapacity.

*In Australia, an &quot;administrator of the Commonwealth&quot; may be appointed to perform the necessary official functions, pending a decision by the sovereign, on the advice of the prime minister, about a permanent replacement as governor-general. The administrator has usually been the senior state governor. Each state governor normally holds what is known as a dormant commission. Cases have however occurred where a state governor has fallen out of favour with the federal government, causing the latter to revoke that governor&#x27;s dormant commission. The most recent example was that of Sir Colin Hannah, governor of Queensland, in 1975.
*In the Bahamas, Canada, Jamaica, and New Zealand, it is the chief justice.
*In Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu it is the Speaker
*Many have a specific office of &quot;deputy governor-general&quot;, who act in their place—but often e.g. only for temporary incapacity.

===List of countries with a governor-general===

====Current====


====Former====
The title has been used in many former British colonies or other territories, which became independent realms and then later became republics. Each of these realms had a governor-general.

;In Africa
*Governor-General of the Gambia (1965–1970)
*Governor-General of Ghana (1957–1960)
*Governor-General of Kenya (1963–1964)
*Governor-General of Malawi (1964–1966)
*Governor-General of Mauritius (1968–1992)
*Governor-General of Nigeria (1960–1963) 
*Governor-General of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland (1953–1963) (Although the position was called &quot;governor-general&quot;, the federation was neither a dominion nor an independent country.)
*Governor-General of Sierra Leone (1961–1971)
*Governor-General of the Union of South Africa (1910–1961)
*Governor-General of Tanganyika (1961–1962)
*Governor-General of Uganda (1962–1963)
* In Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe), a unique situation arose following the Unilateral Declaration of Independence in 1965, unrecognised by the United Kingdom. The Rhodesian Front government of Ian Smith recognised Elizabeth II as &quot;Queen of Rhodesia&quot;, but refused to recognise the authority of her governor, Sir Humphrey Gibbs, whose duties were performed by an &quot;officer administering the government&quot;, Clifford Dupont (1905–1978). Dupont served in the post until 2 March 1970, when Rhodesia was declared a republic (an act also unrecognised internationally), and he became president. The country became an independent republic within the Commonwealth as Zimbabwe on 18 April 1980.

;In the Americas
*Governor-General of the West Indies Federation (1958–1962) (Although the position was called governor-general, the federation was neither a dominion nor an independent country.)
*Governor-General of Barbados (1966–2021)
*Governor-General of Guyana (1966–1970)
*Governor-General of Trinidad and Tobago (1962–1976)

;In Asia
*Governor-General of Ceylon (1948–1972)
*Governor-General of India (1833–1950)
*Governor-General of Pakistan (1947–1956)

;In Europe
*Governor-General of the Irish Free State (1922–1936)
*Governor-General of Malta (1964–1974)

;In Oceania
*Governor-General of Fiji (1970–1987)

==Other colonial and similar usage ==
===Belgium===
* Belgian Congo;
* Ruanda-Urundi

===Brazil===

In Brazil, after a few governors, from 1578 until its promotion in 1763 to a viceroyalty (though various members of the nobility since 1640 had assumed, without sovereign authority, the title of Viceroy).

===France===
The equivalent term in French is &quot;gouverneur général&quot;, used in the following colonies:

* From 1887 to 1945 the French appointed a governor-general to govern French Indochina (modern-day Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam); the function of the High Commissioner in the Pacific Ocean, from 22 March 1907 held by the governors of New Caledonia, was used to coordinate that colony, the other French settlements in Oceania and the other governors of French Indochina and the resident commissioners of the New Hebrides and the residents of Wallis and Futuna were subordinated to him.
* The governor-general of New France was the vice-regal post in New France from 1663 until 1760 and was the last French vice-regal post. It was replaced by the British post of governor of the Province of Quebec following the fall of New France. While the districts of Montreal and Trois-Rivières had their own governors, the governor-general of New France and the governor of the district of Quebec were the same person.
* From 1699 to 1947, the French appointed a governor and general commander () to administer French India (including Pondichéry).
*Governors-general of the Mascarene Islands (under control of the chartered French Indies Company to 14 July 1767) from 4 June 1735 (succeeding to governors), and after its split-up of Mauritius (Réunion and the Seychelles got lower-styled commandants or governors), until 25 September 1803
* Haiti January 1714 – 31 December 1803; last incumbent Jean-Jacques Dessalines shortly maintained the title after the January I, 1804 independence before proclaiming himself Emperor Jacques I
* Since its creation on 16 June 1895 in French West Africa (AOF), until 4 April 1957; the last stayed on as first of two high commissioners
* Madagascar
* From 28 June 1908 (previously it had a Commissaire général, i.e. commissioner general) to 4 April 1957 (the last stayed on as first of three high commissioners) in French Equatorial Africa (AEF); during several periods he also acted as governor of the constitutive colony Congo Brazzaville.

Furthermore, in Napoleonic Europe successive French governors-general were appointed by Napoleon I in:
* the German states of Brandenburg (various others got &quot;mere&quot; governors), two incumbents between 27 October 1806 and 10 December 1808, during the French occupation
* Province of Courland under the French occupation (from 1 August 1812, Duchy of Courland and Semigallia and District of Pilten nominally re-established under joint French-Saxon protectorate 8 October 1812 – 20 December 1812) : Jacques David Martin, baron de Campredon (1761–1837)
* Parma and Piacenza under occupation, (after a commissioner) 15 February 1804 – 23 July 1808, later annexed as &quot;département&quot; under a &quot;prefect of Taro&quot;.
* principality of Piombino May 1806 – 1811: Adolphe Beauvais (d. 1811)
* annexed Tuscany, two incumbents, over prefects for Arno, Méditerranée [Mediterranean] and Ombrone:
** May 1808 – 3 March 1809 Jacques François de Boussay, baron de Menou (1750–1810)
** 3 March 1809 – 1 February 1814 Elisa Baciocchi Bonaparte (with courtesy style of Grand Duchess of Tuscany) (1777–1820)
* the Illyrian Provinces (comprising present Croatia, Slovenia and even adjacent parts of Austria and Italy), annexed as part of the French Empire proper, 14 October 1809 – August 1813

===Japan===
From 1895 to 1945, Japanese-administered Taiwan had a governor-general. From 1910 to 1945, Japanese-administered Korea had a governor-general. From 1905 to 1910, Japan had a resident-general in Korea.

===Netherlands===
From 1610 to 1942 the Dutch appointed a &quot;gouverneur-generaal&quot; (&quot;governor-general&quot;) to govern the Netherlands East Indies, now Indonesia. Between the capitulation of the Dutch East Indies in 1942 and the formal end of colonial rule over Indonesia by the Dutch in 1949, no governor-general was appointed.

While in the Caribbean, various other titles were used, Curaçao had three governors-general between 1816 and 1820:

*1816–1819 Albert Kikkert
*1819–1820 Petrus Bernardus van Starkenborgh
*1820 Isaäk Johannes Rammelman Elsevier

===Philippines===
The Philippines from the 16th through the 20th century had a series of governors-general during the Spanish and American colonial periods, as well as the brief Japanese occupation during World War II.

====Spain====
Beginning 21 November 1564, the Spanish East Indies had a governor-general, which was under the Viceroy of New Spain based in Mexico. After the successful Mexican War of Independence in 1821, the governor-general reported directly to Spain.

====United States====
From 1899 to 1935 under initial military rule then Insular Government, the Philippines was administered by a series of governors-general, first military and then civilian, appointed by the federal government of the United States.

===Portugal===
The equivalent word in Portuguese is &quot;governador-geral&quot;. This title was only used for the governors of the major colonies, indicating that they had, under their authority, several subordinate governors. In most of the colonies, lower titles, mainly &quot;governador&quot; (governor) or formerly captain-major (&quot;capitão-mor&quot;), prevailed
*In the Portuguese State of India (&quot;Estado da Índia&quot;, capital Goa) the style was changed repeatedly for another, mostly &quot;vice-rei&quot; (Viceroy). The viceroy title was usually reserved for members of the Portuguese royal family, the remaining governors receiving the title of &quot;governador-general&quot;;
*in Africa, from 1837 Portugal appointed a governor-general to govern the overseas province of Angola, and another to govern the province of Moçambique. For some time, a governor-general was also appointed to rule Cape Verde and Portuguese Guinea, while these territories were united in a single province. Between 1921 and 1930, additional powers were given to some of the Angola and Mozambique governors, who were restyled in full &quot;Alto-comissário e governador-geral&quot; (high commissioner and governor-general).

== Other Western usage ==
===Greece===
The Balkan Wars of 1912–13 led to the Greek acquisition of the so-called &quot;New Lands&quot; (Epirus, Macedonia, Crete and the islands of the eastern Aegean), almost doubling the country&#x27;s territory. Instead of fully incorporating these new lands into Greece by dividing them into prefectures, the Ottoman administrative system continued in existence for a while, and Law ΔΡΛΔ΄ of 1913 established five governorates-general (Γενικαὶ Διοικήσεις, sing. Γενική Διοίκησις): Epirus, Macedonia, Crete, Aegean and Samos–Ikaria. The governors-general had wide-ranging authority in their territories, and were almost autonomous of the government in Athens.

Law 524 in 1914 abolished the governorates-general and divided the New Lands into regular prefectures, but in 1918 Law 1149 re-instated them as a superordinate administrative level above the prefectures, with Macedonia now divided in two governorates-general, those of Thessaloniki and Kozani–Florina. The governors-general of Thessaloniki, Crete and Epirus were also given ministerial rank. To these was added the Governorate-General of Thrace in 1920–22, comprising Western Thrace and Eastern Thrace (returned to Turkey in the Armistice of Mudanya in 1922). The extensive but hitherto legally rather undefined powers of the governors-general created friction and confusion with other government branches, until their remit was exactly delineated in 1925. The governorates-general, except for that of Thessaloniki, were abolished in 1928, but re-established in December 1929—for Crete, Epirus, Thrace, and Macedonia—and delegated practically all ministerial authorities for their respective areas. Over the next decade, however, in a see-saw of legislative measures that in turn gave and took away authority, they gradually lost most of their powers in favour of the prefectures and the central government in Athens.

Following liberation from the Axis occupation, in 1945 the Governorate-General of Northern Greece was established, initially with subordinate governorates for West Macedonia, Central Macedonia, East Macedonia, and Thrace, the first three of which were then grouped anew into a new Governorate-General of Macedonia, albeit still subject to the Governorate-General of Northern Greece. This awkward arrangement lasted until 1950, when the administration of Macedonia was streamlined, the junior governorates abolished and only the Governorate-General of Northern Greece retained. Finally, in 1955, the Governorate-General of Northern Greece was transformed into the Ministry of Northern Greece, and all other governorates-general elsewhere in Greece were abolished.

===Sweden===

From 1636 to 1815, the king of Sweden typically appointed the governors-general of Sweden for the Swedish Dominions on the eastern side of the Baltic Sea and in northern Germany, but occasionally also for Scania.

===Others===
* From 1809 to 1918, Russia designated governors-general of Finland in the Grand Duchy of Finland; Governors-General of Poland in Vistula Land and other Governors-General in various other governorates-general.
* From 1939 to 1944, during the German occupation of Poland, in that part of the country designated the General Government the Nazi official Hans Frank had the title Governor-General ( – Governor-General of the occupied Polish areas).
* The Kingdom of Saxony had two governors-general during the period of Allied control of the after the defeat of the French emperor Napoleon I:
** 28 October 1813 – 8 November 1814 Prince Nikolay Grigorievich Repnin-Volkonsky (Russia) (1778–1845)
** 8 November 1814 – 8 June 1815 Eberhard Friedrich Christoph Ludwig, Freiherr von der Recke (Prussia) (1744–1826)
* During the occupation of Serbia by Austrian-Hungarian and Bulgarian forces in World War I, the Austrian-Hungarian government appointed three consecutive governors-general:
** 1 January 1916 – July 1916 Johan Ulrich Graf von Salis-Seewis (1862–1940)
** July 1916 – October 1918 Adolf Freiherr von Rhemen zu Barensfeld (1855–1932)
** October 1918 – 1 November 1918 Hermann Freiherr Kövess von Kövessháza (1854–1924; a former military commander in northern Serbia)

== Asian counterparts ==
* From 1644 to 1911, in Qing dynasty China, a governor-general or &quot;viceroy&quot; () was the highest official of joint military and civil affairs in one or several provinces.
* The hereditary &quot;shōgun&quot; of Japan (, &quot;sei-i tai-shōgun&quot;) who ruled in the name of the emperor from 1185 until 1868 were equivalent to governors-general, though they often had far greater power than a governor-general would ordinarily have.
* Imperial Japan:
**From 1895 to 1945, Taiwan was administered by the Japanese governor-general of Taiwan (Japanese: 台湾総督, &quot;taiwan sōtoku&quot;).
** From 1910 to 1945, Korea was administered by the Japanese governor-general of Korea (Japanese: 朝鮮総督, &quot;chōsen sōtoku&quot;).
* Islamic Republic of Iran
**The provincial authority is headed by an appointed governor-general (Persian: استاندار, &quot;ostāndār&quot;).
*Umayyad Empire
**The governor of Iraq appointed the governors of eastern provinces. Hence the Iraqi governor served as a Viceroy of the Caliph. See: Hajjaj bin Yousuf.

==See also==
*Administrator of the government
*Administrator General
*Government House, the name of the official residences of governors-general in the British Commonwealth (past and present)
*Governor
*Governor-in-chief
*Governor-General of the Philippines
*High commissioner
*Lieutenant governor
*Viceroy
*Aruba and the Netherlands Antilles; territories of the Dutch Monarchy
*Guberniya, governor-generalship in the Russian Empire
*Representatives of the Commonwealth of Nations
**Roman administration of Judaea (AD 6–135) (Roman governors)
**List of Roman governors of Asia
**List of Ottoman governors of Egypt
*Some defunct political entities: Governor-General of the Irish Free State, Governor-General of the Federation of the West Indies, Governor-General of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, Governor of Southern Rhodesia, Governor-General of French Indochina
*Some former Commonwealth realms in the Americas Governor-General of Barbados, Governor-General of Guyana, Governor-General of Trinidad and Tobago
*Some former Commonwealth realms in Africa: Governor-General of Nigeria, Governor-General of Sierra Leone, Governor-General of Tanzania, Governor-General of the Union of South Africa, Governor-General of Uganda, Governor-General of Gambia, Governor-General of Kenya, Governor-General of Ghana, Governor-General of Malawi
*Some former Commonwealth realms in Asia Governor-General of India, Governor-General of Pakistan, Governor-General of Sri Lanka
*Some former Commonwealth realms in Europe Governor-General of Malta
*Some former Commonwealth realms in Oceania Governor-General of Fiji

== Notes and references ==

=== Notes ===
===References===
==External links==

* WorldStatesmen
* National Museum of Australia Governor-General&#x27;s despatch box (1937–1952)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="0" end="16" title="Governor-general" label="Governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="25" end="42" title="Governor-general" label="governors-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="48" end="64" title="Governor-general" label="governor general"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="73" end="90" title="Governor-general" label="governors general"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="159" end="173" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="226" end="242" title="British colonies" label="British colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="290" end="297" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="328" end="342" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="350" end="365" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="431" end="449" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="535" end="540" title="state (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="610" end="615" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="619" end="624" title="Korea under Japanese rule" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q137816" start="629" end="635" title="Taiwan under Japanese rule" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227437" start="640" end="646" title="List of Governors-General of French Indochina" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="650" end="659" title="French Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="876" end="890" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1042" end="1048" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1050" end="1059" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="1069" end="1090" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="1157" end="1165" title="Dominion" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q335651" start="1360" end="1398" title="Arthur Foljambe, 2nd Earl of Liverpool" label="Arthur Foljambe, 2nd Earl of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q455690" start="1424" end="1455" title="Governor-General of New Zealand" label="governor-general of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="1591" end="1609" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="2055" end="2068" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="2150" end="2154" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="2286" end="2293" title="Persian Language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091482" start="2351" end="2375" title="Ministry of Interior (Iran)" label="minister of the interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519998" start="2855" end="2873" title="Secretary of State for the Colonies" label="colonial secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="2961" end="2973" title="Royal Assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139567" start="3728" end="3747" title="Imperial Conference" label="Imperial Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q195559" start="3779" end="3798" title="Balfour Declaration 1926" label="Balfour Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="3923" end="3931" title="Dominion" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q719883" start="5138" end="5160" title="Statute of Westminster 1931" label="Statute of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345608" start="5259" end="5276" title="High Commissioner" label="High Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="5682" end="5693" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="5705" end="5719" title="King of Canada" label="King of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q669459" start="5721" end="5738" title="King of Australia" label="King of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296" start="5744" end="5763" title="King of New Zealand" label="King of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="5961" end="5979" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q389256" start="6098" end="6111" title="reserve power" label="reserve power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392197" start="6255" end="6273" title="oath of allegiance" label="oath of allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758647" start="6495" end="6514" title="Letters of credence" label="Letters of credence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893413" start="6518" end="6535" title="letters of recall" label="letters of recall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="6625" end="6631" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720142" start="7371" end="7396" title="constitutional convention (political custom)" label="constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308979" start="7410" end="7416" title="advice (constitutional)" label="advice"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="7763" end="7788" title="Governor General of Canada" label="Canadian governor general"/>
<link wikidata="Q334974" start="7789" end="7814" title="Julian Byng, 1st Viscount Byng of Vimy" label="the Viscount Byng of Vimy"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="7823" end="7837" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q128633" start="7838" end="7859" title="William Lyon Mackenzie King" label="Mackenzie King&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392127" start="7957" end="7972" title="Malik Ghulam Muhammad" label="Ghulam Mohammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q109237061" start="7983" end="8002" title="1953 Pakistani constitutional coup" label="constitutional coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354851" start="8118" end="8131" title="John Kerr (Governor-General)" label="Sir John Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q575834" start="8133" end="8161" title="Australian constitutional crisis of 1975" label="dismissed the prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q23333" start="8163" end="8176" title="Gough Whitlam" label="Gough Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825020" start="9054" end="9091" title="Australian head of state dispute" label="been referred to as the head of state"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9178" end="9187" title="Monarchy of Canada#Head of state" label="in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280467" start="9828" end="9873" title="Governor-General of the Union of South Africa" label="governor-general of the Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="9891" end="9900" title="Afrikaner" label="Afrikaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q740718" start="9901" end="9912" title="National Party (South Africa)" label="Nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131647" start="10019" end="10024" title="medal" label="medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558541" start="10159" end="10199" title="Governor-General of the Irish Free State" label="governor-general of the Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107474" start="10220" end="10235" title="Áras an Uachtaráin" label="Viceregal Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q377937" start="10239" end="10251" title="Phoenix Park" label="Phoenix Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="10253" end="10259" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q173347" start="10283" end="10298" title="Éamon de Valera" label="Éamon de Valera"/>
<link wikidata="Q727370" start="10361" end="10382" title="Domhnall Ua Buachalla" label="Domhnall Ua Buachalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q952860" start="10549" end="10554" title="Flag terminology" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q643999" start="10564" end="10575" title="Royal Crest" label="royal crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="10658" end="10664" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="10743" end="10758" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q203472" start="10802" end="10814" title="frigate bird" label="frigate bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="10831" end="10835" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="10888" end="10893" title="whale" label="whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q200972" start="10977" end="11004" title="coat of arms of New Zealand" label="coat of arms of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067610" start="11103" end="11113" title="Excellency" label="Excellency"/>
<link wikidata="Q23362" start="11435" end="11448" title="James Scullin" label="James Scullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="11476" end="11484" title="Dominion" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673410" start="11603" end="11615" title="Isaac Isaacs" label="Isaac Isaacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="11946" end="11972" title="governor general of Canada" label="governor general of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q455690" start="11988" end="12019" title="governor-general of New Zealand" label="governor-general of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230986" start="12071" end="12079" title="patriate" label="patriate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775277" start="12223" end="12228" title="Dominion of India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006542" start="12233" end="12241" title="Dominion of Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356606" start="13611" end="13631" title="Great Seal of Canada" label="Great Seal of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="13720" end="13735" title="Canadian Forces" label="Canadian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683598" start="14307" end="14352" title="Administrator (Australia)" label="&amp;quot;administrator of the Commonwealth&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589802" start="14586" end="14600" title="Governors of the Australian states" label="state governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298071" start="14656" end="14674" title="dormant commission" label="dormant commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108493" start="14891" end="14903" title="Colin Hannah" label="Colin Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188089" start="14999" end="15012" title="Chief Justice" label="chief justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758037" start="15073" end="15080" title="Speaker (politics)" label="Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q845898" start="15503" end="15533" title="Governor-General of the Gambia" label="Governor-General of the Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q887028" start="15547" end="15572" title="Governor-General of Ghana" label="Governor-General of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q392556" start="15586" end="15611" title="Governor-General of Kenya" label="Governor-General of Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q854910" start="15625" end="15651" title="Governor-General of Malawi" label="Governor-General of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573804" start="15665" end="15694" title="Governor-General of Mauritius" label="Governor-General of Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q743228" start="15708" end="15735" title="List of governors and governors-general of Nigeria" label="Governor-General of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589516" start="15750" end="15810" title="Governor-General of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland" label="Governor-General of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089189" start="15955" end="15987" title="Governor-General of Sierra Leone" label="Governor-General of Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280467" start="16001" end="16046" title="Governor-General of the Union of South Africa" label="Governor-General of the Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q695619" start="16060" end="16090" title="Governor-General of Tanganyika" label="Governor-General of Tanganyika"/>
<link wikidata="Q878204" start="16104" end="16130" title="Governor-General of Uganda" label="Governor-General of Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="16148" end="16156" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="16162" end="16170" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321053" start="16212" end="16250" title="Unilateral Declaration of Independence (Rhodesia)" label="Unilateral Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185174" start="16300" end="16315" title="Rhodesian Front" label="Rhodesian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q313424" start="16330" end="16339" title="Ian Smith" label="Ian Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="16351" end="16363" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941419" start="16454" end="16472" title="Humphrey Gibbs" label="Sir Humphrey Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501445" start="16558" end="16573" title="Clifford Dupont" label="Clifford Dupont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="16662" end="16670" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q584901" start="16729" end="16738" title="President of Rhodesia" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589515" start="16856" end="16902" title="Governor-General of the West Indies Federation" label="Governor-General of the West Indies Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261556" start="17035" end="17063" title="Governor-General of Barbados" label="Governor-General of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q14940077" start="17077" end="17103" title="Governor-General of Guyana" label="Governor-General of Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q651523" start="17117" end="17156" title="Governor-General of Trinidad and Tobago" label="Governor-General of Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q749656" start="17180" end="17206" title="Governor-General of Ceylon" label="Governor-General of Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="17220" end="17245" title="Governor-General of India" label="Governor-General of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462163" start="17259" end="17287" title="Governor-General of Pakistan" label="Governor-General of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558541" start="17313" end="17353" title="Governor-General of the Irish Free State" label="Governor-General of the Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572061" start="17367" end="17392" title="Governor-General of Malta" label="Governor-General of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670766" start="17419" end="17443" title="Governor-General of Fiji" label="Governor-General of Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q213510" start="17511" end="17524" title="Belgian Congo" label="Belgian Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q590743" start="17528" end="17541" title="Ruanda-Urundi" label="Ruanda-Urundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088324" start="17560" end="17566" title="Colonial Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12356456" start="17634" end="17645" title="viceroyalty" label="viceroyalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227437" start="17917" end="17933" title="list of governors-general of French Indochina" label="governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="17944" end="17960" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="17973" end="17981" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="17983" end="17987" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="17993" end="18000" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="18107" end="18120" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315432" start="18250" end="18271" title="resident commissioner" label="resident commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q752431" start="18280" end="18292" title="New Hebrides" label="New Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q572927" start="18301" end="18310" title="resident minister" label="residents"/>
<link wikidata="Q35555" start="18314" end="18331" title="Wallis and Futuna" label="Wallis and Futuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="18384" end="18394" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="18550" end="18568" title="Province of Quebec" label="Province of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="18626" end="18634" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44012" start="18639" end="18653" title="Trois-Rivières" label="Trois-Rivières"/>
<link wikidata="Q646374" start="18871" end="18883" title="French India" label="French India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866095" start="18895" end="18905" title="History of Pondicherry" label="Pondichéry"/>
<link wikidata="Q205695" start="18934" end="18951" title="Mascarene Islands" label="Mascarene Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q162157" start="18974" end="18983" title="charter companies" label="chartered"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18984" end="19005" title="French Indies Company" label="French Indies Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="19093" end="19102" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054507" start="19148" end="19158" title="commandant" label="commandant"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="19201" end="19206" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q212068" start="19255" end="19278" title="Jean-Jacques Dessalines" label="Jean-Jacques Dessalines"/>
<link wikidata="Q210682" start="19432" end="19450" title="French West Africa" label="French West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="19534" end="19544" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345608" start="19586" end="19605" title="Commissaire général" label="Commissaire général"/>
<link wikidata="Q271894" start="19711" end="19735" title="French Equatorial Africa" label="French Equatorial Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="19819" end="19836" title="Congo Brazzaville" label="Congo Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="19927" end="19937" title="Napoleon I" label="Napoleon I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="19965" end="19976" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q185072" start="20130" end="20138" title="Courland" label="Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q838491" start="20237" end="20243" title="Pilten" label="Pilten"/>
<link wikidata="Q165040" start="20399" end="20417" title="Parma and Piacenza" label="Parma and Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q371909" start="20547" end="20554" title="prefect" label="prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="20558" end="20562" title="Taro" label="Taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q157824" start="20588" end="20596" title="Piombino" label="Piombino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="20651" end="20658" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567507" start="20694" end="20698" title="Arno (department)" label="Arno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="20700" end="20712" title="Méditerranée" label="Méditerranée"/>
<link wikidata="Q736290" start="20733" end="20740" title="Ombrone" label="Ombrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q699923" start="20953" end="20971" title="Illyrian Provinces" label="Illyrian Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="20992" end="20999" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="21001" end="21009" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="21037" end="21044" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q137816" start="21164" end="21192" title="Taiwan under Japanese rule" label="Japanese-administered Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q701172" start="21199" end="21215" title="Governor-General of Taiwan" label="governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="21236" end="21263" title="Korea under Japanese rule" label="Japanese-administered Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q483997" start="21270" end="21286" title="Governor-General of Korea" label="governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q24856863" start="21319" end="21335" title="Japanese Resident-General of Korea" label="resident-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233" start="21339" end="21344" title="Korean Empire" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432239" start="21411" end="21430" title="Governor-General of the Dutch East Indies" label="gouverneur-generaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="21482" end="21505" title="Netherlands East Indies" label="Netherlands East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="21511" end="21520" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175954" start="22095" end="22114" title="Japanese occupation of the Philippines" label="Japanese occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="22122" end="22134" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q910648" start="22183" end="22202" title="Spanish East Indies" label="Spanish East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542521" start="22209" end="22225" title="Governor-General of the Philippines" label="governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="22247" end="22267" title="Viceroyalty of New Spain" label="Viceroy of New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="22277" end="22283" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="22306" end="22333" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="22385" end="22390" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q31351948" start="22439" end="22460" title="Military Government of the Philippine Islands" label="initial military rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042084" start="22466" end="22484" title="Insular Government of the Philippine Islands" label="Insular Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="22490" end="22501" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542521" start="22534" end="22551" title="Governor-General of the Philippines" label="governors-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="22604" end="22643" title="federal government of the United States" label="federal government of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937346" start="22966" end="22979" title="captain-major" label="captain-major"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="23025" end="23050" title="Portuguese State of India" label="Portuguese State of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="23089" end="23092" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="23169" end="23176" title="Viceroy" label="Viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826232" start="23436" end="23442" title="Portuguese Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q889394" start="23482" end="23492" title="Portuguese Mozambique" label="Moçambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023340" start="23555" end="23565" title="Portuguese Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002279" start="23570" end="23587" title="Portuguese Guinea" label="Portuguese Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q165725" start="23906" end="23917" title="Balkan Wars" label="Balkan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q180484" start="23998" end="24004" title="Epirus (Greece)" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="24006" end="24015" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="24017" end="24022" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q202595" start="24190" end="24201" title="prefectures of Greece" label="prefectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q173620" start="24405" end="24411" title="Northern Aegean" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q156882" start="24416" end="24421" title="Samos" label="Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q209576" start="24422" end="24428" title="Ikaria" label="Ikaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q180176" start="24844" end="24850" title="Kozani" label="Kozani"/>
<link wikidata="Q202272" start="24851" end="24858" title="Florina" label="Florina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="25026" end="25040" title="Western Thrace" label="Western Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q171323" start="25045" end="25059" title="Eastern Thrace" label="Eastern Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541445" start="25087" end="25107" title="Armistice of Mudanya" label="Armistice of Mudanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q703550" start="25807" end="25822" title="Axis occupation of Greece" label="Axis occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165408" start="25936" end="25950" title="West Macedonia" label="West Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152" start="25952" end="25969" title="Central Macedonia" label="Central Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171314" start="25971" end="25997" title="East Macedonia and Thrace" label="East Macedonia, and Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555742" start="26440" end="26467" title="Ministry of Northern Greece" label="Ministry of Northern Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q26796319" start="26578" end="26585" title="Monarchy of Sweden" label="king of"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="26586" end="26592" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654694" start="26617" end="26644" title="Governors-General of Sweden" label="governors-general of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148626" start="26653" end="26670" title="Dominions of Sweden" label="Swedish Dominions"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="26698" end="26708" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q180756" start="26760" end="26766" title="Skåne" label="Scania"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="26803" end="26809" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501845" start="26821" end="26849" title="Governor-General of Finland" label="governors-general of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="26857" end="26879" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Grand Duchy of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26881" end="26908" title="Vistula Land#Government" label="Governors-General of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068091" start="26912" end="26924" title="Vistula Land" label="Vistula Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q86622" start="26970" end="26990" title="Guberniya" label="governorates-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="27045" end="27051" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q156111" start="27096" end="27114" title="General Government" label="General Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q60087" start="27133" end="27143" title="Hans Frank" label="Hans Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q153015" start="27233" end="27250" title="Kingdom of Saxony" label="Kingdom of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q138107" start="27298" end="27304" title="Sixth Coalition" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="27359" end="27369" title="Napoleon I" label="Napoleon I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338119" start="27544" end="27552" title="Freiherr" label="Freiherr"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="27616" end="27622" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="27626" end="27644" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austrian-Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="27669" end="27680" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q613421" start="27868" end="27907" title="Adolf von Rhemen" label="Adolf Freiherr von Rhemen zu Barensfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q78544" start="27954" end="27992" title="Hermann Kövess von Kövessháza" label="Hermann Freiherr Kövess von Kövessháza"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="28103" end="28115" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888862" start="28151" end="28158" title="Viceroys in China" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615742" start="28247" end="28256" title="Province of China" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="28281" end="28287" title="shōgun" label="shōgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q137816" start="28558" end="28564" title="Taiwan under Japanese rule" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q701172" start="28598" end="28624" title="Governor-General of Taiwan" label="governor-general of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="28692" end="28697" title="Korea under Japanese rule" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q483997" start="28731" end="28756" title="Governor General of Korea" label="governor-general of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="28804" end="28828" title="Iran" label="Islamic Republic of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344695" start="28835" end="28845" title="Provinces of Iran" label="provincial"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="28900" end="28907" title="Persian Language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824534" start="29126" end="29157" title="Administrator of the government" label="Administrator of the government"/>
<link wikidata="Q109638658" start="29159" end="29180" title="Administrator General (disambiguation)" label="Administrator General"/>
<link wikidata="Q494360" start="29182" end="29198" title="Government House" label="Government House"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="29305" end="29313" title="Governor" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q731810" start="29315" end="29332" title="Governor-in-chief" label="Governor-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542521" start="29334" end="29369" title="Governor-General of the Philippines" label="Governor-General of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345608" start="29371" end="29388" title="High commissioner" label="High commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516453" start="29390" end="29409" title="Lieutenant governor" label="Lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="29411" end="29418" title="Viceroy" label="Viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203" start="29420" end="29425" title="Aruba" label="Aruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q25227" start="29434" end="29454" title="Netherlands Antilles" label="Netherlands Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q302958" start="29475" end="29489" title="Monarchy of the Netherlands" label="Dutch Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q86622" start="29491" end="29500" title="Guberniya" label="Guberniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="29530" end="29544" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6615374" start="29546" end="29592" title="Representatives of the Commonwealth of Nations" label="Representatives of the Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861569" start="29595" end="29636" title="Roman administration of Judaea (AD 6–135)" label="Roman administration of Judaea (AD 6–135)"/>
<link wikidata="Q649754" start="29657" end="29688" title="List of Roman governors of Asia" label="List of Roman governors of Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593167" start="29691" end="29725" title="List of Ottoman governors of Egypt" label="List of Ottoman governors of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558541" start="29760" end="29800" title="Governor-General of the Irish Free State" label="Governor-General of the Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589515" start="29802" end="29855" title="Governor-General of the Federation of the West Indies" label="Governor-General of the Federation of the West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589516" start="29857" end="29917" title="Governor-General of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland" label="Governor-General of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589719" start="29919" end="29948" title="Governor of Southern Rhodesia" label="Governor of Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227437" start="29950" end="29986" title="Governor-General of French Indochina" label="Governor-General of French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261556" start="30036" end="30064" title="Governor-General of Barbados" label="Governor-General of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q14940077" start="30066" end="30092" title="Governor-General of Guyana" label="Governor-General of Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q651523" start="30094" end="30133" title="Governor-General of Trinidad and Tobago" label="Governor-General of Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q743228" start="30178" end="30205" title="Governor-General of Nigeria" label="Governor-General of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089189" start="30207" end="30239" title="Governor-General of Sierra Leone" label="Governor-General of Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q695619" start="30241" end="30269" title="Governor-General of Tanzania" label="Governor-General of Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280467" start="30271" end="30316" title="Governor-General of the Union of South Africa" label="Governor-General of the Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q878204" start="30318" end="30344" title="Governor-General of Uganda" label="Governor-General of Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q845898" start="30346" end="30372" title="Governor-General of Gambia" label="Governor-General of Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q392556" start="30374" end="30399" title="Governor-General of Kenya" label="Governor-General of Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q887028" start="30401" end="30426" title="Governor-General of Ghana" label="Governor-General of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q854910" start="30428" end="30454" title="Governor-General of Malawi" label="Governor-General of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="30496" end="30521" title="Governor-General of India" label="Governor-General of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462163" start="30523" end="30551" title="Governor-General of Pakistan" label="Governor-General of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q749656" start="30553" end="30582" title="Governor-General of Sri Lanka" label="Governor-General of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572061" start="30626" end="30651" title="Governor-General of Malta" label="Governor-General of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670766" start="30696" end="30720" title="Governor-General of Fiji" label="Governor-General of Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229134" start="30873" end="30885" title="red box (government)" label="despatch box"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55931" wikidata="Q130788" url="?curid=55931" title="Chronology">
<text>Chronology (from Latin , from Ancient Greek , , ; and , &quot;&quot;) is the science of arranging events in their order of occurrence in time. Consider, for example, the use of a timeline or sequence of events. It is also &quot;the determination of the actual temporal sequence of past events&quot;.

Chronology is a part of periodization. It is also a part of the discipline of history including earth history, the earth sciences, and study of the geologic time scale.

==Related fields==
Chronology is the science of locating historical events in time. It relies mostly upon chronometry, which is also known as timekeeping, and historiography, which examines the writing of history and the use of historical methods. Radiocarbon dating estimates the age of formerly living things by measuring the proportion of carbon-14 isotope in their carbon content. Dendrochronology estimates the age of trees by correlation of the various growth rings in their wood to known year-by-year reference sequences in the region to reflect year-to-year climatic variation. Dendrochronology is used in turn as a calibration reference for radiocarbon dating curves.

==Calendar and era==
The familiar terms &quot;calendar&quot; and &quot;era&quot; (within the meaning of a coherent system of numbered calendar years) concern two complementary fundamental concepts of chronology. For example, during eight centuries the calendar belonging to the Christian era, which era was taken in use in the 8th century by Bede, was the Julian calendar, but after the year 1582 it was the Gregorian calendar. Dionysius Exiguus (about the year 500) was the founder of that era, which is nowadays the most widespread dating system on earth. An epoch is the date (year usually) when an era begins.

===Ab Urbe condita era===

&quot;Ab Urbe condita&quot; is Latin for &quot;from the founding of the City (Rome)&quot;, traditionally set in 753 BC. It was used to identify the Roman year by a few Roman historians. Modern historians use it much more frequently than the Romans themselves did; the dominant method of identifying Roman years was to name the two consuls who held office that year. Before the advent of the modern critical edition of historical Roman works, AUC was indiscriminately added to them by earlier editors, making it appear more widely used than it actually was.

It was used systematically for the first time only about the year 400, by the Iberian historian Orosius. Pope Boniface IV, in about the year 600, seems to have been the first who made a connection between this era and Anno Domini. (AD 1 = AUC 754.)

===Astronomical era===

Dionysius Exiguus&#x27; Anno Domini era (which contains only calendar years &quot;AD&quot;) was extended by Bede to the complete Christian era (which contains, in addition all calendar years &quot;BC&quot;, but no &quot;year zero&quot;). Ten centuries after Bede, the French astronomers Philippe de la Hire (in the year 1702) and Jacques Cassini (in the year 1740), purely to simplify certain calculations, put the Julian Dating System (proposed in the year 1583 by Joseph Scaliger) and with it an astronomical era into use, which contains a leap year zero, which precedes the year 1 (AD).

==Prehistory==
While of critical importance to the historian, methods of determining chronology are used in most disciplines of science, especially astronomy, geology, paleontology and archaeology.

In the absence of written history, with its chronicles and king lists, late 19th century archaeologists found that they could develop relative chronologies based on pottery techniques and styles. In the field of Egyptology, William Flinders Petrie pioneered sequence dating to penetrate pre-dynastic Neolithic times, using groups of contemporary artefacts deposited together at a single time in graves and working backwards methodically from the earliest historical phases of Egypt. This method of dating is known as seriation.

Known wares discovered at strata in sometimes quite distant sites, the product of trade, helped extend the network of chronologies. Some cultures have retained the name applied to them in reference to characteristic forms, for lack of an idea of what they called themselves: &quot;The Beaker People&quot; in northern Europe during the 3rd millennium BCE, for example. The study of the means of placing pottery and other cultural artifacts into some kind of order proceeds in two phases, classification and typology: Classification creates categories for the purposes of description, and typology seeks to identify and analyse changes that allow artifacts to be placed into sequences.

Laboratory techniques developed particularly after mid-20th century helped constantly revise and refine the chronologies developed for specific cultural areas. Unrelated dating methods help reinforce a chronology, an axiom of corroborative evidence. Ideally, archaeological materials used for dating a site should complement each other and provide a means of cross-checking. Conclusions drawn from just one unsupported technique are usually regarded as unreliable.

==Synchronism==
The fundamental problem of chronology is to synchronize events. By synchronizing an event it becomes possible to relate it to the current time and to compare the event to other events. Among historians, a typical need is to synchronize the reigns of kings and leaders in order to relate the history of one country or region to that of another. For example, the Chronicon of Eusebius (325 A.D.) is one of the major works of historical synchronism. This work has two sections. The first contains narrative chronicles of nine different kingdoms: Chaldean, Assyrian, Median, Lydian, Persian, Hebrew, Greek, Peloponnesian, Asian, and Roman. The second part is a long table synchronizing the events from each of the nine kingdoms in parallel columns.

By comparing the parallel columns, the reader can determine which events were contemporaneous, or how many years separated two different events. To place all the events on the same time scale, Eusebius used an Anno Mundi (A.M.) era, meaning that events were dated from the supposed beginning of the world as computed from the Book of Genesis in the Hebrew Pentateuch. According to the computation Eusebius used, this occurred in 5199 B.C. The Chronicon of Eusebius was widely used in the medieval world to establish the dates and times of historical events. Subsequent chronographers, such as George Syncellus (died circa 811), analyzed and elaborated on the Chronicon by comparing with other chronologies. The last great chronographer was Joseph Justus Scaliger (1540-1609) who reconstructed the lost Chronicon and synchronized all of ancient history in his two major works, &quot;De emendatione temporum&quot; (1583) and &quot;Thesaurus temporum&quot; (1606). Much of modern historical datings and chronology of the ancient world ultimately derives from these two works. Scaliger invented the concept of the Julian Day which is still used as the standard unified scale of time for both historians and astronomers.

In addition to the literary methods of synchronism used by traditional chronographers such as Eusebius, Syncellus and Scaliger, it is possible to synchronize events by archaeological or astronomical means. For example, the Eclipse of Thales, described in the first book of Herodotus can potentially be used to date the Lydian War because the eclipse took place during the middle of an important battle in that war. Likewise, various eclipses and other astronomical events described in ancient records can be used to astronomically synchronize historical events. Another method to synchronize events is the use of archaeological findings, such as pottery, to do sequence dating.

==See also==

===Examples===
* Parian Chronicle
* List of timelines – specific chronologies
* Timelines of world history – overall historical chronology

===Christian chronology===
* Dionysius Exiguus&#x27; Easter table
* Easter
* Lunar cycle
* Millennium question
* Paschal full moon
* Solar cycle
===General===
* Annals
* French revolutionary era
* Historiography
* Traditional Jewish chronology

===Fiction writing===
Aspects and examples of non-chronological story-telling:
* Flashback
* Flashforward
* Linearity (writing)
* Reverse chronology
==Notes==
==References==
* Hegewisch, D. H., &amp; Marsh, J. (1837). Introduction to historical chronology. Burlington [Vt.]: C. Goodrich.
* B. E. Tumanian, &quot;Measurement of Time in Ancient and Medieval Armenia,&quot; Journal for the History of Astronomy 5, 1974, pp. 91–98.
* Kazarian, K. A., &quot;History of Chronology by B. E. Tumanian,&quot; Journal for the History of Astronomy, 4, 1973, p. 137
* Porter, T. M., &quot;The Dynamics of Progress: Time, Method, and Measure&quot;. The American Historical Review, 1991.

==Further reading==

===Published in the 18th–19th centuries===
* Weeks, J. E. (1701). &quot;The gentleman&#x27;s hour glass; or, An introduction to chronology; being a plain and compendious analysis of time.&quot; Dublin: James Hoey.
* Hodgson, J., Hinton, J., &amp; Wallis, J. (1747). &quot;An introduction to chronology:: containing an account of time; also of the most remarkable cycles, epoch&#x27;s, era&#x27;s, periods, and moveable feasts. To which is added, a brief account of the several methods proposed for the alteration of the style, the reforming the calendar, and fixing the true time of the celebration of Easter&quot;. London: Printed for J. Hinton, at the King&#x27;s Arms in St Paul&#x27;s Church-yard.
* Smith, T. (1818). &quot;An introduction to chronology.&quot; New York: Samuel Wood.

===Published in the 20th century===
* Keller, H. R. (1934). &quot;The dictionary of dates&quot;. New York: The Macmillan company.
* Poole, R. L., &amp; Poole, A. L. (1934). &quot;Studies in chronology and history.&quot; Oxford: Clarendon Press.
* Langer, W. L., &amp; Gatzke, H. W. (1963). &quot;An encyclopedia of world history, ancient, medieval and modern, chronologically arranged&quot;. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
* Momigliano, A. &quot;Pagan and Christian historiography in the Fourth Century A.D.&quot; in A. Momigliano, ed., &quot;The conflict between paganism and Christianity in the Fourth Century,&quot; The Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1963, pp. 79–99
* Williams, N., &amp; Storey, R. L. (1966). &quot;Chronology of the modern world: 1763 to the present time.&quot; London: Barrie &amp; Rockliffe.
* Steinberg, S. H. (1967). &quot;Historical tables: 58 B.C.-A.D. 1965.&quot; London: Macmillan.
* Freeman-Grenville, G. S. P. (1975). &quot;Chronology of world history: a calendar of principal events from 3000 BC to AD 1973&quot;. London: Collings.
* Neugebauer, O. (1975). &quot;A history of ancient mathematical astronomy&quot; Springer-Verlag.
* Bickerman, E. J. (1980). &quot;The chronology of the ancient world&quot;. London: Thames and Hudson.
* Whitrow, G. J. (1990). &quot;Time in history: views of time from prehistory to the present day&quot;. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
* Aitken, M. (1990). &quot;Science-based dating in archaeology&quot;. London: Thames and Hudson.
* Richards, E. G. (1998). &quot;Mapping time: the calendar and history&quot;. Oxford University Press.

===Published in the 21st century===
* Koselleck, R. &quot;Time and history.&quot; &quot;The practice of conceptual history: timing history, spacing concepts.&quot; Palo Alto: Stanford University Press, 2002.
* 

==External links==

* Dating the Past (archived 29 May 2005)
* Pragmatic Bayesians: a decade of integrating radiocarbon dates in chronological models (archived 5 April 2005) from the University of Sheffield at the Internet Archive. Accessed 2008-01-04.
* Open Library. Works related to chronology
* Chattopadhyay, Subhasis. &quot;Chronicity and Temporality: A Revisionary Hermeneutics of Time&quot; in &quot;Prabuddha Bharata or Awakened India&quot; 120 (10):606–609 (2015). .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q130788" start="0" end="10" title="Chronology" label="Chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="17" end="22" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="30" end="43" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="77" end="84" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="137" end="141" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q186117" start="179" end="187" title="timeline" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="191" end="209" title="sequence of events" label="sequence of events"/>
<link wikidata="Q816829" start="325" end="338" title="periodization" label="periodization"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="379" end="386" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q156312" start="397" end="410" title="earth history" label="earth history"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008" start="416" end="430" title="earth sciences" label="earth sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="449" end="468" title="geologic time scale" label="geologic time scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q186398" start="577" end="588" title="chronometry" label="chronometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="630" end="644" title="historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="719" end="737" title="Radiocarbon dating" label="Radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q840660" start="813" end="822" title="carbon-14" label="carbon-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="823" end="830" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="840" end="846" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80205" start="856" end="872" title="Dendrochronology" label="Dendrochronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q186290" start="903" end="914" title="correlation" label="correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80205" start="930" end="942" title="growth rings" label="growth rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q736777" start="1095" end="1106" title="calibration" label="calibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="1121" end="1139" title="radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q12132" start="1195" end="1203" title="calendar" label="calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428674" start="1220" end="1223" title="era" label="era"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="1427" end="1440" title="Christian era" label="Christian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="1491" end="1495" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q274091" start="1577" end="1594" title="Dionysius Exiguus" label="Dionysius Exiguus"/>
<link wikidata="Q507810" start="1710" end="1715" title="Epoch (reference date)" label="epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1822" end="1827" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247524" start="1843" end="1855" title="founding of Rome" label="the founding"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1869" end="1873" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489757" start="2122" end="2128" title="consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q311456" start="2445" end="2452" title="Paulus Orosius" label="Orosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q170505" start="2454" end="2470" title="Pope Boniface IV" label="Pope Boniface IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="2567" end="2578" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="2731" end="2735" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="2752" end="2765" title="Christian era" label="Christian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q371890" start="2910" end="2929" title="Philippe de la Hire" label="Philippe de la Hire"/>
<link wikidata="Q315037" start="2953" end="2968" title="Jacques Cassini" label="Jacques Cassini"/>
<link wikidata="Q14267" start="3038" end="3058" title="Julian Date" label="Julian Dating System"/>
<link wikidata="Q315163" start="3089" end="3104" title="Joseph Scaliger" label="Joseph Scaliger"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828" start="3165" end="3174" title="leap year" label="leap year"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="3362" end="3371" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="3373" end="3380" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="3382" end="3394" title="paleontology" label="paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="3399" end="3410" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="3431" end="3446" title="written history" label="written history"/>
<link wikidata="Q185363" start="3457" end="3466" title="chronicle" label="chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3472" end="3482" title=":Category:Regnal lists" label="king lists"/>
<link wikidata="Q145903" start="3625" end="3635" title="Egyptology" label="Egyptology"/>
<link wikidata="Q220130" start="3637" end="3660" title="William Flinders Petrie" label="William Flinders Petrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="3713" end="3722" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q358095" start="3930" end="3939" title="Seriation (archaeology)" label="seriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q470867" start="4227" end="4240" title="Beaker People" label="Beaker People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347572" start="4867" end="4875" title="evidence" label="evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675944" start="5470" end="5491" title="Chronicon (Eusebius)" label="Chronicon of Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q743781" start="6065" end="6075" title="Anno Mundi" label="Anno Mundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="6181" end="6196" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="6211" end="6221" title="Pentateuch" label="Pentateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q366382" start="6448" end="6464" title="George Syncellus" label="George Syncellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q315163" start="6595" end="6617" title="Joseph Justus Scaliger" label="Joseph Justus Scaliger"/>
<link wikidata="Q14267" start="6965" end="6975" title="Julian day" label="Julian Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q537110" start="7295" end="7312" title="Eclipse of Thales" label="Eclipse of Thales"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="7345" end="7354" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12764401" start="7733" end="7748" title="Dating methodologies in archaeology" label="sequence dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q547179" start="7782" end="7798" title="Parian Chronicle" label="Parian Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131000" start="7801" end="7818" title="List of timelines" label="List of timelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806483" start="7845" end="7871" title="Timelines of world history" label="Timelines of world history"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279397" start="7934" end="7970" title="Dionysius Exiguus&amp;#x27; Easter table" label="Dionysius Exiguus&amp;#x27; Easter table"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="7973" end="7979" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q26388" start="7982" end="7993" title="Lunar cycle" label="Lunar cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36507" start="7996" end="8015" title="Millennium question" label="Millennium question"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332270" start="8018" end="8035" title="Paschal full moon" label="Paschal full moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q676397" start="8038" end="8049" title="solar cycle (calendar)" label="Solar cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193866" start="8066" end="8072" title="Annals" label="Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="8075" end="8099" title="French revolutionary era" label="French revolutionary era"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="8102" end="8116" title="Historiography" label="Historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q110722850" start="8119" end="8148" title="Traditional Jewish chronology" label="Traditional Jewish chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q473432" start="8231" end="8240" title="Flashback (narrative)" label="Flashback"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533706" start="8243" end="8255" title="Flashforward" label="Flashforward"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="8258" end="8277" title="Linearity (writing)" label="Linearity (writing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967297" start="8280" end="8298" title="Reverse chronology" label="Reverse chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q823917" start="11618" end="11641" title="University of Sheffield" label="University of Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="11649" end="11665" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237277" start="11843" end="11878" title="Prabuddha Bharata" label="Prabuddha Bharata or Awakened India"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55934" wikidata="Q768414" url="?curid=55934" title="Eric Corley">
<text>Eric Gordon Corley (born December 16, 1959), also frequently referred to by his pen name of Emmanuel Goldstein, is a figure in the hacker community. He directs the non-profit organization 2600 Enterprises, Inc., publishes a magazine called &quot;2600: The Hacker Quarterly&quot; (which has associated monthly meet-ups around the world), and hosts the hacker convention Hackers on Planet Earth (HOPE). His pseudonym is derived from the fictional opposition leader in George Orwell&#x27;s dystopian novel &quot;Nineteen Eighty-Four&quot;.

In 1993, Corley testified before the United States House of Representatives Subcommittee on Telecommunications. Corley was questioned in relation to the content of &quot;2600&quot; as part of discussions concerning the Digital Telephony Bill; also known as the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act.

Corley is the editor of &quot;The Best of 2600: A Hacker Odyssey&quot; which was released July 2008. The book consists of articles from the magazine &quot;2600: The Hacker Quarterly&quot; set in chronological order to show the evolution of the internet and technology. A follow-up book, &quot;Dear Hacker. Letters to the Editor of 2600&quot;, was published in 2010.

Corley is the host of both the weekly radio programs &quot;Off the Hook&quot; on WBAI-FM and &quot;Off the Wall&quot; on WUSB-FM. While &quot;Off the Hook&quot; often includes a panel of guests and is frequently centered on technological topics, &quot;Off the Wall&quot; is usually narrated by Eric Corley himself and has covered a wide range of topics. &quot;Off the Hook&quot; has been on the air since 1988.

==Filmography==

Corley directed the 2001 film &quot;Freedom Downtime&quot;, a documentary about the incarcerations of Kevin Mitnick and Bernie S that also examines alleged distortions in mainstream media coverage of Mitnick&#x27;s case.

A second movie from 2600 Films, Speaker&#x27;s World has been discussed on previous episodes of Off the Hook.

==References==
==Further reading==

* 
* United States District Court Southern District of New York (2000). &quot;Decision in UNIVERSAL CITY STUDIOS, INC, et al. v. SHAWN C. REIMERDES, et al.&quot; (PDF from MPAA ) p. 12–13
* 2600 Website (2004) Off The Wall. Retrieved June 16, 2005.
* CNN .
* &quot;The Best of 2600&quot; 
* &quot;Dear Hacker. Letters to the Editor of 2600&quot; 

==External links==
* 2600 Magazine
* RNC &#x27;04 Ordeal
* emmangoldstein on Twitter
* Corley: &quot;WikiLeaks is Not One Person, We Are All the Threat&quot; – video interview by &quot;Democracy Now!&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q768414" start="0" end="18" title="Eric Corley" label="Eric Gordon Corley"/>
<link wikidata="Q768414" start="92" end="110" title="Eric Corley" label="Emmanuel Goldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083944" start="131" end="137" title="Hacker (programmer subculture)" label="hacker"/>
<link wikidata="" start="246" end="272" title="2600: The Hacker Quarterly" label="2600: The Hacker Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q22678" start="369" end="392" title="Hackers on Planet Earth" label="Hackers on Planet Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q645795" start="445" end="462" title="Emmanuel Goldstein" label="opposition leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q358998" start="487" end="502" title="utopian and dystopian fiction" label="dystopian novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="509" end="529" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="Nineteen Eighty-Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="575" end="613" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154160" start="799" end="848" title="Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act" label="Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1006" end="1032" title="2600: The Hacker Quarterly" label="2600: The Hacker Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078974" start="1271" end="1295" title="Off the Hook (radio program)" label="&amp;quot;Off the Hook&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651267" start="1299" end="1303" title="WBAI" label="WBAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956677" start="1339" end="1346" title="WUSB-FM" label="WUSB-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500522" start="1683" end="1699" title="Freedom Downtime" label="Freedom Downtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="1709" end="1720" title="documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="1731" end="1744" title="incarceration" label="incarceration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449" start="1749" end="1762" title="Kevin Mitnick" label="Kevin Mitnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894484" start="1767" end="1775" title="Bernie S" label="Bernie S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185824" start="2549" end="2563" title="Democracy Now!" label="Democracy Now!"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55937" wikidata="Q5571775" url="?curid=55937" title="Glossary of communication disorders">
<text>This is a glossary of medical terms related to communication disorders which are psychological or medical conditions that could have the potential to affect the ways in which individuals can hear, listen, understand, speak and respond to others.

== A ==



















== B ==






== C ==










== D ==













== E ==




== G ==



== H ==











== I ==



== K ==

== L ==














== M ==








== N ==








== O ==












== P ==










== R ==


== S ==














== T ==











== U ==



== V ==












== W ==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1058691" start="47" end="69" title="communications disorder" label="communication disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="81" end="94" title="Mental disorder" label="psychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="98" end="116" title="Disease" label="medical conditions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55940" wikidata="Q928834" url="?curid=55940" title="Nulla poena sine lege">
<text>Nulla poena sine lege (Latin for &quot;no penalty without law&quot;, Anglicized pronunciation: ) is a legal formula which, in its narrow interpretation, states that one can only be punished for doing something if a penalty for this behavior is fixed in criminal law. As some laws are unwritten (e.g. in oral law or customary law) and laws can be interpreted broadly, it does not necessarily mean that an action will not be punished simply because a specific rule against it is not codified.

The variant &quot;nullum crimen sine lege&quot; (&quot;no crime without law&quot;) establishes that conduct is not criminal if not found among the behavior/circumstance combinations of a statute. The other interpretations of the formula include the rules prohibiting retroactive criminalization and prescribing laws to be strictly construed.

Despite the use of Latin language and brocard-like appearance, the formula was mostly born in 18th century liberalism (some elements of non-retroactivity of laws and limiting the punishment to the one prescribed in the statute date back to Roman times). This principle is accepted and codified in modern democratic states as a basic requirement of the rule of law. It has been described as &quot;one of the most &#x27;widely held value-judgement[s] in the entire history of human thought.

==Requirements==
In modern European criminal law, e.g. of the Constitutional Court of Germany, the principle of &quot;nulla poena sine lege&quot; has been found to consist of four separate requirements:

;&quot;Nulla poena sine lege praevia&quot;: There is to be no penalty without &quot;previous&quot; law. This prohibits ex post facto laws, and the retroactive application of criminal law. It is a basic maxim in mainland European legal thinking. It was written by Paul Johann Anselm Ritter von Feuerbach as part of the Bavarian Criminal Code in 1813.
;&quot;Nulla poena sine lege scripta&quot;: There is to be no penalty without &quot;written&quot; law. That is, criminal prohibitions must be set out in written legal instruments of general application, normally statutes, adopted in the form required by constitutional law. This excludes customary law as a basis of criminal punishment.
;&quot;Nulla poena sine lege certa&quot;: There is to be no penalty without &quot;well-defined&quot; law. This provides that a penal statute must define the punishable conduct and the penalty with sufficient definiteness. This to allow citizens to foresee when a specific action would be punishable, and to conduct themselves accordingly, a rule expressed in the general principle of legal certainty in matters of criminal law. It is recognised or codified in many national jurisdictions, as well as e.g. by the European Court of Justice as a &quot;general principle of Union law&quot;.
;&quot;Nulla poena sine lege stricta&quot;: There is to be no penalty without &quot;exact&quot; law. This prohibits the application by analogy of statutory provisions in criminal law.

==In common law==
One complexity is the lawmaking power of judges under common law. Even in civil law systems that do not admit judge-made law, it is not always clear when the function of interpretation of the criminal law ends and judicial lawmaking begins.

In English criminal law there are offences of common law origin. For example, murder is still a common law offence and lacks a statutory definition. The Homicide Act 1957 did not include a statutory definition of murder (or any other homicidal offence). Therefore, the definition of murder was the subject of no fewer than six appeals to the House of Lords within the following 40 years (&quot;Director of Public Prosecutions v. Smith&quot; [1961] A.C. 290; &quot;Hyam v. Director of Public Prosecutions&quot; [1975] A.C. 55; &quot;Regina v. Cunningham&quot; [1982] A.C. 566; &quot;Regina v. Moloney&quot; [1985] A.C. 905; &quot;Regina v. Hancock&quot; [1986] A.C. 455; &quot;Regina v. Woollin&quot; [1998] 4 A11 E.R. 103 (H.L.)).

== In natural law ==
The legal principle &quot;nulla poena sine lege&quot; as principle in natural law is due to the contention of scholars of the Scholasticism about the preconditions of a guilty conscience. In relation to the Ezekiel-commentary of Jerome, Thomas Aquinas and Francisco Suárez analysed the formal conditions of the punishment of conscience. Thomas located the conditions within the synderesis. For him it is a formal and active part of the human soul. Understanding of activity, which is in accordance with the human nature, is formal possible due to the synderesis. Hence the synderesis contains in the works of patristic authors a law which commands how the human as human has to act. In the individual case this law is contentual definite. For the scholastic this is shown in the action of the intellect. This action is named since Thomas &quot;conscientia&quot;. A possible content of the &quot;conscientia&quot; is the punishment in concordance with the content of the synderesis, in case the human has had not act in concordance with the human nature. An example for the punishment is madness, which since antiquity is a punishment of conscience. The Oresteia is a famous example for this.

According Suárez the punishment of conscience is the insight in an obligation to act in concordance with the human nature to undo a past misdeed. This insight obligates to impossible actions due to the fact that the misdeed is in the past and hence it is unchangeable. Therefore the &quot;conscientia&quot; obligates in concordance with the synderesis to do an impossible action. Hence the &quot;conscientia&quot; restricts conscientious persons by doing a limitation on their own will. For they are unable to think about any other action than to fulfil their obligation. Inasmuch the conscientia restricts the intellect the scholastic speak of it as a &quot;malum&quot; or &quot;malum metaphysicum&quot;, because the limitation is related to a metaphysical quality of a human. The law is constituted by the human nature itself from what the &quot;malum metaphysicum&quot; is inflicted. Therefore the punishment of the conscience is executed because of a violation of natural law.

When coming to terms with the Nazi crimes after World War II in Austria, the Austrian legal scholar and judge Wilhelm Malaniuk justified the admissibility of the non-application of the &quot;nulla poena sine lege&quot; with regard to the Austrian Verbotsgesetz 1947: &quot;Because these are crimes that are so grossly violate the laws of humanity!&quot; Regarding war crimes law and war crimes related to command structures, Malaniuk said: “In the war instigated by the National Socialists, the requirements of humanity as well as the principles of international law and martial law were violated to such an extent that it was no longer just the government that was believed to be responsible for this, but also the individual citizens, because they knew had to that their actions grossly violate the principles, compliance with which must be demanded from every member of the occidental culture.&quot;

==In cases of universal jurisdiction==
The question of jurisdiction may sometimes come to contradict this principle. For example, customary international law allows the prosecution of pirates by any country (applying universal jurisdiction), even if they did not commit crimes at the area that falls under this country&#x27;s law. A similar principle has appeared in the recent decades with regard to crimes of genocide (see genocide as a crime under domestic law); and UN Security Council Resolution 1674 &quot;reaffirms the provisions of paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document regarding the responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity&quot; even if the State in which the population is being assaulted does not recognise these assaults as a breach of domestic law. However, it seems that universal jurisdiction is not to be expanded substantially to other crimes, so as to satisfy &quot;Nulla poena sine lege&quot;.

Since the Nuremberg Trials, penal law is taken to include the prohibitions of international criminal law, in addition to those of domestic law. Thus, prosecutions have been possible of such individuals as Nazi war criminals and officials of the German Democratic Republic responsible for the Berlin Wall, even though their deeds may have been allowed or even ordered by domestic law. Also, courts when dealing with such cases will tend to look to the letter of the law at the time, even in regimes where the law as it was written was generally disregarded in practice by its own authors.

However, some legal scholars criticize this, because generally, in the legal systems of mainland Europe where the maxim was first developed, &quot;penal law&quot; was taken to mean statutory penal law, so as to create a guarantee to the individual, considered as a fundamental right, that he would not be prosecuted for an action or omission that was not considered a crime according to the statutes passed by the legislators in force at the time of the action or omission, and that only those penalties that were in place when the infringement took place would be applied. Also, even if one considers that certain actions are prohibited under general principles of international law, critics point out that a prohibition in a general principle does not amount to the establishment of a crime, and that the rules of international law also do not stipulate specific penalties for the violations.

In an attempt to address those criticisms, the statute of the recently established International Criminal Court provides for a system in which crimes and penalties are expressly set out in written law, that shall only be applied to future cases. See Article 22 of the Rome Statute, however this is under the proviso, in Article 22(3) that this only applies to the ICC, and &quot;doesn&#x27;t affect the characterization of any conduct as criminal under international law independently of [the Rome Statute]&quot;.

The principle of nulla poena sine lege, insofar as it applies to general criminal law, is enshrined in several national constitutions, and international instruments, see European Convention on Human Rights, article 7(1). However, when applied to international criminal/humanitarian law, the same legal instruments often allow for ex post facto application of the law. See ECHR, article 7(2), which states that article 7(1) &quot;shall not prejudice the trial and punishment of any person for any act or omission which, at the time when it was committed, was criminal according to the general principles of law recognised by civilised nations.&quot;

==See also==

* Everything which is not forbidden is allowed
* Ex post facto law
* List of Latin legal terms
* &quot;Nulla poena sine culpa&quot;
* Principle of legality in criminal law
* Radbruch formula
* &quot;Rechtsstaat&quot;
* Riom Trial (1942–1943)

==Notes==
==References==

* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="23" end="28" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832291" start="69" end="79" title="Traditional English pronunciation of Latin" label="Anglicized"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="102" end="107" title="Law" label="legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="253" end="265" title="criminal law" label="criminal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144567" start="303" end="311" title="oral law" label="oral law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479995" start="315" end="328" title="customary law" label="customary law"/>
<link wikidata="Q214214" start="481" end="489" title="Codification (law)" label="codified"/>
<link wikidata="Q328293" start="759" end="770" title="Ex post facto law" label="retroactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623615" start="814" end="832" title="Strict constructionism" label="strictly construed"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="854" end="868" title="Latin language" label="Latin language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680313" start="873" end="885" title="Brocard (law)" label="brocard-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="942" end="952" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1075" end="1086" title="Roman times" label="Roman times"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="1187" end="1198" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q56025" start="1387" end="1418" title="Constitutional Court of Germany" label="Constitutional Court of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q328293" start="1648" end="1665" title="ex post facto law" label="ex post facto law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026787" start="1731" end="1736" title="Maxim (saying)" label="maxim"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="1740" end="1755" title="mainland Europe" label="mainland Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q61929" start="1792" end="1831" title="Paul Johann Anselm Ritter von Feuerbach" label="Paul Johann Anselm Ritter von Feuerbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="2091" end="2098" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479995" start="2167" end="2180" title="customary law" label="customary law"/>
<link wikidata="Q49094488" start="2600" end="2615" title="legal certainty" label="legal certainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="2728" end="2753" title="European Court of Justice" label="European Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q208202" start="2786" end="2795" title="Law of the European Union" label="Union law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2923" end="2945" title="Analogy#Law" label="application by analogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="3060" end="3070" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="3080" end="3089" title="civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352893" start="3251" end="3271" title="English criminal law" label="English criminal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="3294" end="3304" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="3326" end="3332" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153559" start="3344" end="3362" title="common law offence" label="common law offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5890807" start="3401" end="3418" title="Homicide Act 1957" label="Homicide Act 1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="4127" end="4140" title="Scholasticism" label="Scholasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194064" start="4208" end="4215" title="Ezekiel" label="Ezekiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="4230" end="4236" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="4238" end="4252" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q316339" start="4257" end="4273" title="Francisco Suárez" label="Francisco Suárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q193526" start="4326" end="4336" title="conscience" label="conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508810" start="4379" end="4389" title="synderesis" label="synderesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q249769" start="5154" end="5162" title="Oresteia" label="Oresteia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="6162" end="6173" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q18410091" start="6286" end="6302" title="Wilhelm Malaniuk" label="Wilhelm Malaniuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q571913" start="6423" end="6441" title="Verbotsgesetz 1947" label="Verbotsgesetz 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="7135" end="7147" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194894" start="7210" end="7237" title="customary international law" label="customary international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="7264" end="7270" title="pirate" label="pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q928801" start="7297" end="7319" title="universal jurisdiction" label="universal jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="7491" end="7499" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7505" end="7543" title="genocide#Crime" label="genocide as a crime under domestic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403044" start="7550" end="7585" title="UN Security Council Resolution 1674" label="UN Security Council Resolution 1674"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605150" start="7655" end="7684" title="World Summit Outcome Document" label="World Summit Outcome Document"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="8101" end="8117" title="Nuremberg Trials" label="Nuremberg Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="8119" end="8128" title="penal law" label="penal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009938" start="8221" end="8233" title="domestic law" label="domestic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="8296" end="8300" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="8301" end="8313" title="war criminal" label="war criminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="8336" end="8362" title="German Democratic Republic" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="8383" end="8394" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="8861" end="8870" title="Statutory law" label="statutory"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="9659" end="9687" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q838958" start="9844" end="9856" title="Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court" label="Rome Statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="10261" end="10296" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418159" start="10757" end="10801" title="Everything which is not forbidden is allowed" label="Everything which is not forbidden is allowed"/>
<link wikidata="Q328293" start="10804" end="10821" title="Ex post facto law" label="Ex post facto law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062797" start="10824" end="10849" title="List of Latin legal terms" label="List of Latin legal terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004629" start="10858" end="10880" title="Nulla poena sine culpa" label="Nulla poena sine culpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214335" start="10889" end="10926" title="Principle of legality in criminal law" label="Principle of legality in criminal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051558" start="10929" end="10945" title="Radbruch formula" label="Radbruch formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209223" start="10954" end="10965" title="Rechtsstaat" label="Rechtsstaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q572765" start="10974" end="10984" title="Riom Trial" label="Riom Trial"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55941" wikidata="Q1243520" url="?curid=55941" title="Jabber">
<text>To jabber means to babble incoherently. 

Jabber may also refer to:

* The original name of the Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP), the open technology for instant messaging and presence
* Jabber.org, the public, free instant messaging and presence service based on XMPP
* Jabber XCP, a commercial product which is an implementation of XMPP. Acquired by Cisco Systems in 2008
* An abnormally long transmission on an Ethernet network or link

==See also==
* Jabbar (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1243520" start="3" end="9" title="Jabber" label="jabber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243520" start="42" end="48" title="Jabber" label="Jabber"/>
<link wikidata="Q188951" start="96" end="138" title="XMPP" label="Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059386" start="204" end="214" title="Jabber.org" label="Jabber.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q173395" start="369" end="382" title="Cisco Systems" label="Cisco Systems"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="431" end="439" title="Ethernet#Jabber" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q41739545" start="472" end="495" title="Jabbar (disambiguation)" label="Jabbar (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55942" wikidata="Q222883" url="?curid=55942" title="Special Air Service">
<text>The Special Air Service (SAS) is a special forces unit of the British Army. It was founded as a regiment in 1941 by David Stirling, and in 1950 it was reconstituted as a corps. The unit specialises in a number of roles including counter-terrorism, hostage rescue, direct action and special reconnaissance. Much of the information about the SAS is highly classified, and the unit is not commented on by either the British government or the Ministry of Defence due to the secrecy and sensitivity of its operations.

The corps currently consists of the 22 Special Air Service Regiment, which is the regular component, as well as the 21 Special Air Service Regiment (Artists) (Reserve) and the 23 Special Air Service Regiment (Reserve), which are reserve units, all under the operational command of United Kingdom Special Forces (UKSF). Its sister unit is the Royal Navy&#x27;s Special Boat Service, which specialises in maritime counter-terrorism. Both units are under the operational control of the Director Special Forces.

The Special Air Service traces its origins to 1941 and the Second World War. It was reformed as part of the Territorial Army in 1947, named the &quot;21st Special Air Service Regiment (Artists Rifles)&quot;. The 22nd Special Air Service Regiment, which is part of the regular army, gained fame and recognition worldwide after its televised rescue of all but two of the hostages held during the 1980 Iranian Embassy siege.

==History==
===Second World War===
The Special Air Service was a unit of the British Army during the Second World War that was formed in July 1941 by David Stirling and originally called &quot;L&quot; Detachment, Special Air Service Brigadethe &quot;L&quot; designation and Air Service name being a tie-in to a British disinformation campaign, trying to deceive the Axis into thinking there was a paratrooper regiment with numerous units operating in the area (the real SAS would &quot;prove&quot; to the Axis that the fake one existed). It was conceived as a commando force to operate behind enemy lines in the North African Campaign and initially consisted of five officers and 60 other ranks. Its first mission, in November 1941, was a parachute drop in support of the Operation Crusader offensive, codenamed Operation Squatter. Due to German resistance and adverse weather conditions, the mission was a disaster; with only 22 men, a third of the unit making back to base. The rest were either killed or captured. Its second mission was a major success. Transported by the Long Range Desert Group, it attacked three airfields in Libya, destroying 60 aircraft without loss. In September 1942, it was renamed 1st SAS, consisting at that time of four British squadrons, one Free French, one Greek, and the Folboat Section.

In January 1943, Colonel David Stirling was captured in Tunisia and Paddy Mayne replaced him as commander. In April 1943, the 1st SAS was reorganised into the Special Raiding Squadron under Mayne&#x27;s command and the Special Boat Squadron was placed under the command of George Jellicoe. The Special Raiding Squadron fought in Sicily and Italy along with the 2nd SAS, which had been formed in North Africa in 1943 in part by the renaming of the Small Scale Raiding Force under the command of Bill Stirling (brother of David). The Special Boat Squadron fought in the Aegean Islands and Dodecanese until the end of the war. In 1944 the SAS Brigade was formed. The unit was formed from:
* 1st Special Air Service
* 2nd Special Air Service
* 3rd Special Air Service – 2e Régiment de Chasseurs Parachutistes
* 4th Special Air Service – 3e Régiment de Chasseurs Parachutistes
* 5th Special Air Service – lineage continued by Belgian Special Forces Group
* F Squadron – responsible for signals and communications

It was tasked with parachute operations behind the German lines in France and carried out operations supporting the Allied advance through France (Operations Houndsworth, Bulbasket, Loyton, Kipling and Wallace-Hardy), Belgium, the Netherlands (Operation Pegasus), and eventually into Germany (Operation Archway and Operation Howard). As a result of Hitler&#x27;s issuing of the Commando Order on 18 October 1942, the members of the unit faced the additional danger that they would be summarily executed if captured by the Germans. In July 1944, following Operation Bulbasket, 34 captured SAS commandos were indeed summarily executed by the Germans. In October 1944, in the aftermath of Operation Loyton, another 31 captured SAS commandos were summarily executed by the Germans.

The last original member of the Special Air Service and the last survivor of the Long Range Desert Group, Mike Sadler, died on 4 January 2024, at the age of 103.

===Post-war===
At the end of the war the British government saw no further need for the force and disbanded it on 8 October 1945.

The following year it was decided there &quot;was&quot; a need for a long-term deep-penetration commando unit and a new SAS regiment was to be raised as part of the Territorial Army. Ultimately, the Artists Rifles, raised in 1860 and headquartered at Dukes Road, Euston, took on the SAS mantle as 21st SAS Regiment (V) on 1 January 1947.

====Malayan Scouts====
In 1950, a 21 SAS squadron was raised to fight in the Korean War. After three months of training in Britain, it was informed that the squadron would no longer be required in Korea and so it instead volunteered to fight in the Malayan Emergency. Upon arrival in Malaya, it came under the command of &quot;Mad Mike&quot; Mike Calvert who was forming a new unit called the Malayan Scouts (SAS). Calvert had already formed one squadron from 100 volunteers in the Far East, which became A Squadron; the 21 SAS squadron then became B Squadron; and after a recruitment visit to Rhodesia by Calvert, C Squadron was formed from 100 Rhodesian volunteers. The Rhodesians returned home after three years&#x27; service and were replaced by a New Zealand squadron. By this time the need for a regular army SAS regiment had been recognised; the 22 SAS Regiment was formally added to the army list in 1952 and has been based at Hereford since 1960. In 1959 the third regiment, the 23 SAS Regiment, was formed by renaming the Reserve Reconnaissance Unit, which had succeeded MI9 and whose members were experts in escape and evasion.

===22 SAS Regiment===
Since serving in Malaya, men from the regular army 22 SAS Regiment have taken part in reconnaissance patrols and large scale raiding missions in the Jebel Akhdar War in Oman and conducted covert reconnaissance and surveillance patrols and some larger scale raiding missions in Borneo. They returned to Oman in operations against Communist-backed rebels in the Dhofar Rebellion including the Battle of Mirbat. They have also taken part in operations in the Aden Emergency, Northern Ireland, and Gambia. Their Special projects team assisted the West German counterterrorism group GSG 9 at Mogadishu. The SAS counter terrorist wing famously took part in a hostage rescue operation during the Iranian Embassy Siege in London. SAS were involved throughout Britain&#x27;s covert involvement in the Soviet–Afghan War; they acted through private military contractor Keenie Meenie Services (or KMS Ltd), training the Afghan Mujaheddin in weapons, tactics and using explosives. Not only did they train the Mujaheddin in Afghanistan but also sent them to be trained in Pakistan, Oman and even parts of the UK. During the Falklands War B squadron were prepared for Operation Mikado before it was subsequently cancelled while D and G squadrons were deployed and participated in the raid on Pebble Island. Operation Flavius was a controversial operation in Gibraltar against the Provisional Irish Republican Army (PIRA). 22 SAS also directed NATO aircraft onto Serb positions and hunted war criminals in Bosnia. They were also involved in the Kosovo War helping KLA guerillas behind Serbian lines. According to Albanian sources one SAS sergeant was killed by Serbian special forces.

The Gulf War, in which A, B and D squadrons deployed, was the largest SAS mobilisation since the Second World War, also notable for the failure of the Bravo Two Zero mission. In Sierra Leone it took part in Operation Barras, a hostage rescue operation, to extract members of the Royal Irish Regiment.

Following the September 11 attacks on the United States by al-Qaeda in 2001, two squadrons of 22 SAS, later reinforced by members of both the Territorial SAS units, deployed to Afghanistan as part of the Coalition invasion at the start of the War in Afghanistan, to dismantle and destroy al-Qaeda and to deny it a safe base of operations in Afghanistan by removing the Taliban from power in the War on Terror. The Regiment carried out Operation Trent, the largest operation in its history, which included its first wartime HALO parachute jump. Following the invasion, the Regiment continued to operate in Afghanistan against the Taliban and other insurgents until 2006, when its deployment to Iraq became its focus of operations, until 2009 when the SAS redeployed to Afghanistan.

The regiment took part in the Iraq War, notably carrying out operations in Iraq before the 2003 invasion. Following the invasion, it formed part of Task Force Black/Knight to combat the post invasion insurgency; in late 2005/early 2006, the SAS were integrated into JSOC and focused its counterinsurgency efforts on combating al-Qaeda in Iraq and the Sunni insurgency alongside Delta Force. The counter-insurgency was successful, and the UKSF mission in Iraq ended in May 2009. Overall, more than 3,500 terrorists were &quot;taken off the streets&quot; of Baghdad by 22 SAS.

Various British newspapers have speculated on SAS involvement in Operation Ellamy and the 2011 Libyan civil war. The &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot; reports that &quot;defence sources have confirmed that the SAS has been in Libya for several weeks, and played a key role in coordinating the fall of Tripoli.&quot; While &quot;The Guardian&quot; reports &quot;They have been acting as forward air controllersdirecting pilots to targetsand communicating with NATO operational commanders. They have also been advising rebels on tactics.&quot;

Members of the Special Air Service were deployed to Northern Iraq in late August 2014, and according to former SIS chief Richard Barrett, would also be sent to Syria, tasked with trying to track down the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) terrorist group that the press labelled the Beatles. In 2024 it was acknowledged that five SAS members had been arrested by the Royal Military Police on suspicion of committing war crimes in Syria, though details have not been disclosed.

In recent years SAS officers have risen to senior appointments in the British Army and Armed Forces. General Peter de la Billière was the commander in chief of the British forces in the 1990 Gulf War. General Michael Rose became commander of the United Nations Protection Force in Bosnia in 1994. In 1997 General Charles Guthrie became Chief of the Defence Staff the head of the British armed forces. Lieutenant-General Cedric Delves was appointed commander of the Field Army and deputy commander in chief NATO Regional Headquarters Allied Forces North in 2002–2003.

===21 and 23 SAS===

For much of the Cold War, the role of 21 SAS and 23 SAS was to provide stay-behind parties in the event of a Warsaw Pact invasion of western Europe, forming together I Corps&#x27; Corps Patrol Unit. In the case of an invasion, this Special Air Service Group would have let themselves be bypassed and remained behind in order to collect intelligence behind Warsaw Pact lines, conduct target acquisition, and thus try to slow the enemy&#x27;s advance.

In early 2003, a squadron of about 60 soldiers from 21 SAS and 23 SAS, were deployed to Afghanistan. In 2005, for the first time since the Malayan Emergency a whole Reserve squadron deployed from one of the regiments to Afghanistan to conduct reconnaissance of Helmand province in preparation for the establishment of a Task Force based around 16 Air Assault Brigade.

===Influence on other special forces===
Following the post-war reconstitution of the Special Air Service, other countries in the Commonwealth recognised their need for similar units. The Canadian Special Air Service Company was formed in 1947, being disbanded in 1949. The New Zealand Special Air Service squadron was formed in June 1955 to serve with the British SAS in Malaya, which became a full regiment in 2011. Australia formed the 1st SAS Company in July 1957, which became a full regiment of the Special Air Service Regiment (SASR) in 1964. On its return from Malaya, the C (Rhodesian) Squadron formed the basis for creation of the Rhodesian Special Air Service in 1961. It retained the name &quot;C Squadron (Rhodesian) Special Air Service&quot; within the Rhodesian Security Forces until 1978, when it became 1 (Rhodesian) Special Air Service Regiment.

Non-Commonwealth countries have also formed units based on the SAS. The Belgian Army&#x27;s Special Forces Group, which wears the same capbadge as the British SAS, traces its ancestry partly from the 5th Special Air Service of the Second World War. The French 1st Marine Infantry Parachute Regiment (1er RPIMa) can trace its origins to the Second World War 3rd and 4th SAS, adopting its &quot;who dares wins&quot; motto. The American unit, 1st Special Forces Operational Detachment-Delta, was formed by Colonel Charles Alvin Beckwith, who served with 22 SAS as an exchange officer, and recognised the need for a similar type of unit in the United States Army. The Israeli Sayeret Matkal and Shaldag units have also been modelled after the SAS, sharing its motto. Ireland&#x27;s Army Ranger Wing (ARW) also trains with the SAS. The Philippine National Police&#x27;s Special Action Force was formed along the lines of the SAS.

The former Royal Afghan Army&#x27;s 666th Commando Brigade was formed by Colonel Ramatullah Safi in the 1970s after he received his training with the SAS before it was disbanded through purges after the coups in 1973 and 1978.

==Organisation==

Little publicly verifiable information exists on the contemporary SAS, as the British government usually does not comment on special forces matters due to the nature of their work. The Special Air Service comprises three units: one Regular and two Army Reserve (AR) units. The regular army unit is 22 SAS Regiment and the reserve units are 21 Special Air Service Regiment (Artists) (Reserve) (21 SAS(R)) and 23 Special Air Service Regiment (23 SAS (R)), collectively, the Special Air Service (Reserve) (SAS(R)).

Special Forces Parachute Support Squadron (Para Sp Sqn) is a sub-unit of the Airborne Delivery Wing (ADW) based at RAF Brize Norton.

Supplementary to the SAS, together with the Special Boat Service and the Special Reconnaissance Regiment is 18 (UKSF) Signal Regiment.

===Squadrons===

22 SAS normally has a strength of 400 to 600. The regiment has four operational squadrons: A, B, D and G. Each squadron consists of approximately 65 members commanded by a major, divided into four troops (each troop being commanded by a captain) and a small headquarters section. Troops usually consist of 16 members (Members of the SAS are variously known as &quot;blade&quot; or &quot;Operator&quot;) and each patrol within a troop consists of four members, with each member possessing a particular skill e.g. signals, demolition, medic or linguist in addition to basic skills learned during the course of his training. The term &quot;squadron&quot; dates back to the unit&#x27;s earliest days when the unit&#x27;s name was intended to confuse German intelligence. The four troops specialise in four different areas:
* Boat troop – specialists in maritime skills including diving using rebreathers, using kayaks (canoes) and rigid-hulled inflatable boats and often train with the Special Boat Service.
* Air troop – experts in free fall parachuting and high-altitude parachute operations including High-Altitude Low Opening (HALO) and High-Altitude High Opening (HAHO) techniques.
* Mobility troop – specialists in using vehicles and are experts in desert warfare. They are also trained in an advanced level of motor mechanics to field-repair any vehicular breakdown.
* Mountain troop – specialists in Arctic combat and survival, using specialist equipment such as skis, snowshoes and mountain climbing techniques.

In 1980 R Squadron (which has since been renamed L Detachment) was formed; its members are all ex-regular SAS regiment soldiers who have a commitment to reserve service.

22 SAS squadron duty rotations are set up as such that one squadron is maintained on Counter-Terrorism duty in the UK; a second will be on a deployment; a third will be preparing for deployment whilst conducting short term training; and the fourth will be preparing for long-term overseas training such as jungle or desert exercises. In times of war, such as the 2003 invasion of Iraq, it is not uncommon for two squadrons to be deployed.

Squadron Structure:
* A Squadron: 1 (Boat) Troop – 2 (Air) Troop – 3 (Mobility) Troop – 4 (Mountain) Troop
* B Squadron: 6 (Boat) Troop – 7 (Air) Troop – 8 (Mobility) Troop – 9 (Mountain) Troop
* D Squadron: 16 (Air) Troop – 17 (Boat) Troop – 18 (Mobility) Troop – 19 (Mountain) Troop
* G Squadron: 21 (Mobility) Troop – 22 (Mountain) Troop – 23 (Boat) Troop – 24 (Air) Troop

===Counter Terrorist Wing===

The SAS has a subunit called the Counter Terrorist Wing (CTW) that fulfils its counterterrorism (CT) role. It has previously been known as the Counter Revolutionary Warfare (CRW) Wing and special projects team. The SAS receives aviation support from No. 658 Squadron AAC to carry out their CT role.

The CTW is trained in Close Quarter Battle (CQB), sniper techniques and specialises in hostage rescue in buildings or on public transport. The team was formed in the early 1970s after the Prime Minister, Edward Heath, asked the Ministry of Defence to prepare for any possible terrorist attack similar to the massacre at the 1972 Summer Olympics therefore ordering that the SAS Counter Revolutionary Warfare (CRW) wing be raised.

Squadrons refresh their training every 16 months, on average. The CRW&#x27;s first deployment was during the Balcombe Street siege. The Metropolitan Police had trapped a PIRA unit; it surrendered when it heard on the BBC that the SAS were being sent in. The first documented action abroad by the CRW wing was assisting the West German counter-terrorism group GSG 9 at Mogadishu.

The CT role was shared amongst the squadrons, initially on a 12-month and later six-month rotation basis to ensure that all members are eventually trained in CT and CQB techniques. The SAS train for the CT role at Pontrilas Army Training Area in a facility that includes the Killing House (officially known as Close Quarter Battle House) and part of a Boeing 747 airliner that can be reconfigured to match the internal layouts of virtually any commercial aircraft. The on-call CT squadron is split into four troops, two of which are on immediate notice to move and are restricted to the Hereford-Credenhill area, whilst the other two conduct training and exercises across the UK, but are available for operational deployment should the need arise.

===Commanding Officers===
* 1950 Lt Col Mike Calvert, Royal Engineers
* 1951 Lt Col John Slone, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
* 1953 Lt Col Oliver Brooke, Welch Regiment
* 1954 Lt Col Michael Osborn, West Yorkshire Regiment
* 1955 Lt Col George Lea, Lancashire Fusiliers and Parachute Regiment
* 1957 Lt Col Tony Deane-Drummond, Royal Signals
* 1960 Lt Col Ronald Wilson, Royal Northumberland Fusiliers
* 1962 Lt Col John Woodhouse, Dorset Regiment and East Surreys
* 1965 Lt Col Michael Wingate-Gray, Black Watch
* 1967 Lt Col John Slim, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
* 1969 Lt Col John Watts, Royal Irish Rangers
* 1972 Lt Col Peter de la Billière, Light Infantry
* 1974 Lt Col Anthony Jeapes, Devonshire and Dorset Regiment
* 1977 Lt Col Mike Wilkes, Royal Artillery
* 1982 Lt Col Mike Rose, Coldstream Guards
* 1984 Lt Col Andrew Massey, Royal Corps of Transport
* 1986 Lt Col Cedric Delves, Devonshire and Dorset Regiment
* 1989 Lt Col John Holmes, Scots Guards
* n/k Lt Col Jonathan &quot;Jacko&quot; Page, Parachute Regiment
* 2001 Lt Col Ed Butler, Royal Green Jackets
* 2002 Lt Col Mark Carleton-Smith, Irish Guards
* 2007 Lt Col Richard Williams, Parachute Regiment
* 2012 Lt Col Nick Perry, King&#x27;s Royal Hussars

===Operational command===
====Regular====
22 SAS is under the operational command of the Director Special Forces (DSF), a major-general grade post. Previously ranked as a brigadier, the DSF was promoted from brigadier to major-general in recognition of the significant expansion of the United Kingdom Special Forces (UKSF).

====Reserve====
On 1 September 2014, 21 and 23 SAS were moved from UKSF They were placed under command of 1st Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Brigade. In 2019 they were moved back to UKSF.

==Recruitment and training==

The first version of the SAS selection course was created by John Woodhouse in 1952. The United Kingdom Special Forces do not recruit directly from the general public. All current members of the UK Armed Forces can apply for Special Forces selection, but the majority of candidates have historically come from a Royal Marines or Parachute Regiment background. Selections are held twice a year, once in summer and again in winter.

Typically only 10% of candidates make it through the initial selection process. Between 2014 and 2022 there were more deaths in training and exercises than in combat against armed threats. In a group of approximately 200 candidates, most will drop out within the first few days, and fewer than 30 will remain by the end. Those who complete all phases of selection are transferred to an operational squadron.

For applicants to the reserve component, 21 SAS and 23 SAS, the pathway involves comparable elements, apart from jungle training, but taken in blocks, spread out over a longer period, to fit in with the demands of participants&#x27; civilian careers. In October 2018, recruitment policy changed to allow women to become members of the SAS for the first time. In August 2021, two women became the first to pass the pre-selection course, making them eligible for the full course.

The first phase of selection, aptitude phase, lasts 4 weeks and takes place in the Brecon Beacons. This phase also involves training in Sennybridge, and normally starts with approximately 200 potential candidates. Candidates complete a Personal Fitness Test (PFT) upon arrival, which consists of at least 50 sit-ups in two minutes, 60 press-ups in two minutes, and a run in 10 minutes and 30 seconds. They then complete an Annual Fitness Test (AFT), which consists of marching in two hours while carrying of equipment. Candidates then march cross-country against the clock, increasing the distance covered each day; this culminates in an endurance test known as the &quot;Endurance&quot;, in which candidates march with full equipment before climbing up and down the mountain Pen y Fan (886 m; 2,907 ft) in 20 hours. By the end of this phase, candidates must then be able to run in 30 minutes or less and swim in 90 minutes or less.

After completing aptitude phase, officer candidates are required to spend a week assessing their ability to carry out planning for UKSF operations while fatigued and stressed. Following mountain training, the jungle phase takes place in Belize, Brunei, or Malaysia. Candidates are taught navigation, patrol formation and movement, and jungle survival skills. Candidates then return to the UK to begin training in battle plans and foreign weapons, and then take part in combat survival exercises, ending in week-long escape and evasion training. Candidates are formed into patrols and, with nothing more than a tin can filled with survival equipment, are dressed in World War II-era uniforms and told to head for a particular destination by sunrise. The final selection test, resistance to interrogation (RTI), lasts for 36 hours.

==Uniform distinctions==

Normal barracks headdress is the sand-coloured beret, its cap badge is a downward pointing Excalibur, wreathed in flames (often incorrectly referred to as a winged dagger) worked into the cloth of a Crusader shield with the motto &quot;Who Dares Wins&quot;. SAS pattern parachute wings, designed by Lieutenant Jock Lewes and based on the stylised sacred ibis of Isis of Egyptian iconography depicted in the décor of Shepheard&#x27;s Hotel in Cairo, are worn on the right shoulder. Its ceremonial No 1 dress uniform is distinguished by a light-blue stripe on the trousers. Its stable belt is a shade of blue similar to the blue stripe on the No 1 dress uniform.

==Battle honours==
In the British Army, battle honours are awarded to regiments that have seen active service in a significant engagement or campaign, generally with a victorious outcome. The Special Air Service Regiment has been awarded the following battle honours:
* North-West Europe 1944–45
* Tobruk 1941
* Benghazi Raid
* North Africa 1940–43
* Landing in Sicily
* Sicily 1943
* Termoli
* Valli di Comacchio
* Italy 1943–45
* Greece 1944–45
* Adriatic
* Middle East 1943–44
* Falkland Islands 1982
* Western Iraq
* Gulf 1991
==Order of precedence==


==Memorials==

The names of those members of the Regular SAS who have died on duty were inscribed on the regimental clock tower at Stirling Lines. Originally funded by contributions of a day&#x27;s pay by members of the regiment and a donation from Handley Page in memory of Cpl. R.K. Norry who was killed in a freefall parachuting accident, this was rebuilt at the new barracks at Credenhill. Those whose names are inscribed are said by surviving members to have &quot;failed to beat the clock&quot;. At the suggestion of the then Commanding Officer, Dare Wilson, inscribed on the base of the clock is a verse from &quot;The Golden Journey to Samarkand&quot; by James Elroy Flecker:

The other main memorial is the SAS and Airborne Forces memorial in the cloisters at Westminster Abbey. The SAS Brigade Memorial at Sennecey-le-Grand in France commemorates the wartime dead of the Belgian, British and French SAS and recently a memorial plaque was added to the David Stirling Memorial in Scotland. There are other smaller memorials &quot;scattered throughout Europe and in the Far East&quot;.

The local church of St Martin&#x27;s, Hereford has part of its graveyard set aside as an SAS memorial, over twenty SAS soldiers are buried there. There is also a wall of remembrance displaying memorial plaques to some who could not be buried, including the 18 SAS men who lost their lives in the Sea King helicopter crash during the Falklands Campaign on 19 May 1982 and a sculpture and stained glass window dedicated to the SAS.

On 17 October 2017 &quot;Ascension&quot;, a new sculpture and window honouring the Special Air Service Regiment in Hereford Cathedral, was dedicated by the Bishop of Hereford at a service attended by Prince William.

==In popular culture==
;Books and films about the SAS:
* &quot;Eastern Approaches&quot; – Fitzroy Maclean&#x27;s memoir provides his personal experiences in the fledgling SAS in the Western Desert Campaign.
* &quot;Bravo Two Zero&quot; – a memoir about a failed SAS mission by Andy McNab
** &quot;Bravo Two Zero&quot; - a film based on the book of the same name by Andy McNab.
* &quot;Red Notice&quot;, a novel by Andy McNab, part of his &quot;Tom Buckingham&quot; Series
** &quot;&quot; - a 2021 film based on Andy McNab&#x27;s novel &quot;Red Notice&quot;.
* &quot;The One That Got Away&quot; - another memoir about the Bravo Two Zero mission by Chris Ryan
** &quot;The One That Got Away&quot; - a film based on the book
* &quot;The Feather Men&quot; a novel by Sir Ranulph Fiennes - claimed by the author to be a partly non-fictional story involving the SAS
** &quot;Killer Elite&quot; - film based on &quot;The Feathermen&quot;, about a mercenary hired to kill SAS troopers (fictional story surrounding real events and people from SAS history).
* &quot;6 Days&quot; - film about the SAS involvement in the Iranian Embassy siege in 1980
* &quot;Who Dares Wins&quot;, 1982 film - released in the United States as &quot;The Final Option&quot;
* &quot;&quot;, 2016 book
;Television shows about the SAS:
* &quot;&quot; (2002-2004)
* &quot;&quot; – a reality quasi-military training television programme which pits contestants against harsh environments in a two-week-long training course that is designed to replicate Special Air Service selection
* &quot;Ultimate Force&quot; – an &quot;ITV&quot; action drama series following the operations of the fictitious &#x27;Red Troop&#x27; of the Special Air Service. (2002-2008)
* &quot;&quot; – a BBC historical drama series which depicts the formation of the Special Air Service during World War II. (2022)

==Alliances==
* – Special Air Service Regiment
* – New Zealand Special Air Service

==See also==
* List of military special forces units
* Parachute Regiment (United Kingdom)

==References==
=== Footnotes ===
=== Citations ===
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="4" end="23" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="25" end="28" title="Special Air Service" label="SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="35" end="49" title="special forces" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="62" end="74" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q519183" start="116" end="130" title="David Stirling" label="David Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="170" end="175" title="corps" label="corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="229" end="246" title="counter-terrorism" label="counter-terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192620" start="248" end="262" title="hostage rescue" label="hostage rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631521" start="264" end="277" title="direct action (military)" label="direct action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154237" start="282" end="304" title="special reconnaissance" label="special reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q846498" start="354" end="364" title="classified information" label="classified"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="413" end="431" title="British government" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="439" end="458" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778759" start="630" end="681" title="Artists Rifles" label="21 Special Air Service Regiment (Artists) (Reserve)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20966121" start="690" end="731" title="23 Special Air Service Regiment (Reserve)" label="23 Special Air Service Regiment (Reserve)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139184" start="795" end="824" title="United Kingdom Special Forces" label="United Kingdom Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="856" end="866" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q843421" start="874" end="894" title="Special Boat Service" label="Special Boat Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4508" start="917" end="925" title="naval" label="maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280531" start="997" end="1020" title="Director Special Forces" label="Director Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1082" end="1098" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="1131" end="1147" title="Territorial Army (United Kingdom)" label="Territorial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q370706" start="1422" end="1443" title="Iranian Embassy siege" label="Iranian Embassy siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208019" start="1523" end="1563" title="British Army during the Second World War" label="British Army during the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q519183" start="1596" end="1610" title="David Stirling" label="David Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347548" start="2006" end="2014" title="Commandos (United Kingdom)" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="2058" end="2080" title="North African Campaign" label="North African Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108620" start="2129" end="2140" title="Other ranks (UK)" label="other ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q327085" start="2218" end="2236" title="Operation Crusader" label="Operation Crusader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634787" start="2522" end="2545" title="Long Range Desert Group" label="Long Range Desert Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="2578" end="2583" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2716" end="2731" title="1st Marine Infantry Paratroopers Regiment#World War II" label="one Free French"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2733" end="2742" title="Sacred Band (World War II)#SAS Squadron" label="one Greek"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2752" end="2767" title="Special Boat Service#Origin: Second World War" label="Folboat Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="2826" end="2833" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918762" start="2838" end="2849" title="Paddy Mayne" label="Paddy Mayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q843421" start="2989" end="3010" title="Special Boat Service" label="Special Boat Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q82278" start="3043" end="3058" title="George Jellicoe, 2nd Earl Jellicoe" label="George Jellicoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043702" start="3217" end="3242" title="Small Scale Raiding Force" label="Small Scale Raiding Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q12806363" start="3264" end="3277" title="Bill Stirling (British Army officer)" label="Bill Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q878481" start="3338" end="3352" title="Aegean Islands" label="Aegean Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q131555" start="3357" end="3367" title="Dodecanese" label="Dodecanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q107292275" start="3406" end="3417" title="Special Air Service Troops" label="SAS Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008933" start="3510" end="3533" title="3rd Parachute Chasseur Regiment" label="3rd Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815917" start="3577" end="3600" title="2nd Parachute Chasseur Regiment" label="4th Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817868" start="3644" end="3667" title="5 SAS" label="5th Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492825" start="3699" end="3719" title="Special Forces Group (Belgium)" label="Special Forces Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513422" start="3722" end="3732" title="GHQ Liaison Regiment" label="F Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097144" start="3937" end="3948" title="Operation Houndsworth" label="Houndsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354664" start="3950" end="3959" title="Operation Bulbasket" label="Bulbasket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026177" start="3961" end="3967" title="Operation Loyton" label="Loyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q130660516" start="3969" end="3976" title="Operation Kipling" label="Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816148" start="3981" end="3994" title="Operation Wallace-Hardy" label="Wallace-Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q542093" start="4023" end="4040" title="Operation Pegasus" label="Operation Pegasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554277" start="4072" end="4089" title="Operation Archway" label="Operation Archway"/>
<link wikidata="Q123412079" start="4094" end="4110" title="Operation Howard" label="Operation Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q581891" start="4157" end="4171" title="Commando Order" label="Commando Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354664" start="4334" end="4353" title="Operation Bulbasket" label="Operation Bulbasket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026177" start="4465" end="4481" title="Operation Loyton" label="Operation Loyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634787" start="4639" end="4662" title="Long Range Desert Group" label="Long Range Desert Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q124130614" start="4664" end="4675" title="Mike Sadler" label="Mike Sadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="4762" end="4780" title="British government" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778759" start="5051" end="5065" title="Artists Rifles" label="Artists Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="5268" end="5278" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354629" start="5440" end="5457" title="Malayan Emergency" label="Malayan Emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313250" start="5533" end="5545" title="Mike Calvert" label="Mike Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="5785" end="5793" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429612" start="5806" end="5816" title="Rhodesian Special Air Service" label="C Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q204720" start="6126" end="6134" title="Hereford" label="Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570501" start="6272" end="6275" title="MI9" label="MI9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507188" start="6310" end="6328" title="escape and evasion" label="escape and evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6172500" start="6502" end="6518" title="Jebel Akhdar War" label="Jebel Akhdar War"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="6522" end="6526" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361929" start="6630" end="6636" title="Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363565" start="6713" end="6729" title="Dhofar Rebellion" label="Dhofar Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889338" start="6744" end="6760" title="Battle of Mirbat" label="Battle of Mirbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299864" start="6809" end="6823" title="Aden Emergency" label="Aden Emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="6825" end="6841" title="The Troubles" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="6847" end="6853" title="The Gambia" label="Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q158431" start="6931" end="6936" title="GSG 9" label="GSG 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q326241" start="6940" end="6949" title="Lufthansa Flight 181" label="Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q370706" start="7042" end="7063" title="Iranian Embassy Siege" label="Iranian Embassy Siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q115828416" start="7104" end="7137" title="United Kingdom in the Soviet-Afghan War" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s covert involvement"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="7145" end="7162" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q85773860" start="7211" end="7233" title="Keenie Meenie Services" label="Keenie Meenie Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q42759" start="7268" end="7278" title="Mujaheddin" label="Mujaheddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="7411" end="7419" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="7463" end="7476" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097290" start="7506" end="7522" title="Operation Mikado" label="Operation Mikado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979826" start="7622" end="7643" title="raid on Pebble Island" label="raid on Pebble Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145378" start="7645" end="7662" title="Operation Flavius" label="Operation Flavius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="7696" end="7705" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="7718" end="7751" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="Provisional Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="7781" end="7785" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="7800" end="7804" title="Serb" label="Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="7843" end="7849" title="Bosnia" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="7882" end="7892" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q193366" start="7901" end="7904" title="Kosovo Liberation Army" label="KLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="8027" end="8035" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919209" start="8174" end="8188" title="Bravo Two Zero" label="Bravo Two Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="8201" end="8213" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150465" start="8230" end="8246" title="Operation Barras" label="Operation Barras"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445850" start="8302" end="8322" title="Royal Irish Regiment (1992)" label="Royal Irish Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="8339" end="8359" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="8384" end="8392" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="8502" end="8513" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646470" start="8529" end="8547" title="United States invasion of Afghanistan" label="Coalition invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="8568" end="8586" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="War in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="8694" end="8701" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="8720" end="8733" title="War on Terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325087" start="8760" end="8775" title="Operation Trent" label="Operation Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967730" start="8848" end="8852" title="High-altitude military parachuting" label="HALO"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="9137" end="9145" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="9198" end="9211" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9255" end="9278" title="Joint Special Operations Command Task Force in the Iraq War#Task Force Black/Knight" label="Task Force Black/Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q926905" start="9293" end="9317" title="Iraqi insurgency (2003–11)" label="post invasion insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q31901" start="9373" end="9377" title="JSOC" label="JSOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076058" start="9433" end="9449" title="Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn" label="al-Qaeda in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q209114" start="9485" end="9496" title="Delta Force" label="Delta Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316065" start="9748" end="9764" title="Operation Ellamy" label="Operation Ellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="9773" end="9794" title="2011 Libyan civil war" label="2011 Libyan civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="9806" end="9821" title="Daily Telegraph" label="Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="10005" end="10017" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q488598" start="10063" end="10082" title="forward air control" label="forward air control"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323973" start="10341" end="10356" title="Richard Barrett (counter-terrorism expert)" label="Richard Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10372" end="10385" title="Foreign involvement in the Syrian Civil War#United Kingdom" label="sent to Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="10424" end="10460" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q18053804" start="10508" end="10519" title="The Beatles (terrorist cell)" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666334" start="10596" end="10617" title="Royal Military Police" label="Royal Military Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q968340" start="10816" end="10836" title="Peter de la Billière" label="Peter de la Billière"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="10845" end="10863" title="commander in chief" label="commander in chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026030" start="10916" end="10928" title="Michael Rose (British Army officer)" label="Michael Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q170245" start="10953" end="10984" title="United Nations Protection Force" label="United Nations Protection Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="10988" end="10994" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q335517" start="11020" end="11035" title="Charles Guthrie, Baron Guthrie of Craigiebank" label="Charles Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962001" start="11043" end="11069" title="Chief of the Defence Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of the Defence Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="11108" end="11126" title="Lieutenant-General" label="Lieutenant-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057086" start="11127" end="11140" title="Cedric Delves" label="Cedric Delves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453496" start="11240" end="11259" title="Joint Force Command Brunssum" label="Allied Forces North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778759" start="11334" end="11340" title="Artists Rifles" label="21 SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q20966121" start="11345" end="11351" title="23 Special Air Service Regiment (Reserve)" label="23 SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5709231" start="12008" end="12024" title="Helmand province campaign" label="Helmand province"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687305" start="12067" end="12077" title="Task Force Helmand" label="Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029029" start="12091" end="12113" title="16 Air Assault Brigade" label="16 Air Assault Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="12245" end="12257" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030593" start="12303" end="12339" title="Canadian Special Air Service Company" label="Canadian Special Air Service Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q503949" start="12389" end="12420" title="New Zealand Special Air Service" label="New Zealand Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q782735" start="12620" end="12648" title="Special Air Service Regiment" label="Special Air Service Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429612" start="12756" end="12785" title="Rhodesian Special Air Service" label="Rhodesian Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321070" start="12882" end="12907" title="Rhodesian Security Forces" label="Rhodesian Security Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492825" start="13072" end="13092" title="Special Forces Group (Belgium)" label="Special Forces Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817868" start="13180" end="13203" title="5th Special Air Service" label="5th Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q209033" start="13240" end="13278" title="1st Marine Infantry Parachute Regiment" label="1st Marine Infantry Parachute Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q209114" start="13420" end="13467" title="Delta Force" label="1st Special Forces Operational Detachment-Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q912227" start="13491" end="13513" title="Charles Alvin Beckwith" label="Charles Alvin Beckwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419605" start="13544" end="13560" title="exchange officer" label="exchange officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="13620" end="13638" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q927370" start="13652" end="13666" title="Sayeret Matkal" label="Sayeret Matkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686100" start="13671" end="13678" title="Shaldag Unit" label="Shaldag"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="13743" end="13750" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q689767" start="13758" end="13774" title="Army Ranger Wing" label="Army Ranger Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q963772" start="13811" end="13837" title="Philippine National Police" label="Philippine National Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q13164420" start="13845" end="13865" title="Special Action Force" label="Special Action Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="14400" end="14412" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="Army Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778759" start="14492" end="14543" title="Artists Rifles" label="21 Special Air Service Regiment (Artists) (Reserve)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20966121" start="14560" end="14591" title="23 Special Air Service Regiment (Reserve)" label="23 Special Air Service Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420053" start="14780" end="14796" title="RAF Brize Norton" label="RAF Brize Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q843421" start="14843" end="14863" title="Special Boat Service" label="Special Boat Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166254" start="14872" end="14903" title="Special Reconnaissance Regiment" label="Special Reconnaissance Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557497" start="14907" end="14932" title="18 (UKSF) Signal Regiment" label="18 (UKSF) Signal Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080137" start="15149" end="15154" title="troop" label="troop"/>
<link wikidata="Q12066983" start="15840" end="15851" title="Rebreather diving" label="rebreathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q179246" start="15859" end="15864" title="kayak" label="kayak"/>
<link wikidata="Q251295" start="15879" end="15907" title="rigid-hulled inflatable boat" label="rigid-hulled inflatable boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q843421" start="15934" end="15954" title="Special Boat Service" label="Special Boat Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q140028" start="15981" end="15990" title="free fall" label="free fall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16052" end="16077" title="High-altitude military parachuting#High Altitude Low Opening – HALO" label="High-Altitude Low Opening"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16089" end="16115" title="High-altitude military parachuting#High Altitude High Opening – HAHO" label="High-Altitude High Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="17567" end="17583" title="counterterrorism" label="counterterrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015737" start="17738" end="17758" title="No. 658 Squadron AAC" label="No. 658 Squadron AAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q201948" start="17838" end="17844" title="sniper" label="sniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="17992" end="18004" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="18016" end="18035" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q229007" start="18096" end="18104" title="Munich massacre" label="massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8438" start="18112" end="18132" title="1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q804715" start="18327" end="18348" title="Balcombe Street siege" label="Balcombe Street siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="18354" end="18373" title="Metropolitan Police" label="Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="18388" end="18392" title="PIRA" label="PIRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="18435" end="18438" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q158431" start="18577" end="18582" title="GSG 9" label="GSG 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q326241" start="18586" end="18595" title="Lufthansa Flight 181" label="Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228371" start="18812" end="18840" title="Pontrilas Army Training Area" label="Pontrilas Army Training Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407704" start="18873" end="18886" title="Killing House" label="Killing House"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="18950" end="18960" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q204720" start="19185" end="19193" title="Hereford" label="Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q372195" start="19194" end="19204" title="Credenhill" label="Credenhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313250" start="19387" end="19399" title="Mike Calvert" label="Mike Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="19401" end="19416" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135445" start="19443" end="19476" title="Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders" label="Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980559" start="19506" end="19520" title="Welch Regiment" label="Welch Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848277" start="19535" end="19549" title="Mike Osborn" label="Michael Osborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987044" start="19551" end="19574" title="West Yorkshire Regiment" label="West Yorkshire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q30705569" start="19589" end="19599" title="George Lea" label="George Lea"/>
<link wikidata="Q81925" start="19601" end="19621" title="Lancashire Fusiliers" label="Lancashire Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772386" start="19659" end="19678" title="Tony Deane-Drummond" label="Tony Deane-Drummond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322747" start="19680" end="19693" title="Royal Signals" label="Royal Signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115291" start="19723" end="19753" title="Royal Northumberland Fusiliers" label="Royal Northumberland Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264814" start="19768" end="19782" title="John Woodhouse (British Army officer)" label="John Woodhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298865" start="19784" end="19799" title="Dorset Regiment" label="Dorset Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329457" start="19804" end="19816" title="East Surrey Regiment" label="East Surreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849308" start="19831" end="19851" title="Mike Wingate Gray" label="Michael Wingate-Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568897" start="19853" end="19864" title="Black Watch" label="Black Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701770" start="19879" end="19888" title="John Slim, 2nd Viscount Slim" label="John Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135445" start="19890" end="19923" title="Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders" label="Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263258" start="19938" end="19948" title="John Watts (British Army officer)" label="John Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374347" start="19950" end="19969" title="Royal Irish Rangers" label="Royal Irish Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q968340" start="19984" end="20004" title="Peter de la Billière" label="Peter de la Billière"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598759" start="20006" end="20020" title="Light Infantry" label="Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442644" start="20035" end="20049" title="Tony Jeapes" label="Anthony Jeapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16835161" start="20051" end="20081" title="Devonshire and Dorset Regiment" label="Devonshire and Dorset Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835347" start="20096" end="20107" title="Michael Wilkes" label="Mike Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587335" start="20109" end="20124" title="Royal Artillery" label="Royal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026030" start="20139" end="20148" title="Michael Rose (British Army officer)" label="Mike Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107953" start="20150" end="20167" title="Coldstream Guards" label="Coldstream Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q21664721" start="20182" end="20195" title="Andrew Massey (British Army officer)" label="Andrew Massey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374074" start="20197" end="20221" title="Royal Corps of Transport" label="Royal Corps of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057086" start="20236" end="20249" title="Cedric Delves" label="Cedric Delves"/>
<link wikidata="Q16835161" start="20251" end="20281" title="Devonshire and Dorset Regiment" label="Devonshire and Dorset Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239650" start="20296" end="20307" title="John Holmes (British Army officer)" label="John Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856034" start="20309" end="20321" title="Scots Guards" label="Scots Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116781" start="20335" end="20366" title="Jacko Page" label="Jonathan &amp;quot;Jacko&amp;quot; Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q26251206" start="20401" end="20410" title="Ed Butler" label="Ed Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445950" start="20412" end="20431" title="Royal Green Jackets" label="Royal Green Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766994" start="20446" end="20465" title="Mark Carleton-Smith" label="Mark Carleton-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q252564" start="20467" end="20479" title="Irish Guards" label="Irish Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q106007412" start="20545" end="20555" title="Nick Perry (British Army officer)" label="Nick Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196985" start="20557" end="20582" title="King&amp;#x27;s Royal Hussars" label="King&amp;#x27;s Royal Hussars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280531" start="20673" end="20696" title="Director Special Forces" label="Director Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="20706" end="20719" title="major-general" label="major-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139184" start="20870" end="20899" title="United Kingdom Special Forces" label="United Kingdom Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969990" start="21015" end="21072" title="1st Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Brigade" label="1st Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264814" start="21204" end="21218" title="John Woodhouse (British Army officer)" label="John Woodhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778759" start="22024" end="22030" title="Artists Rifles" label="21 SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q20966121" start="22035" end="22041" title="23 SAS" label="23 SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q904522" start="22545" end="22559" title="Brecon Beacons" label="Brecon Beacons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450887" start="22598" end="22609" title="Sennybridge" label="Sennybridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q609747" start="22770" end="22777" title="Sit-up (exercise)" label="sit-ups"/>
<link wikidata="Q320575" start="22797" end="22805" title="press-up" label="press-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769653" start="22885" end="22904" title="Annual Fitness Test" label="Annual Fitness Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325530" start="23238" end="23247" title="Pen y Fan" label="Pen y Fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q242" start="23633" end="23639" title="Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="23641" end="23647" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="23652" end="23660" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="24061" end="24073" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315627" start="24171" end="24198" title="resistance to interrogation" label="resistance to interrogation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682165" start="24286" end="24305" title="Tan beret" label="sand-coloured beret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975547" start="24311" end="24320" title="cap badge" label="cap badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q187880" start="24344" end="24353" title="Excalibur" label="Excalibur"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="24452" end="24460" title="Crusades" label="Crusader"/>
<link wikidata="Q131559" start="24461" end="24467" title="shield" label="shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352983" start="24489" end="24503" title="Who Dares Wins" label="Who Dares Wins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133947" start="24523" end="24538" title="Parachutist Badge (United Kingdom)" label="parachute wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179902" start="24563" end="24573" title="Jock Lewes" label="Jock Lewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193833" start="24607" end="24611" title="ibis" label="ibis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79876" start="24615" end="24619" title="Isis" label="Isis"/>
<link wikidata="Q208145" start="24632" end="24643" title="iconography" label="iconography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296267" start="24669" end="24691" title="Shepheard&amp;#x27;s Hotel" label="Shepheard&amp;#x27;s Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24738" end="24767" title="Uniforms of the British Army#No. 1: Temperate ceremonial uniform" label="ceremonial No 1 dress uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595759" start="24829" end="24840" title="stable belt" label="stable belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q831663" start="25056" end="25064" title="Military campaign" label="campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965522" start="25185" end="25210" title="North-West Europe 1944–45" label="North-West Europe 1944–45"/>
<link wikidata="Q682399" start="25213" end="25224" title="Tobruk 1941" label="Tobruk 1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091132" start="25227" end="25240" title="Operation Agreement" label="Benghazi Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="25243" end="25263" title="North African Campaign" label="North Africa 1940–43"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="25266" end="25283" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Landing in Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="25286" end="25297" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Sicily 1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q118642" start="25300" end="25307" title="Termoli" label="Termoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097466" start="25310" end="25328" title="Operation Roast" label="Valli di Comacchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="25331" end="25344" title="Italian Campaign (World War II)" label="Italy 1943–45"/>
<link wikidata="Q708173" start="25347" end="25361" title="Dodecanese Campaign" label="Greece 1944–45"/>
<link wikidata="Q708173" start="25364" end="25372" title="Dodecanese Campaign" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q696817" start="25375" end="25394" title="Mediterranean and Middle East Theatre" label="Middle East 1943–44"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="25397" end="25418" title="Falklands War" label="Falkland Islands 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="25421" end="25433" title="Gulf War" label="Western Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="25436" end="25445" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q16912556" start="25603" end="25617" title="Stirling Lines" label="Stirling Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q965204" start="25721" end="25733" title="Handley Page" label="Handley Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q18016097" start="26024" end="26035" title="Dare Wilson" label="Dare Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680343" start="26135" end="26154" title="James Elroy Flecker" label="James Elroy Flecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="26241" end="26258" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q946351" start="26288" end="26305" title="Sennecey-le-Grand" label="Sennecey-le-Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q429379" start="27112" end="27130" title="Hereford Cathedral" label="Hereford Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325798" start="27153" end="27171" title="Richard Frith" label="Bishop of Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q36812" start="27197" end="27211" title="Prince William, Duke of Cambridge" label="Prince William"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329980" start="27277" end="27295" title="Eastern Approaches" label="Eastern Approaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263302" start="27304" end="27319" title="Sir Fitzroy Maclean, 1st Baronet" label="Fitzroy Maclean"/>
<link wikidata="Q625798" start="27396" end="27419" title="Western Desert Campaign" label="Western Desert Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897970" start="27429" end="27443" title="Bravo Two Zero (novel)" label="Bravo Two Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919209" start="27469" end="27487" title="Bravo Two Zero" label="failed SAS mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q433597" start="27491" end="27501" title="Andy McNab" label="Andy McNab"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27511" end="27525" title="Bravo Two Zero (film)" label="Bravo Two Zero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27652" end="27685" title="Andy McNab#Fiction" label="&amp;quot;Tom Buckingham&amp;quot; Series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27781" end="27802" title="The One That Got Away (book)" label="The One That Got Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q432087" start="27862" end="27872" title="Chris Ryan" label="Chris Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27882" end="27903" title="The One That Got Away (1996 film)" label="The One That Got Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733605" start="27945" end="27960" title="The Feather Men" label="The Feather Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331624" start="27978" end="27997" title="Sir Ranulph Fiennes" label="Sir Ranulph Fiennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320416" start="28084" end="28096" title="Killer Elite (film)" label="Killer Elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q30544652" start="28265" end="28283" title="6 Days (2017 film)" label="&amp;quot;6 Days&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q742480" start="28362" end="28376" title="Who Dares Wins (film)" label="Who Dares Wins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535174" start="28769" end="28783" title="Ultimate Force" label="Ultimate Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q674608" start="28795" end="28810" title="ITV (TV channel)" label="&amp;quot;ITV&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="28955" end="28958" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q782735" start="29085" end="29113" title="Special Air Service Regiment" label="Special Air Service Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q503949" start="29118" end="29149" title="New Zealand Special Air Service" label="New Zealand Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351358" start="29166" end="29203" title="List of military special forces units" label="List of military special forces units"/>
<link wikidata="Q197217" start="29206" end="29241" title="Parachute Regiment (United Kingdom)" label="Parachute Regiment (United Kingdom)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55944" wikidata="Q5348553" url="?curid=55944" title="Eh">
<text>Eh ( or ) is a spoken interjection used in many varieties of English. The oldest &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; defines &quot;eh&quot; as an &quot;interjectional interrogative particle often inviting assent to the sentiment expressed.&quot; Today, while &quot;eh&quot; has many different uses, it is most popularly used in a manner similar in meaning to &quot;Excuse me?&quot;, &quot;Please repeat that&quot;, &quot;Huh?&quot;, or to otherwise mark a question. It is also commonly used as an alternative to the question tag &quot;right?&quot;, as a method for inciting a reply, as in &quot;Don&#x27;t you think?&quot;, &quot;You agree with me, right?&quot;, as in, &quot;It&#x27;s nice here, eh?&quot; (instead of &quot;It&#x27;s nice here, right?&quot;). In the Americas, it is most commonly associated with Canada and Canadian English, though it is also common in England, Scotland, and New Zealand. It is also known in some American regions bordering Canada, including the area stretching from northern Wisconsin up to Michigan&#x27;s Upper Peninsula. Similar interjections exist in many other languages, such as Azerbaijani and Italian and Dutch.

The spelling of this sound in English is quite different from the common usage of these letters. The vowel is sounded in one of the continental manners (as in French, only missing the apostrophe), and the letter &quot;h&quot; is used to indicate it is long, as though the origin of the spelling were German.

While evidence suggests that &quot;eh&quot; initially may have been considered as an onomatopoeic sound, the earliest uses of &quot;eh&quot; found so far, date back to Early Modern English in 1662, but first mentions of it are found in Middle English. In 1707, it was first used in a play, functioning &quot;to create or confirm agreement.&quot; Later, in 1773, its earliest quotation, s.v. &quot;eh&quot; was in a play by Irish playwright Oliver Goldsmith. 

It can also convey a lack of strong emotion and a neutral response. For example, if when asked how a movie was one replies with &quot;Eh,&quot; this indicates that they did not find it particularly great or terrible. In this example, &quot;eh&quot; is used as a way to convey a middle-ground feeling or invite further discussion.

==English==

===United States===
&quot;Eh&quot; is also used in situations to describe something bad or mediocre. In which, it is often pronounced with a short &quot;e&quot; sound and the &quot;h&quot; may even be noticeable.

It is quite prevalent in the New York area to use the term &quot;ey&quot; as a general substitute for such basic greetings, such as &quot;hey&quot; or &quot;hello&quot;.

In the Upper Midwest, it is used to end sentences.

===Canada===
==== History ====
The first clear evidence of &quot;eh&quot;&#x27;s usage in Canada was in 1836, through the writings of Thomas Chandler Haliburton, a Nova-Scotian district judge and comical writer. &quot;Eh&quot; was first recognized as being a marker of being Canadian in 1959 by Harold B. Allen; he stated that &quot;eh&quot; is &quot;so exclusively a Canadian feature that immigration officials use it as an identifying clue.&quot; However, despite mainly being perceived as a stereotypical marker of Canadian identity, &quot;eh&quot; was not recognized initially as a Canadianism in the &quot;Dictionary of Canadianisms on Historical Principles&quot; (DCHP-1). Chief editor of the DCHP-1, Walter Avis, argued that it should not be included due to its historical use in British English and its frequency in American, Australian, and New Zealand English. However, despite &quot;eh&quot;&#x27;s origins, it has become more frequently used in Canada than in the UK and the US, and in a broader variety of contexts. Due to this frequency, it has since been included in the DCHP-2 as a Preservation of British English that is Culturally Significant.

==== Uses ====
According to the DCHP-2, there are five main uses of &quot;eh&quot; with four subtypes. The first is used to elicit confirmation (1a), which can be used in sentences like &quot;So that&#x27;s what he thinks, eh?&quot; A subtype of this use is to elicit acknowledgement (1b). This applies to the acknowledgment of a fact in contrast to belief or opinion. For example, one could say &quot;I have a new dog, eh?&quot; The second subtype (1c) is to confirm agreement. This is used to increase the chance of acceptance of a suggestion, toning down statements. The fourth, (1d), is used as an exclamative over a shared experience, for example &quot;What a great game, eh?&quot; The final (1e) is to confirm compliance, like asking &quot;Will you?&quot; The belief is that this tones down a command or request. 

The second main use of &quot;eh&quot; is as an expression of disbelief to express one&#x27;s surprise over the offered information (2). Use 3 is to elicit repetition, and is referred to as the &quot;Pardon &quot;eh&quot;.&quot; It is used synonymously with &quot;I beg your pardon?&quot; in the sense of asking for a repetition of what was said. The fourth use is a distinctly Canadian use, identified as the narrative &quot;eh&quot;. It is a rarer form, and is claimed to be found primarily in oral evidence of Canadian origin. The final use of &quot;eh&quot; is as a metalinguistic commentary to express a link with Canada or rural Canada (5). This form is commentary on the Canadian status of &quot;eh&quot; and has contributed its share to the registration of &quot;eh&quot; and commodification of the form in association with Canada. A popular example of its use is in the phrase &quot;How&#x27;s it goin&#x27;, &quot;eh&quot;?&quot;

Due to English and French being Canada&#x27;s official languages, the popularity of &quot;eh&quot;&#x27;s usage in Canada is believed to be influenced by French. The French Canadian sounds similar to a nasalized Canadian &quot;eh&quot;, and the two share similar functions. Due to this, the increased use of &quot;eh&quot; in Canada may have been influenced by the frequent use of &quot;&quot; in Canadian French.

The term is used most frequently among blue-collar workers, and the most popular form used is for opinions and exclamations. While there is a prevalent stereotype that men use &quot;eh&quot; more than women, survey results suggest similar use frequencies. Overall, between both men and women, the pardon-&quot;eh&quot; is used much less than the observation-&quot;eh&quot;. The most positively viewed usage of &quot;eh&quot; is the imperative &quot;I know, &quot;eh&quot;?&quot; form with the exclamation-&quot;eh&quot; and opinion-&quot;eh&quot; close behind. The most negatively viewed usage is the anecdotal, narrative-&quot;eh&quot;. This perception is due to opinions surrounding the speakers of the narrative-&quot;eh&quot;, who are categorized as uneducated, lower-class, rural, and male, akin to the McKenzie brothers from the comedy sketch &quot;Great White North,&quot; which first appeared during Second City Television&#x27;s (SCTV) third season.

Regionally, while usage is similar across the ten provinces, with the use of &quot;eh&quot; not having changed significantly over the past 25 years, there is some variation. For example, in Quebec, respondents use &quot;eh&quot; for &#x27;pardon&#x27; more than other Canadians. While usage has not changed significantly across Canada, the overall frequency of &quot;eh&quot; has declined among speakers born in the 1960s or later. This decrease has been prevalent in big cities such as Vancouver and Toronto. Despite this decline, there have been high recognition rates and uptake of the Canadian &quot;eh&quot; among immigrant populations.

==== Iconography ====
&quot;Eh&quot; has gained such recognition among Canadians that it is used consciously and frequently by newspaper journalists and others in informal articles and reports. Also, &quot;eh&quot; is attributed freely in reported conversations with all men, including athletes, professors, and politicians, such as Pierre Trudeau.

The prevalence of &quot;eh&quot; in Canadian iconography is strongly associated with its recognition as part of the Canadian national or regional identity. In print, it is used primarily to signify &#x27;Canadian,&#x27; with many websites incorporating &quot;eh&quot; into their URLs to indicate a Canadian connection. It is also popularly incorporated into Canadian-targeted marketing campaigns, such as when Smarties&#x27; Canadian-themed packaging was labelled &quot;SMARTIES &quot;eh&quot;?&quot;

The usage of &quot;eh&quot; in Canada is occasionally mocked in the United States, where some view its use as a stereotypical Canadianism. Such stereotypes have been reinforced in popular culture and were famously lampooned in &quot;South Park: Bigger, Longer &amp; Uncut&quot;. Singer Don Freed, in his song &quot;Saskatchewan,&quot; declares, &quot;What is this &quot;&#x27;Eh&quot;?&#x27;-nonsense? I wouldn&#x27;t speak like that if I were paid to&quot;. There are many products displaying the phrase, such as T-shirts and coffee mugs.

==== Future usage ====
The future of &quot;eh&quot; in Canada is vague but promising. Three critical factors that will shape the future of this expression include speaker attitudes, the possible replacement of the expressions by young speakers, and new Canadians&#x27; adoption of &quot;eh&quot;. Students account for a large percentage of &quot;eh&quot; users and continue to contribute to the growing community. Because of this projected increase in the usage of &quot;eh&quot;, the previous negative connotation surrounding the narrative-&quot;eh&quot; will most likely dwindle. The future of &quot;eh&quot; is quite optimistic and there is room for expansion due to the various uses possible. In addition to the popularity amongst students, immigrants are essential to the future of &quot;eh&quot;. Survey results on immigrant recognition of &quot;eh&quot; show that immigrants had high rates of recognition for most types of &quot;eh&quot;, with opinion-&quot;eh&quot; and exclamation-&quot;eh&quot; at the top. The data shows that while the usage of &quot;eh&quot; in immigrant countries is different, it is still common. This shows that even though native speakers still use &quot;eh&quot; more frequently, the future of &quot;eh&quot; is still optimistic. Altogether, Canada&#x27;s link with bilingualism has contributed to &quot;eh&quot;&#x27;s common usage, and its recognition amongst immigrants shows that &quot;eh&quot; will continue to be prevalent in Canadian culture.

===New Zealand===

While not as commonly lampooned as the Canadian &quot;eh&quot;, there are few features that are more eagerly recognized by New Zealanders as a marker of their identity than the tag particle &quot;eh&quot; (commonly spelt as &quot;ay&quot;, although this has been contentious). New Zealanders use &quot;eh&quot; much more than Canadians, who are more famous for the word. This commonly used and referenced feature of New Zealand English (NZE) is one of great controversy to many communication scholars as it is both a mark of cultural identity and simultaneously a means to parody those of a lower socioeconomic status. The use of &quot;eh&quot; in New Zealand is very common among all demographics.

Communications scholar Miriam Meyerhoff describes &quot;eh&quot; as a &quot;validation checker&quot; to create connections between speakers. She says that there are two main uses of the phrase: to signify a question, such as &quot;You went to school in Christchurch, eh?&quot;; or to confirm that the listener understands new information, such as &quot;He was way bigger than me, eh&quot;. It is believed that &quot;eh&quot; became common in New Zealand due to similarity with the Māori word , which has a similar use.

A 1994 study by Meyerhoff sought to examine the function of &quot;eh&quot; in New Zealand culture. She hypothesized that &quot;eh&quot; did not function as a clarification device as frequently believed, but instead served as a means of establishing solidarity between individuals of similar ethnic descent. In her research, Meyerhoff analyzed conversations between an interviewer and an interviewee of either Pākehā or Māori descent and calculated the frequency of &quot;eh&quot; in the conversation. In order to yield the most natural speech, Meyerhoff instructed the interviewers to introduce themselves as a &quot;friend of a friend&quot;, to their respective interviewees. Her results showed Māori men as the most frequent users of &quot;eh&quot; in their interviews. As Māori are typically of a lower socio-economic status, Meyerhoff proposed that &quot;eh&quot; functioned as a verbal cue that one reciprocated by another individual signified both shared identity and mutual acceptance. Therefore, in the context of Meyerhoff&#x27;s research, &quot;eh&quot; can be equated as a device to establish and maintain a group identity. This phenomenon sheds light on the continuous scholarly debate questioning if language determines culture or culture determines language. In New Zealand &quot;eh&quot; is used more often by males than females, more by younger generations than older generations, and more by the middle class than the working class. Māori use &quot;eh&quot; about twice as much than Pākehā, irrespective of their gender, age or class.

===England, Scotland and Ireland===
The usage of the word is widespread throughout much of the UK, particularly in Eastern Scotland, the north of England, Northern Ireland, and Wales. It is normally used to mean &#x27;what?&#x27;. In Scotland, mainly around the Tayside region, &quot;eh&quot; is also used as a shortened term for &#x27;yes&#x27;. For example, &quot;Are you going to the disco?&quot; &quot;Eh&quot;. In Aberdeen and the wider Doric Scots speaking area of Grampian, &quot;eh&quot; is often used to end a sentence, as a continuation or sometimes, inflection is added and it&#x27;s used as a confirmation, or with different inflection, a question. For example, &quot;I was walking home, eh, and I saw a badger, eh&quot;, &quot;It was a big car, eh&quot; or &quot;We&#x27;re going to the co-op, eh?&quot;.

===Rest of the world===

&quot;Eh?&quot; used to solicit agreement or confirmation is also heard regularly amongst speakers in Australia, Trinidad and Tobago and the United Kingdom (where it is sometimes spelled on the assumption that &quot;eh&quot; would rhyme with or ). In the Caribbean island of Barbados the word &quot;nuh&quot; acts similarly, as does &quot;noh&quot; in Surinamese Dutch and Sranantongo. The usage in New Zealand is similar, and is more common in the North Island. It is also heard in the United States, especially Minnesota, Wisconsin, the Upper Peninsula of Michigan (although the Scandinavian-based Yooperism &quot;ya&quot; is more common), Oklahoma, and the New England region. In New England and Oklahoma, it is also used as a general exclamation as in Scotland and the Channel Islands of Jersey and Guernsey.
It is occasionally used to express indifference, in a similar way to &quot;meh&quot;.

Since usage of the word &quot;eh&quot; is not as common in the United States as it is in Canada, it is often used by Americans, and indeed Canadians themselves, to parody Canadian English.

The equivalent in South African English is &quot;hey&quot;. This usage is also common in Western Canada.

&quot;Eh&quot; is also used in Guernsey English and Jersey English.

&quot;Eh&quot; is very common in the English spoken in the Seychelles.

In Singapore, the use of medium Singlish often includes &quot;eh&quot; as an interjection, but it is not as popularly used as &quot;lah&quot;. An example of a sentence that uses &quot;eh&quot; is &quot;Dis guy Singlish damn good eh&quot;, meaning &quot;this guy&#x27;s Singlish is very good&quot;.

Similar to Singapore, Malaysia also uses &quot;eh&quot; in Manglish as an interjection. It is also used as an exclamation to express surprise, depending on the length and context of the &quot;eh&quot;. It also depends how one sounds uses it as a short &quot;eh&quot; can be a sarcastic shock or a genuine one. Sometimes it can be used as the equivalent as &quot;oi&quot; when the speaker is being angry to the listener such as &quot;Eh, hello!?&quot; or &quot;Eh, can you not!?&quot;. A long &quot;eeeh&quot; can be a disgusted shock, annoyance, or greater surprise. The &quot;eh&quot; usage here is similar to the Japanese usage. It is used by all Malaysians regardless of what language they are using.

==Similar terms in other languages== 
*&quot;&quot; (&#x27;heh&#x27; ) (not to be confused with &quot;&quot; (&#x27;hey&#x27; ), an informal greeting and (potentially rude) way of getting someone&#x27;s attention is an informal yet very common Dutch interjection that can be used as a brief exclamation to indicate confusion or surprise (&#x27;huh?&#x27;), in a prolonged manner when disappointed or annoyed (&#x27;aww&#x27;), or at the end of any sentence to form a tag question. The third usage is arguably the most popular. It very closely compares with &quot;Eh&quot; in Canadian English. In the regional dialects of Zealand and West Flanders, the corresponding and frequently used interjection , is in fact pronounced the same as in English (note that the equivalent of Dutch is silent in Zealandic and West Flemish).
*Japanese &quot;/&quot;&quot;？&quot; () is a common exclamation in Japanese and is used to express surprise. It is also used when the listener did not fully understand or hear what the speaker said. It can be lengthened to show greater surprise (e.g. ). &quot;Ne&quot; and are extremely similar to the Canadian &quot;eh&quot;, being statement ending particles which solicit or assume agreement, confirmation, or comprehension on the part of the listener. 
*Portuguese &quot;?&quot;, a contraction of &quot;?&quot; meaning &#x27;isn&#x27;t it?&#x27;, is used to turn a statement in to a question, even if no answer is expected, for emphasis or other objectives. 
* is used in French and in Portuguese in much the same way as in English.
* is used in Mauritian Creole and it can express a variety of ideas. It is generally used in context of a conversation and is generally interpreted very quickly.
* or , , or (&#x27;true&#x27; or &#x27;correct&#x27;) or (from &quot;,&quot; &#x27;not&#x27;) are used in (very) colloquial German to express a positive interrogative at the end of a sentence, much as &quot;eh&quot; is used in Canadian English. Statements expressed in Standard German are more commonly phrased in negative terms, and outside of colloquial usage the ending interrogative is often , which invites a response of (&#x27;agreed&#x27;, literally &#x27;that&#x27;s right&#x27;).
* is used in Dutch in the same way as is in German.
*Spanish , literally translated to English as &#x27;no&#x27;, is often put at the end of a statement to change it into a question and give emphasis, i.e. (&#x27;The weather is nice, isn&#x27;t it?&#x27;). is also used as well for emphasis, as in (&#x27;You&#x27;re going to fall from the chair, if you keep doing that!&#x27;). &quot;Che&quot; also has a similar function. 
*In Catalan, is also commonly used.
*Swiss German meaning &#x27;or&#x27; in English, is commonly used interrogatively as &#x27;... or what?&#x27; and at the end of sentences in German-speaking Switzerland, especially in the Zurich area. It is used more as a matter of conversational convention than for its meaning. The expression is used in highest Alemannic-speaking parts, and is used similarly to in German. The term is also used, which is pronounced similarly to &quot;eh&quot; in English and has the same meaning.
*Azerbaijani , , , and are commonly used as &#x27;huh?&#x27;. Alternatively, &#x27;yes?&#x27;, and &#x27;is it correct?&#x27; can be used as &#x27;isn&#x27;t it?&#x27;.
*Pakistani Urdu is used to mean &#x27;what? say it again&#x27;.
*Egyptian Arabic () is used to mean &#x27;what? say it again&#x27;. It could also mean &#x27;what&#x27;s wrong?&#x27; either in a concerned manner or a more aggressive one, depending on the tone used to pose the question. Besides, it could refer to an exclamation.
*Levantine Arabic or (, ) as &#x27;what?&#x27;.
*Gulf Arabic () is used to mean &#x27;what?&#x27;.
*Regional Italian is used in regional Northern Italian as spoken in Piedmont, Western Lombardy (Northwestern Italy), and the Ticino (Southern Switzerland), with the meaning of &quot;isn&#x27;t it true?&quot;. It comes from the expression in the local languages (Piedmontese and Lombard) , which means, once again, &#x27;isn&#x27;t it true?&#x27;

==See also==
*English interjections
*Discourse marker
*Canadian English

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q83034" start="22" end="34" title="interjection" label="interjection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="61" end="68" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="87" end="112" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q83034" start="154" end="166" title="interjection" label="interjection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304610" start="169" end="182" title="Interrogative word" label="interrogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q184943" start="183" end="191" title="Grammatical particle" label="particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970212" start="518" end="530" title="question tag" label="question tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="770" end="778" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="816" end="822" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q44676" start="827" end="843" title="Canadian English" label="Canadian English"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="873" end="880" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="882" end="890" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="896" end="907" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="934" end="942" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="1013" end="1022" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="1029" end="1037" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338" start="1045" end="1060" title="Upper Peninsula of Michigan" label="Upper Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q83034" start="1070" end="1082" title="interjection" label="interjection"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="1123" end="1134" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="1139" end="1146" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="1151" end="1156" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="1260" end="1265" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1318" end="1324" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q436048" start="1343" end="1353" title="apostrophe" label="apostrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1459" end="1465" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q170239" start="1553" end="1565" title="Onomatopoeia" label="onomatopoeic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472196" start="1636" end="1656" title="Early Modern English" label="Early Modern English"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="1704" end="1718" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="1752" end="1756" title="Theatre" label="play"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="1891" end="1896" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q236236" start="1908" end="1924" title="Oliver Goldsmith" label="Oliver Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="2515" end="2528" title="New York area" label="New York area"/>
<link wikidata="Q45594" start="2599" end="2607" title="greeting" label="greeting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2624" end="2627" title="Hey (interjection)" label="hey"/>
<link wikidata="Q98815142" start="2643" end="2648" title="hello" label="hello"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984465" start="2664" end="2677" title="Upper Midwest" label="Upper Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346720" start="2843" end="2869" title="Thomas Chandler Haliburton" label="Thomas Chandler Haliburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="2873" end="2885" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova-Scotian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935806" start="3295" end="3306" title="Canadianism" label="Canadianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273963" start="3320" end="3371" title="Dictionary of Canadianisms on Historical Principles" label="Dictionary of Canadianisms on Historical Principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="3496" end="3511" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="3533" end="3541" title="American English" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q44679" start="3543" end="3553" title="Australian English" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44661" start="3559" end="3578" title="New Zealand English" label="New Zealand English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273963" start="3795" end="3801" title="DCHP-2" label="DCHP-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273963" start="3904" end="3910" title="DCHP-2" label="DCHP-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="4418" end="4429" title="Tone (linguistics)" label="toning down"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918137" start="5262" end="5276" title="metalinguistic" label="metalinguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780322" start="5476" end="5491" title="commodification" label="commodification"/>
<link wikidata="Q233113" start="5665" end="5697" title="Official bilingualism in Canada" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s official languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="5799" end="5814" title="French Canadian" label="French Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450506" start="6030" end="6045" title="Canadian French" label="Canadian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934497" start="6856" end="6873" title="Bob and Doug McKenzie" label="McKenzie brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767756" start="6956" end="6978" title="Second City Television" label="Second City Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="7198" end="7204" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="7495" end="7504" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="7509" end="7516" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q8619" start="7984" end="7998" title="Pierre Trudeau" label="Pierre Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400476" start="8411" end="8419" title="Smarties" label="Smarties"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="8571" end="8584" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8736" end="8774" title="South Park: Bigger, Longer &amp;amp; Uncut" label="South Park: Bigger, Longer &amp;amp; Uncut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292634" start="8789" end="8798" title="Don Freed" label="Don Freed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="8818" end="8830" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="10344" end="10356" title="bilingualism" label="bilingualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q871904" start="10671" end="10685" title="New Zealanders" label="New Zealanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q44661" start="10964" end="10983" title="New Zealand English" label="New Zealand English"/>
<link wikidata="Q17325203" start="11271" end="11287" title="Miriam Meyerhoff" label="Miriam Meyerhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="11729" end="11734" title="Māori language" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250849" start="12177" end="12183" title="Pākehā" label="Pākehā"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="13476" end="13492" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="13498" end="13503" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="13555" end="13563" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="13769" end="13774" title="Scots Language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542364" start="13792" end="13800" title="Grampian" label="Grampian"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="14267" end="14276" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="14278" end="14297" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="14306" end="14320" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="14420" end="14429" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="14440" end="14448" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q750939" start="14517" end="14533" title="Surinamese Dutch" label="Surinamese Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q33989" start="14538" end="14549" title="Sranantongo" label="Sranantongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="14564" end="14575" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="14614" end="14626" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="14652" end="14665" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="14678" end="14687" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="14689" end="14698" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338" start="14704" end="14731" title="Upper Peninsula of Michigan" label="Upper Peninsula of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="14746" end="14758" title="North Germanic languages" label="Scandinavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060510" start="14765" end="14774" title="Yooper dialect" label="Yooperism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="14807" end="14815" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="14825" end="14836" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="14848" end="14859" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="14864" end="14872" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="14957" end="14963" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="14968" end="14976" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386958" start="15053" end="15056" title="meh" label="meh"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="15229" end="15235" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q44676" start="15236" end="15252" title="Canadian English" label="Canadian English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156228" start="15273" end="15294" title="South African English" label="South African English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145847" start="15344" end="15358" title="Western Canada" label="Western Canada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15392" end="15408" title="Channel Island English#Guernsey English" label="Guernsey English"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15413" end="15427" title="Channel Island English#Guernsey English" label="Jersey English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="15467" end="15474" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="15489" end="15499" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q939451" start="15534" end="15542" title="Singlish" label="Singlish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039185" start="15860" end="15868" title="Manglish" label="Manglish"/>
<link wikidata="Q45594" start="16647" end="16655" title="greeting" label="greeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="16750" end="16755" title="Dutch Language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q83034" start="16756" end="16768" title="interjection" label="interjection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970212" start="16973" end="16985" title="tag question" label="tag question"/>
<link wikidata="Q237409" start="17300" end="17309" title="Zeelandic" label="Zealandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q100103" start="17314" end="17326" title="West Flemish" label="West Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="17330" end="17338" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q40681" start="17589" end="17591" title="Ne (kana)" label="Ne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="17786" end="17796" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="18004" end="18010" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="18018" end="18028" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33661" start="18078" end="18094" title="Mauritian Creole" label="Mauritian Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="18351" end="18357" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="18769" end="18776" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068643" start="19101" end="19104" title="Che (Spanish)" label="Che"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="19145" end="19152" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q387066" start="19178" end="19190" title="Swiss German" label="Swiss German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="19662" end="19673" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="19831" end="19845" title="Urdu" label="Pakistani Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q29919" start="19895" end="19910" title="Egyptian Arabic" label="Egyptian Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56593" start="20160" end="20176" title="Levantine Arabic" label="Levantine Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56385" start="20208" end="20219" title="Gulf Arabic" label="Gulf Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098467" start="20259" end="20275" title="Regional Italian" label="Regional Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="20326" end="20334" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="20336" end="20352" title="Lombardy" label="Western Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724" start="20383" end="20389" title="Ticino" label="Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="Q15085" start="20520" end="20531" title="Piedmontese language" label="Piedmontese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33754" start="20536" end="20543" title="Lombard Language" label="Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q107504519" start="20619" end="20640" title="English interjections" label="English interjections"/>
<link wikidata="Q472911" start="20642" end="20658" title="Discourse marker" label="Discourse marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q44676" start="20660" end="20676" title="Canadian English" label="Canadian English"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55951" wikidata="Q58199" url="?curid=55951" title="Instant messaging">
<text>Instant messaging (IM) technology is a type of synchronous computer-mediated communication involving the immediate (real-time) transmission of messages between two or more parties over the Internet or another computer network. Originally involving simple text message exchanges, modern IM applications and services (also called &quot;social messengers&quot;, &quot;messaging apps&quot;, &quot;chat apps&quot; or &quot;chat clients&quot;) tend to also feature the exchange of multimedia, emojis, file transfer, VoIP (voice calling), and video chat capabilities.

Instant messaging systems facilitate connections between specified known users (often using a contact list also known as a &quot;buddy list&quot; or &quot;friend list&quot;) or in chat rooms, and can be standalone apps or integrated into a wider social media platform, or in a website where it can, for instance, be used for conversational commerce. Originally the term &quot;instant messaging&quot; was distinguished from &quot;text messaging&quot; by being run on a computer network instead of a cellular/mobile network, being able to write longer messages, real-time communication, presence (&quot;status&quot;), and being free (only cost of access instead of per SMS message sent).

Instant messaging was pioneered in the early Internet era; the IRC protocol was the earliest to achieve wide adoption. Later in the 1990s, ICQ was among the first closed and commercialized instant messengers, and several rival services appeared afterwards as it became a popular use of the Internet. Beginning with its first introduction in 2005, BlackBerry Messenger became the first popular example of mobile-based IM, combining features of traditional IM and mobile SMS. Instant messaging remains very popular today; IM apps are the most widely used smartphone apps: in 2018 for instance there were 980 million monthly active users of WeChat and 1.3 billion monthly users of WhatsApp, the largest IM network.

== Overview ==

Instant messaging (IM), sometimes also called &quot;messaging&quot; or &quot;texting&quot;, consists of computer-based human communication between two users (private messaging) or more (chat room or &quot;group&quot;) in real-time, allowing immediate receipt of acknowledgment or reply. This is in direct contrast to email, where conversations are not in real-time, and the perceived quasi-synchrony of the communications by the users (although many systems allow users to send offline messages that the other user receives when logging in).

Earlier IM networks were limited to text-based communication, not dissimilar to mobile text messaging. As technology has moved forward, IM has expanded to include voice calling using a microphone, videotelephony using webcams, file transfer, location sharing, image and video transfer, voice notes, and other features.

IM is conducted over the Internet or other types of networks (see also LAN messenger). Depending on the IM protocol, the technical architecture can be peer-to-peer (direct point-to-point transmission) or client–server (when all clients have to first connect to the central server). Primary IM services are controlled by their corresponding companies and usually follow the client-server model.

The term &quot;Instant Messenger&quot; is a service mark of Time Warner and may not be used in software not affiliated with AOL in the United States. For this reason, in April 2007, the instant messaging client formerly named Gaim (or gaim) announced that they would be renamed &quot;Pidgin&quot;.

=== Clients ===


Modern IM services generally provide their own client, either a separately installed application or a browser-based client. They are normally centralised networks run by the servers of the platform&#x27;s operators, unlike peer-to-peer protocols like XMPP. These usually only work within the same IM network, although some allow limited function with other services (see #Interoperability). Third-party client software applications exist that will connect with most of the major IM services. There is the class of instant messengers that uses the serverless model, which doesn&#x27;t require servers, and the IM network consists only of clients. There are several serverless messengers: RetroShare, Tox, Bitmessage, Ricochet, Ring. See also: LAN messenger.

Some examples of popular IM services today include Signal, Telegram, WhatsApp Messenger, WeChat, QQ Messenger, Viber, Line, and Snapchat. The popularity of certain apps greatly differ between different countries. Certain apps have an emphasis on certain uses - for example, Skype focuses on video calling, Slack focuses on messaging and file sharing for work teams, and Snapchat focuses on image messages. Some social networking services offer messaging services as a component of their overall platform, such as Facebook&#x27;s Facebook Messenger, who also own WhatsApp. Others have a direct IM function as an additional adjunct component of their social networking platforms, like Instagram, Reddit, Tumblr, TikTok, Clubhouse and Twitter; this also includes for example dating websites, such as OkCupid or Plenty of Fish, and online gaming chat platforms.

=== Features ===

====Private and group messaging====
Private chat allows users to converse privately with another person or a group. Privacy can also be enhanced in several ways, such as end-to-end encryption by default. Public and group chat features allow users to communicate with multiple people simultaneously.

====Calling====
Many major IM services and applications offer a call feature for user-to-user voice calls, conference calls, and voice messages. The call functionality is useful for professionals who utilize the application for work purposes and as a hands-free method. Videotelephony using a webcam is also possible by some.

====Games and entertainment====
Some IM applications include in-app games for entertainment. Yahoo! Messenger, for example, introduced these where users could play a game and viewed by friends in real-time. MSN Messenger featured a number of playable games within the interface. Facebook&#x27;s Messenger has had a built-in option to play games with people in a chat, including games like Tetris and Blackjack. Discord features multiple games built inside the &quot;activities&quot; tab in voice channels.

====Payments====
A relatively new feature to instant messaging, peer-to-peer payments are available for financial tasks on top of communication. The lack of a service fee also makes these advantageous to financial applications. IM services such as Facebook Messenger and the WeChat &#x27;super-app&#x27; for example offer a payment feature.

==History==
=== Early systems ===

Though the term dates from the 1990s, instant messaging predates the Internet, first appearing on multi-user operating systems like Compatible Time-Sharing System (CTSS) and Multiplexed Information and Computing Service (Multics) in the mid-1960s. Initially, some of these systems were used as notification systems for services like printing, but quickly were used to facilitate communication with other users logged into the same machine. CTSS facilitated communication via text message for up to 30 people.

Parallel to instant messaging were early online chat facilities, the earliest of which was Talkomatic (1973) on the PLATO system, which allowed 5 people to chat simultaneously on a 512 x 512 plasma display (5 lines of text + 1 status line per person). During the bulletin board system (BBS) phenomenon that peaked during the 1980s, some systems incorporated chat features which were similar to instant messaging; Freelancin&#x27; Roundtable was one prime example. The first such general-availability commercial online chat service (as opposed to PLATO, which was educational) was the CompuServe CB Simulator in 1980, created by CompuServe executive Alexander &quot;Sandy&quot; Trevor in Columbus, Ohio.

As networks developed, the protocols spread with the networks. Some of these used a peer-to-peer protocol (e.g. talk, ntalk and ytalk), while others required peers to connect to a server (see talker and IRC). The Zephyr Notification Service (still in use at some institutions) was invented at MIT&#x27;s Project Athena in the 1980s to allow service providers to locate and send messages to users.
Early instant messaging programs were primarily real-time text, where characters appeared as they were typed. This includes the Unix &quot;talk&quot; command line program, which was popular in the 1980s and early 1990s. Some BBS chat programs (i.e. Celerity BBS) also used a similar interface. Modern implementations of real-time text also exist in instant messengers, such as AOL&#x27;s Real-Time IM as an optional feature.

In the latter half of the 1980s and into the early 1990s, the Quantum Link online service for Commodore 64 computers offered user-to-user messages between concurrently connected customers, which they called &quot;On-Line Messages&quot; (or OLM for short), and later &quot;FlashMail.&quot; Quantum Link later became America Online and made AOL Instant Messenger (AIM, discussed later). While the Quantum Link client software ran on a Commodore 64, using only the Commodore&#x27;s PETSCII text-graphics, the screen was visually divided into sections and OLMs would appear as a yellow bar saying &quot;Message From:&quot; and the name of the sender along with the message across the top of whatever the user was already doing, and presented a list of options for responding. As such, it could be considered a type of graphical user interface (GUI), albeit much more primitive than the later Unix, Windows and Macintosh based GUI IM software. OLMs were what Q-Link called &quot;Plus Services&quot; meaning they charged an extra per-minute fee on top of the monthly Q-Link access costs.

Development of the Internet Relay Chat (IRC) protocol began in 1989, and this would become the Internet&#x27;s first widespread instant messaging standard.

=== Graphical messengers ===
Modern, Internet-wide, GUI-based messaging clients as they are known today, began to take off in the mid-1990s with PowWow, ICQ, and AOL Instant Messenger (AIM). Similar functionality was offered by CU-SeeMe in 1992; though primarily an audio/video chat link, users could also send textual messages to each other. AOL later acquired Mirabilis, the authors of ICQ; establishing dominance in the instant messaging market. A few years later ICQ (then owned by AOL) was awarded two patents for instant messaging by the U.S. patent office. Meanwhile, other companies developed their own software; (Excite, Microsoft (MSN), Ubique, and Yahoo!), each with its own proprietary protocol and client; users therefore had to run multiple client applications if they wished to use more than one of these networks. However, the open protocol IRC continued to be popular by the millennium, and its most popular graphical app was mIRC.

While instant messaging was mainly in use for consumer recreational purposes, in 1998, IBM launched their Lotus Sametime instant messenger software, the first popular example of enterprise-grade instant messaging. In 2000, an open-source application and open standards-based protocol called Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP) was launched, initially branded as &quot;Jabber&quot;. XMPP servers could act as gateways to other IM protocols, reducing the need to run multiple clients.

Video calling using a webcam also started taking off during this time. Microsoft&#x27;s NetMeeting, which was focused on business &quot;web conferencing&quot;, was one of the earliest; the company then launched Windows Messenger, coming preloaded on Windows XP, featuring video capabilities. Yahoo! Messenger added video capabilities in 2001; by 2005, such features were built-in also in AIM, MSN Messenger, and Skype.

There were a reported 100 million users of instant messaging in 2001. As of 2003, AIM was the globally most popular instant messenger with 195 million users and exchanges of 1.6 billion messages daily. By 2006, AIM controlled 52 percent of the instant messaging market, but rapidly declined shortly thereafter as the company struggled to compete with other services.

=== Integrated IM and mobile ===

Instant messaging integrated in other services started picking up pace in the late 2000s. Myspace, the then-largest social networking service, launched Myspace IM in 2006, shortly after Google&#x27;s Gtalk, which was integrated into its Gmail webmail interface. Facebook Chat launched in 2008, providing IM to users of the social network. By 2010, traditional instant messaging was in sharp decline in favor of these new messaging features on wider social networks, which at the time were not normally called IM. For instance, AIM&#x27;s userbase had declined by more than half throughout the year 2011.

Standalone instant messenger services were revived, evolving into becoming primarily being used on mobile due to the increasing use of Internet-enabled cell phones and smartphones. Often called &quot;chat apps&quot;, to distinguish it from cellular-based SMS and MMS &quot;texting&quot; services, these newer services were specially designed to be run on mobile platforms, as opposed to older services like AIM and MSN; BlackBerry Messenger, released in 2005, was one of the influential pioneers of mobile IM, and led to other companies launching services with proprietary protocols, such as WhatsApp. Mobile instant messaging surpassed SMS in global message volume by 2013. While SMS relied on traditional paid telephone services, IM apps on mobile were available for free or a minor data charge.

Older IM services were eventually shut, including AIM and Yahoo! Messenger, and also Windows Live Messenger, which merged into Skype in 2013. In 2014, it was reported that instant messaging had more users than social networks. Concurrently, rising use of instant messaging at workplaces led to the creation of new services (enterprise application integration (EAI)) often integrated with other enterprise applications such as workflow systems, for example in Skype for Business, Slack and Microsoft Teams. Meanwhile, the launch of Discord in 2015 has marked a notable new example of traditional IM originally designed for desktops.

== Interoperability ==
Most IM protocols are proprietary and are not designed to be interoperable with others, meaning that many IM networks have been incompatible and users have been unable to reach users on other networks. As of 2024, fragmentation of IM services means that a typical user is likely to have to use more networks than ever, including the need to download the apps and signing up, to stay in touch with all their contacts. However, there had been attempts for solutions.

Multi-protocol clients can use any of the IM protocols by using additional local libraries for each protocol. Examples of multi-protocol instant messenger software include Pidgin and Trillian, and more recently Beeper. These third-party clients have often been unable to keep up due to proprietary protocol restrictions and getting locked out of it. For instance, in 2015, WhatsApp started banning users who were using unofficial clients. Major IM providers usually cite the need for formal agreements, and security concerns as reasons for making changes.

=== Attempted open standards ===
There have been several attempts in the past to create a unified standard for instant messaging, including:

* IETF&#x27;s Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and SIP for Instant Messaging and Presence Leveraging Extensions (SIMPLE)
* Application Exchange (APEX),
* Instant Messaging and Presence Protocol (IMPP),
* Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP), based on XML, and
* Open Mobile Alliance&#x27;s Instant Messaging and Presence Service (IMPS), developed specifically for mobile devices.

=== History and agreements ===

In the early 2000s, when instant messaging was quickly growing, most attempts at producing a unified standard for the-then major IM providers (AOL, Yahoo!, Microsoft) had failed. There was a &quot;bitter row&quot; between AOL and its rivals regarding the opening up of their networks. In 2000, U.S. regulatory Federal Communications Commission (FCC) proposed, and supported by Microsoft chairman Bill Gates, that AOL providing interoperability of its AIM and ICQ instant messengers with Microsoft&#x27;s MSN Messenger was a condition for the forthcoming AOL-Time Warner merger.

However, in 2004, Microsoft, Yahoo! and AOL agreed to a deal in which Microsoft&#x27;s enterprise IM server Live Communications Server 2005 would have the possibility to talk to their rival counterparts and vice versa. On October 13, 2005, Microsoft and Yahoo! announced that their IM networks would soon be interoperable, using SIP/SIMPLE. This was finally rolled out to Windows Live Messenger and Yahoo! Messenger users in July 2006. Additionally, in December 2005 by the AOL and Google strategic partnership deal, it was announced that AIM and ICQ users would be able to communicate with Google Talk users. However this feature took until December 2007 to roll out. XMPP provided the best example of open protocol interoperability, having had gateways that connected to Google Talk, Lotus Sametime and others.

Later, RCS was developed by telecommunication companies as an instant messaging protocol to replace SMS under a unified standard. In 2022, the European Union passed the Digital Markets Act, which largely came into effect in early 2023. Among other things, the legislation mandates certain interoperability between the largest IM platforms in use in Europe. As a result, in March 2024, Meta Platforms opened up its WhatsApp and Messenger networks to be interoperable.

=== Technical ===
There are two ways to combine the many disparate protocols:
* Combine the many disparate protocols inside the IM &quot;client application&quot;.
* Combine the many disparate protocols inside the IM &quot;server&quot; application. This approach moves the task of communicating with the other services to the server. Clients need not know or care about other IM protocols. For example, LCS 2005 Public IM Connectivity. This approach is popular in XMPP servers; however, the so-called transport projects suffer the same reverse engineering difficulties as any other project involved with closed protocols or formats.

Some approaches allow organizations to deploy their own, private instant messaging network by enabling them to restrict access to the server (often with the IM network entirely behind their firewall) and administer user permissions. Other corporate messaging systems allow registered users to also connect from outside the corporation LAN, by using an encrypted, firewall-friendly, HTTPS-based protocol. Usually, a dedicated corporate IM server has several advantages, such as pre-populated contact lists, integrated authentication, and better security and privacy.

== Effects of IM on communication ==
=== Workplace communication ===
Instant messaging has changed how people communicate in the workplace. Enterprise messaging applications like Slack, TeleMessage, Teamnote and Yammer allow companies to enforce policies on how employees message at work and ensure secure storage of sensitive data. They allow employees to separate work information from their personal emails and texts.

Messaging applications may make workplace communication efficient, but they can also have consequences on productivity. A study at Slack showed on average, people spend 10 hours a day on Slack, which is about 67% more time than they spend using email.

Instant messaging is implemented in many video-conferencing tools. A study of chat use during work-related videoconferencing found that chat during meetings allows participants to communicate without interrupting the meeting, plan action around common resources, and enables greater inclusion. The study also found that chat can cause distractions and information asymmetries between participants.

=== Language ===
Users sometimes make use of internet slang or text speak to abbreviate common words or expressions to quicken conversations or reduce keystrokes. The language has become widespread, with well-known expressions such as &#x27;lol&#x27; translated over to face-to-face language.

Emotions are often expressed in shorthand, such as the abbreviation LOL, BRB and TTYL; respectively laugh(ing) out loud, be right back, and talk to you later. Some, however, attempt to be more accurate with emotional expression over IM. Real time reactions such as (&quot;chortle&quot;) (&quot;snort&quot;) (&quot;guffaw&quot;) or (&quot;eye-roll&quot;) have been popular at one point. Also there are certain standards that are being introduced into mainstream conversations including, &#x27;#&#x27; indicates the use of sarcasm in a statement and &#x27;*&#x27; which indicates a spelling mistake and/or grammatical error in the prior message, followed by a correction.

== Business application ==
Instant messaging products can usually be categorised into two types: Enterprise Instant Messaging (EIM) and Consumer Instant Messaging (CIM). Enterprise solutions use an internal IM server, however this is not always feasible, particularly for smaller businesses with limited budgets. The second option, using a CIM provides the advantage of being inexpensive to implement and has little need for investing in new hardware or server software. IM is increasingly becoming a feature of enterprise software rather than a stand-alone application.

Instant messaging has proven to be similar to personal computers, email, and the World Wide Web, in that its adoption for use as a business communications medium was driven primarily by individual employees using consumer software at work, rather than by formal mandate or provisioning by corporate information technology departments. Tens of millions of the consumer IM accounts in use are being used for business purposes by employees of companies and other organizations. The adoption of IM across corporate networks outside of the control of IT organizations creates risks and liabilities for companies who do not effectively manage and support IM use. IM was initially shunned by the corporate world partly due to security concerns, but by 2003 many had started embracing these new services.

=== Software ===
In response to the demand for business-grade IM and the need to ensure security and legal compliance, a new type of instant messaging, called &quot;Enterprise Instant Messaging&quot; (&quot;EIM&quot;) was created when Lotus Software launched IBM Lotus Sametime in 1998. Microsoft followed suit shortly thereafter with Microsoft Exchange Instant Messaging, later created a new platform called Microsoft Office Live Communications Server, and released Office Communications Server 2007 in October 2007. Oracle Corporation also jumped into the market with its Oracle Beehive unified collaboration software.

Both IBM Lotus and Microsoft have introduced federation between their EIM systems and some of the public IM networks so that employees may use one interface to both their internal EIM system and their contacts on AOL, MSN, and Yahoo. As of 2010, leading EIM platforms include IBM Lotus Sametime, Microsoft Office Communications Server, Jabber XCP and Cisco Unified Presence. Industry-focused EIM platforms such as Reuters Messaging and Bloomberg Messaging also provide IM abilities to financial services companies.

== Security and archiving ==
Crackers (malicious or black hat hackers) have consistently used IM networks as vectors for delivering phishing attempts, drive-by URLs, and virus-laden file attachments, with over 1100 discrete attacks listed by the IM Security Center in 2004–2007. Hackers use two methods of delivering malicious code through IM: delivery of viruses, trojan horses, or spyware within an infected file, and the use of &quot;socially engineered&quot; text with a web address that entices the recipient to click on a URL connecting him or her to a website that then downloads malicious code.

IM connections sometimes occur in plain text, making them vulnerable to eavesdropping. Also, IM client software often requires the user to expose open UDP ports to the world, raising the threat posed by potential security vulnerabilities.

In the early 2000s, a new class of IT security providers emerged to provide remedies for the risks and liabilities faced by corporations who chose to use IM for business communications. The IM security providers created new products to be installed in corporate networks for the purpose of archiving, content-scanning, and security-scanning IM traffic moving in and out of the corporation. Similar to the e-mail filtering vendors, the IM security providers focus on the risks and liabilities described above.

With the rapid adoption of IM in the workplace, demand for IM security products began to grow in the mid-2000s. By 2007, the preferred platform for the purchase of security software had become the &quot;computer appliance&quot;, according to IDC, who estimated that by 2008, 80% of network security products would be delivered via an appliance.

By 2014, however, instant messengers&#x27; safety level was still extremely poor. According to a scorecard by the Electronic Frontier Foundation, only 7 out of 39 instant messengers received a perfect score. In contrast, the most popular instant messengers at the time only attained a score of 2 out of 7. A number of studies have shown that IM services are quite vulnerable for providing user privacy.

In 2023, cybersecurity researchers discovered that numerous malicious &quot;mods&quot; exist of the Telegram instant messenger, which is freely available for download from Google Play.

=== Message history ===
Instant messages are often logged in a local message history, similar to emails&#x27; persistent nature. IM networks may store messages with either local-based device storage (e.g. WhatsApp, Viber, Line, WeChat, Signal etc. software) or cloud-based server storage provided by the service (e.g. Telegram, Skype, Facebook Messenger, Google Meet/Chat, Discord, Slack etc.). Although cloud-based storage is advertised to offer encrypted messages, it poses an increased risk that the IM provider may have access to the decryption keys and view the user&#x27;s saved messages.

This requires users to trust IM servers and providers because messages can generally be accessed by the company. Companies may be compelled to reveal their user&#x27;s communication and suspend user accounts for any reason.

=== Tracking and spying ===
News reports from 2013 revealed that the NSA is not only collecting emails and IM messages but also tracking relationships between senders and receivers of those chats and emails in a process known as metadata collection. Metadata refers to the data concerned about the chat or email as opposed to contents of messages. It may be used to collect valuable information.

In January 2014, Matthew Campbell and Michael Hurley filed a class-action lawsuit against Facebook for breaching the Electronic Communications Privacy Act. They alleged that the information in their supposedly private messages was being read and used to generate profit, specifically &quot;for purposes including but not limited to data mining and user profiling&quot;.

In corporate use of IM, organizational offerings have become very sophisticated in their security and logging measures. An employee or organization member must be granted login credentials and permission to use the messaging system. Creating a specific account for each user allows the organization to identify, track and record all use of their messenger system on their servers.

=== Encryption ===
Encryption is the primary method that instant messaging apps use to protect user&#x27;s data privacy and security. For corporate use, encryption and conversation archiving are usually regarded as important features due to security concerns. There are also a bunch of open source encrypting messengers.

IM does hold potential advantages over SMS. SMS messages are not encrypted, making them insecure, as the content of each SMS message is visible to mobile carriers and governments and can be intercepted by a third party, may leak metadata (such as phone numbers), or be spoofed and the sender of the message can be edited to impersonate another person.

Current instant messaging networks that use end-to-end encryption include Signal, WhatsApp, Wire and iMessage. Applications that have been criticized for lacking or poor encryption methods include Telegram and Confide, as both are prone to error or not having encryption enabled by default.

=== Compliance risks ===
In addition to the malicious code threat, using instant messaging at work creates a risk of non-compliance with laws and regulations governing electronic communications in businesses. In the United States alone, there are over 10,000 laws and regulations related to electronic messaging and records retention. The better-known of these include the Sarbanes–Oxley Act, HIPAA, and SEC 17a-3.

Clarification from the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) was issued to member firms in the financial services industry in December 2007, noting that &quot;electronic communications&quot;, &quot;email&quot;, and &quot;electronic correspondence&quot; may be used interchangeably and can include such forms of electronic messaging as &quot;instant messaging&quot; and text messaging. Changes to Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, effective December 1, 2006, created a new category for electronic records which may be requested during discovery in legal proceedings.

Most nations also regulate electronic messaging and records retention similarly to the United States. The most common regulations related to IM at work involve producing archived business communications to satisfy government or judicial requests under law. Many instant messaging communications fall into the category of business communications that must be archived and retrievable.

== Current user base ==
As of March 2022, the most used instant messaging apps and services worldwide include: Signal with 100 million, Line with 217 million, Viber with 260 million, Telegram with 700 million, WeChat with 1.2 billion, Facebook Messenger with 1.3 billion, and WhatsApp with 2.0 billion users. There are 25 countries in the world where WhatsApp messenger is not the market leader in IM, such as the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, Philippines, and China.

IM apps have varying levels of adoption in different countries. As of April 2022:
*WhatsApp by Meta Platforms is the most popular instant messaging network in several countries in South America, Western Europe, Africa, Middle East, South Asia, and Southeast Asia.
*Facebook Messenger by Meta Platforms is the most popular instant messaging network in North America, Northern Europe, some Central Europe countries, and Oceania.
*Telegram is the most popular instant messaging app in several Eastern Europe countries, and the second preferred option after WhatsApp in several countries in Western Europe, Middle East, South Asia, Southeast Asia, Africa, Central and South America.
*Viber by Rakuten has a strong presence in Central and Eastern Europe (Bulgaria, Greece, Serbia, Ukraine, Russia). It is also moderately successful in Philippines and Vietnam.
*Line by Naver Corporation is used widely in some countries in Asia (Japan, Taiwan, Thailand). 
*Instant messaging apps and services that are predominately used in only one country include: KakaoTalk in South Korea, Zalo in Vietnam, WeChat in China, and imo in Qatar. 
*While not the dominant app for one-to-one messaging in any country, Discord is commonly used among online communities due to its ability to support chats with a large amount of members, topic-based channels, and cloud-based storage.

== See also ==
===Terms===
*
*
*
*
* / Messaging

===Lists===
* Comparison of cross-platform instant messaging clients
* Comparison of instant messaging protocols
* Comparison of user features of messaging platforms

===Other===

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="0" end="17" title="Instant messaging" label="Instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="19" end="21" title="Instant messaging" label="IM"/>
<link wikidata="Q287198" start="47" end="90" title="synchronous computer-mediated communication" label="synchronous computer-mediated communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988" start="116" end="125" title="Real-time computing" label="real-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="189" end="197" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="209" end="225" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166101" start="255" end="267" title="Text messaging" label="text message"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="289" end="301" title="application (computing)" label="applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049294" start="487" end="492" title="emoji" label="emoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q534400" start="495" end="508" title="file transfer" label="file transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="510" end="530" title="voice over IP" label="VoIP (voice calling)"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="536" end="546" title="Videotelephony" label="video chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q574577" start="742" end="751" title="chat room" label="chat room"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="808" end="820" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608376" start="887" end="910" title="conversational commerce" label="conversational commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166101" start="991" end="1005" title="text messaging" label="text messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="1060" end="1075" title="cellular phone" label="cellular/mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114925" start="1147" end="1155" title="Presence information" label="presence"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="1229" end="1232" title="SMS" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q73" start="1312" end="1315" title="IRC" label="IRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q58166" start="1388" end="1391" title="ICQ" label="ICQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q879996" start="1596" end="1616" title="BlackBerry Messenger" label="BlackBerry Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082128" start="1653" end="1659" title="Mobile device" label="mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="1718" end="1721" title="SMS" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="1802" end="1812" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q56446417" start="1863" end="1883" title="monthly active users" label="monthly active users"/>
<link wikidata="Q283233" start="1887" end="1893" title="WeChat" label="WeChat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049511" start="1927" end="1935" title="WhatsApp" label="WhatsApp"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166101" start="2055" end="2062" title="texting" label="texting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844938" start="2136" end="2153" title="private message" label="private messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q574577" start="2164" end="2173" title="chat room" label="chat room"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="2295" end="2300" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058791" start="2368" end="2377" title="Synchronization" label="synchrony"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166101" start="2608" end="2622" title="text messaging" label="text messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="2684" end="2697" title="Voice over IP" label="voice calling"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="2706" end="2716" title="microphone" label="microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="2718" end="2732" title="videotelephony" label="videotelephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q29576" start="2739" end="2745" title="webcam" label="webcam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="2893" end="2900" title="computer network" label="network"/>
<link wikidata="Q734413" start="2912" end="2925" title="LAN messenger" label="LAN messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q161410" start="2992" end="3004" title="peer-to-peer" label="peer-to-peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q681349" start="3013" end="3027" title="Point-to-point (telecommunications)" label="point-to-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q146813" start="3045" end="3058" title="client–server model" label="client–server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421330" start="3280" end="3292" title="service mark" label="service mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="3296" end="3307" title="Time Warner" label="Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="3360" end="3363" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q71380" start="3462" end="3466" title="Gaim" label="Gaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q71380" start="3520" end="3526" title="Pidgin (software)" label="Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189210" start="3655" end="3668" title="browser-based" label="browser-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q161410" start="3776" end="3788" title="peer-to-peer" label="peer-to-peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188951" start="3804" end="3808" title="XMPP" label="XMPP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3924" end="3941" title="#Interoperability" label="#Interoperability"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958022" start="4100" end="4110" title="serverless computing" label="serverless"/>
<link wikidata="Q279182" start="4240" end="4250" title="RetroShare" label="RetroShare"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989676" start="4252" end="4255" title="Tox (protocol)" label="Tox"/>
<link wikidata="Q13903041" start="4257" end="4267" title="Bitmessage" label="Bitmessage"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894431" start="4269" end="4277" title="Ricochet (software)" label="Ricochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459508" start="4279" end="4283" title="Ring (software)" label="Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q734413" start="4295" end="4308" title="LAN messenger" label="LAN messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q19718090" start="4362" end="4368" title="Signal (messaging app)" label="Signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15616276" start="4370" end="4378" title="Telegram (software)" label="Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049511" start="4380" end="4388" title="WhatsApp" label="WhatsApp"/>
<link wikidata="Q116947" start="4389" end="4398" title="Messenger (software)" label="Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q283233" start="4400" end="4406" title="WeChat" label="WeChat"/>
<link wikidata="Q857640" start="4408" end="4420" title="Tencent QQ" label="QQ Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q332707" start="4422" end="4427" title="Viber" label="Viber"/>
<link wikidata="Q602471" start="4429" end="4433" title="Line (application)" label="Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q333618" start="4439" end="4447" title="Snapchat" label="Snapchat"/>
<link wikidata="Q40984" start="4585" end="4590" title="Skype" label="Skype"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="4602" end="4615" title="video calling" label="video calling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17130715" start="4617" end="4622" title="Slack (software)" label="Slack"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="4824" end="4832" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q870780" start="4840" end="4858" title="Facebook Messenger chatbots" label="Facebook Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049511" start="4873" end="4881" title="WhatsApp" label="WhatsApp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="4960" end="4986" title="social networking platform" label="social networking platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="4994" end="5003" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136" start="5005" end="5011" title="Reddit" label="Reddit"/>
<link wikidata="Q384060" start="5013" end="5019" title="Tumblr" label="Tumblr"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="5021" end="5027" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q104101703" start="5029" end="5038" title="Clubhouse (app)" label="Clubhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="5043" end="5050" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q612825" start="5083" end="5097" title="dating website" label="dating website"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138914" start="5108" end="5115" title="OkCupid" label="OkCupid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410238" start="5119" end="5133" title="PlentyofFish" label="Plenty of Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631847" start="5139" end="5152" title="Voice chat in online gaming" label="online gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340257" start="5358" end="5379" title="end-to-end encryption" label="end-to-end encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q574577" start="5392" end="5413" title="Chatroom" label="Public and group chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="5758" end="5772" title="Videotelephony" label="Videotelephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q29576" start="5781" end="5787" title="webcam" label="webcam"/>
<link wikidata="Q71694" start="5908" end="5924" title="Yahoo! Messenger" label="Yahoo! Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q71493" start="6022" end="6035" title="MSN Messenger" label="MSN Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993934" start="6047" end="6071" title="Games and applications for Windows Live Messenger" label="number of playable games"/>
<link wikidata="Q116947" start="6110" end="6119" title="Messenger (software)" label="Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q71910" start="6204" end="6210" title="Tetris" label="Tetris"/>
<link wikidata="Q228044" start="6215" end="6224" title="Blackjack" label="Blackjack"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907849" start="6226" end="6233" title="Discord" label="Discord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631847" start="6305" end="6319" title="Voice chat in online gaming" label="voice channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q116947" start="6570" end="6588" title="Messenger (software)" label="Facebook Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q283233" start="6597" end="6603" title="WeChat" label="WeChat"/>
<link wikidata="Q108273448" start="6610" end="6619" title="super-app" label="super-app"/>
<link wikidata="Q876057" start="6797" end="6807" title="multi-user" label="multi-user"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="6808" end="6824" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121396" start="6831" end="6861" title="Compatible Time-Sharing System" label="Compatible Time-Sharing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q739186" start="6920" end="6927" title="Multics" label="Multics"/>
<link wikidata="Q287198" start="7250" end="7261" title="online chat" label="online chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387779" start="7300" end="7310" title="Talkomatic" label="Talkomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755406" start="7325" end="7330" title="PLATO (computer system)" label="PLATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q210499" start="7472" end="7493" title="bulletin board system" label="bulletin board system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009386" start="7804" end="7816" title="CB Simulator" label="CB Simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122074" start="7837" end="7847" title="CompuServe" label="CompuServe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="7896" end="7910" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q161410" start="7997" end="8009" title="peer-to-peer" label="peer-to-peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q225244" start="8025" end="8029" title="talk (software)" label="talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632939" start="8105" end="8111" title="talker" label="talker"/>
<link wikidata="Q73" start="8116" end="8119" title="IRC" label="IRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q191370" start="8126" end="8153" title="Zephyr (protocol)" label="Zephyr Notification Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q740602" start="8217" end="8231" title="Project Athena" label="Project Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300800" start="8358" end="8372" title="real-time text" label="real-time text"/>
<link wikidata="Q225244" start="8443" end="8459" title="talk (software)" label="&amp;quot;talk&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268995" start="8798" end="8810" title="Quantum Link" label="Quantum Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="8830" end="8842" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="9051" end="9065" title="America Online" label="America Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q58066" start="9075" end="9096" title="AOL Instant Messenger" label="AOL Instant Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="9169" end="9181" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022979" start="9215" end="9222" title="PETSCII" label="PETSCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="9550" end="9574" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="9624" end="9628" title="X Window System" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="9630" end="9637" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="9642" end="9651" title="Macintosh" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q73" start="9838" end="9857" title="Internet Relay Chat" label="Internet Relay Chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="10028" end="10031" title="Graphical user interface" label="GUI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235928" start="10121" end="10127" title="PowWow (chat program)" label="PowWow"/>
<link wikidata="Q58166" start="10129" end="10132" title="ICQ" label="ICQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q58066" start="10138" end="10159" title="AOL Instant Messenger" label="AOL Instant Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014667" start="10204" end="10212" title="CU-SeeMe" label="CU-SeeMe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="10319" end="10322" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423522" start="10338" end="10347" title="Mirabilis (company)" label="Mirabilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="10520" end="10538" title="U.S. patent office" label="U.S. patent office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383534" start="10598" end="10604" title="Excite (web portal)" label="Excite"/>
<link wikidata="Q192845" start="10606" end="10621" title="MSN" label="Microsoft (MSN)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876531" start="10623" end="10629" title="Ubique (company)" label="Ubique"/>
<link wikidata="Q37093" start="10635" end="10641" title="Yahoo!" label="Yahoo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408089" start="10662" end="10682" title="proprietary protocol" label="proprietary protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q528166" start="10687" end="10693" title="software client" label="client"/>
<link wikidata="Q211680" start="10919" end="10923" title="mIRC" label="mIRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="11013" end="11016" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q58455" start="11032" end="11046" title="IBM Lotus Sametime" label="Lotus Sametime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="11152" end="11175" title="open-source software" label="open-source application"/>
<link wikidata="Q681263" start="11180" end="11194" title="open standards" label="open standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q188951" start="11217" end="11259" title="Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol" label="Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="11424" end="11437" title="Video calling" label="Video calling"/>
<link wikidata="Q29576" start="11446" end="11452" title="webcam" label="webcam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154380" start="11512" end="11522" title="NetMeeting" label="NetMeeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543677" start="11560" end="11576" title="web conferencing" label="web conferencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154433" start="11635" end="11652" title="Windows Messenger" label="Windows Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="11674" end="11684" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q71493" start="11817" end="11830" title="MSN Messenger" label="MSN Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q40984" start="11836" end="11841" title="Skype" label="Skype"/>
<link wikidata="Q40629" start="12336" end="12343" title="Myspace" label="Myspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="12362" end="12387" title="social networking service" label="social networking service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044688" start="12398" end="12408" title="Myspace IM" label="Myspace IM"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="12432" end="12438" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q51713" start="12446" end="12451" title="Gtalk" label="Gtalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9334" start="12483" end="12488" title="Gmail" label="Gmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q327618" start="12489" end="12496" title="webmail" label="webmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q116947" start="12508" end="12521" title="Facebook Chat" label="Facebook Chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q58066" start="12773" end="12776" title="AIM (software)" label="AIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082128" start="12950" end="12956" title="Mobile device" label="mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="13003" end="13014" title="cell phones" label="cell phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="13019" end="13030" title="smartphones" label="smartphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q535695" start="13091" end="13099" title="Cellular network" label="cellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="13106" end="13109" title="SMS" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q189443" start="13114" end="13117" title="Multimedia Messaging Service" label="MMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166101" start="13124" end="13131" title="texting" label="texting"/>
<link wikidata="Q879996" start="13271" end="13291" title="BlackBerry Messenger" label="BlackBerry Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049511" start="13443" end="13451" title="WhatsApp" label="WhatsApp"/>
<link wikidata="Q71493" start="13735" end="13757" title="Windows Live Messenger" label="Windows Live Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q40984" start="13777" end="13782" title="Skype" label="Skype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052246" start="13974" end="14008" title="enterprise application integration" label="enterprise application integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416838" start="14109" end="14127" title="Skype for Business" label="Skype for Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q17130715" start="14129" end="14134" title="Slack (software)" label="Slack"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406404" start="14139" end="14154" title="Microsoft Teams" label="Microsoft Teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907849" start="14181" end="14188" title="Discord" label="Discord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408089" start="14328" end="14339" title="Proprietary protocol" label="proprietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q749647" start="14367" end="14380" title="interoperable" label="interoperable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126717" start="14647" end="14655" title="download" label="download"/>
<link wikidata="Q71380" start="14944" end="14950" title="Pidgin (software)" label="Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q71483" start="14955" end="14963" title="Trillian (software)" label="Trillian"/>
<link wikidata="Q124045780" start="14983" end="14989" title="Beeper (application)" label="Beeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049511" start="15145" end="15153" title="WhatsApp" label="WhatsApp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510521" start="15279" end="15287" title="computer security" label="security"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="15473" end="15477" title="IETF" label="IETF"/>
<link wikidata="Q191018" start="15485" end="15512" title="Session Initiation Protocol" label="Session Initiation Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971926" start="15523" end="15583" title="SIMPLE (instant messaging protocol)" label="SIP for Instant Messaging and Presence Leveraging Extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="15595" end="15615" title="Application Exchange" label="Application Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038762" start="15626" end="15665" title="Instant Messaging and Presence Protocol" label="Instant Messaging and Presence Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q188951" start="15676" end="15718" title="Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol" label="Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="15736" end="15739" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500419" start="15747" end="15767" title="Open Mobile Alliance" label="Open Mobile Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664674" start="15775" end="15813" title="Instant Messaging and Presence Service" label="Instant Messaging and Presence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="16041" end="16044" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q37093" start="16046" end="16052" title="Yahoo!" label="Yahoo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="16054" end="16063" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="16208" end="16241" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="16294" end="16304" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q58066" start="16349" end="16352" title="AIM (software)" label="AIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q58166" start="16357" end="16360" title="ICQ" label="ICQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q71493" start="16402" end="16415" title="MSN Messenger" label="MSN Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="16452" end="16474" title="AOL Time Warner" label="AOL-Time Warner merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6655052" start="16585" end="16616" title="Live Communications Server 2005" label="Live Communications Server 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q71493" start="16849" end="16871" title="Windows Live Messenger" label="Windows Live Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q71694" start="16876" end="16892" title="Yahoo! Messenger" label="Yahoo! Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="16959" end="16965" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q51713" start="17068" end="17079" title="Google Talk" label="Google Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188951" start="17146" end="17150" title="XMPP" label="XMPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q58455" start="17263" end="17277" title="Lotus Sametime" label="Lotus Sametime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710059" start="17298" end="17301" title="Rich Communication Services" label="RCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="17391" end="17394" title="SMS" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q104829590" start="17460" end="17479" title="Digital Markets Act" label="Digital Markets Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q380" start="17676" end="17690" title="Meta Platforms" label="Meta Platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q116947" start="17718" end="17727" title="Messenger (software)" label="Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q528166" start="17896" end="17914" title="client (computing)" label="client application"/>
<link wikidata="Q6655052" start="18161" end="18169" title="Live Communications Server 2005" label="LCS 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q188951" start="18222" end="18226" title="XMPP" label="XMPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q269608" start="18294" end="18313" title="reverse engineering" label="reverse engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="18526" end="18532" title="Server (computing)" label="server"/>
<link wikidata="Q80998" start="18582" end="18590" title="firewall (computing)" label="firewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q17130715" start="19138" end="19143" title="Slack (software)" label="Slack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695731" start="19145" end="19156" title="TeleMessage" label="TeleMessage"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909286" start="19158" end="19166" title="Teamnote" label="Teamnote"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="19626" end="19631" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="19675" end="19693" title="Videoconferencing" label="video-conferencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q43747" start="20078" end="20092" title="internet slang" label="internet slang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20096" end="20106" title="text messaging#Effect on language" label="text speak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134" start="20274" end="20277" title="LOL" label="lol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134" start="20395" end="20398" title="LOL" label="LOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q43747" start="20400" end="20412" title="Internet slang" label="BRB and TTYL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373787" start="20534" end="20554" title="emotional expression" label="emotional expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318054" start="21510" end="21529" title="enterprise software" label="enterprise software"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="21651" end="21665" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q909169" start="22603" end="22617" title="Lotus Software" label="Lotus Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q223653" start="22703" end="22721" title="Microsoft Exchange Server" label="Microsoft Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931614" start="22777" end="22820" title="Microsoft Office Live Communications Server" label="Microsoft Office Live Communications Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931614" start="22835" end="22863" title="Office Communications Server" label="Office Communications Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q19900" start="22886" end="22904" title="Oracle Corporation" label="Oracle Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099247" start="22942" end="22956" title="Oracle Beehive" label="Oracle Beehive"/>
<link wikidata="Q58455" start="23266" end="23284" title="IBM Lotus Sametime" label="IBM Lotus Sametime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931614" start="23286" end="23324" title="Microsoft Office Communications Server" label="Microsoft Office Communications Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q188951" start="23326" end="23332" title="XMPP" label="Jabber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795897" start="23404" end="23421" title="Reuters Messaging" label="Reuters Messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q13977" start="23426" end="23445" title="Bloomberg L.P." label="Bloomberg Messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332289" start="23558" end="23567" title="black hat (computer security)" label="black hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q135005" start="23638" end="23646" title="phishing" label="phishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259344" start="23657" end="23669" title="Drive-by download" label="drive-by URL"/>
<link wikidata="Q14639" start="23871" end="23883" title="trojan horse (computing)" label="trojan horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q14644" start="23889" end="23896" title="spyware" label="spyware"/>
<link wikidata="Q42253" start="23981" end="23992" title="Uniform Resource Locator" label="web address"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145976" start="24144" end="24154" title="plain text" label="plain text"/>
<link wikidata="Q11163" start="24261" end="24264" title="User Datagram Protocol" label="UDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141106" start="24755" end="24771" title="e-mail filtering" label="e-mail filtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q621580" start="25063" end="25081" title="computer appliance" label="computer appliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q989632" start="25142" end="25158" title="network security" label="network security"/>
<link wikidata="Q624023" start="25320" end="25350" title="Electronic Frontier Foundation" label="Electronic Frontier Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15616276" start="25710" end="25718" title="Telegram (software)" label="Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q79576" start="25782" end="25793" title="Google Play" label="Google Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049511" start="26001" end="26009" title="WhatsApp" label="WhatsApp"/>
<link wikidata="Q332707" start="26011" end="26016" title="Viber" label="Viber"/>
<link wikidata="Q602471" start="26018" end="26022" title="Line (software)" label="Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q283233" start="26024" end="26030" title="WeChat" label="WeChat"/>
<link wikidata="Q19718090" start="26032" end="26038" title="Signal (messaging app)" label="Signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15616276" start="26114" end="26122" title="Telegram (software)" label="Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q40984" start="26124" end="26129" title="Skype" label="Skype"/>
<link wikidata="Q116947" start="26131" end="26149" title="Facebook Messenger" label="Facebook Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q56669074" start="26158" end="26162" title="Google Meet" label="Meet"/>
<link wikidata="Q89804122" start="26163" end="26167" title="Google Chat" label="Chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907849" start="26169" end="26176" title="Discord" label="Discord"/>
<link wikidata="Q17130715" start="26178" end="26183" title="Slack (software)" label="Slack"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="26243" end="26252" title="encrypted" label="encrypted"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="26686" end="26689" title="NSA" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="26846" end="26854" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783852" start="27075" end="27095" title="class-action lawsuit" label="class-action lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q380" start="27104" end="27112" title="Facebook Inc" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358231" start="27131" end="27168" title="Electronic Communications Privacy Act" label="Electronic Communications Privacy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q172491" start="27346" end="27357" title="data mining" label="data mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="27786" end="27796" title="Encryption" label="Encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="28128" end="28131" title="SMS" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941618" start="28236" end="28251" title="Mobile network operator" label="mobile carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="28318" end="28326" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340257" start="28486" end="28507" title="end-to-end encryption" label="end-to-end encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q19718090" start="28516" end="28522" title="Signal (messaging app)" label="Signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049511" start="28524" end="28532" title="WhatsApp" label="WhatsApp"/>
<link wikidata="Q26934461" start="28534" end="28538" title="Wire (software)" label="Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q290267" start="28543" end="28551" title="iMessage" label="iMessage"/>
<link wikidata="Q15616276" start="28639" end="28647" title="Telegram (software)" label="Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q28956988" start="28652" end="28659" title="Confide" label="Confide"/>
<link wikidata="Q856418" start="29107" end="29125" title="Sarbanes–Oxley Act" label="Sarbanes–Oxley Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q606563" start="29127" end="29132" title="Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act" label="HIPAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q387071" start="29173" end="29212" title="Financial Industry Regulatory Authority" label="Financial Industry Regulatory Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166101" start="29529" end="29543" title="text messaging" label="text messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440427" start="29556" end="29588" title="Federal Rules of Civil Procedure" label="Federal Rules of Civil Procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q902342" start="29694" end="29703" title="discovery (law)" label="discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q19718090" start="30223" end="30229" title="Signal (messaging app)" label="Signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q602471" start="30248" end="30252" title="Line (software)" label="Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q332707" start="30271" end="30276" title="Viber" label="Viber"/>
<link wikidata="Q15616276" start="30295" end="30303" title="Telegram (software)" label="Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q283233" start="30322" end="30328" title="WeChat" label="WeChat"/>
<link wikidata="Q116947" start="30347" end="30365" title="Facebook Messenger" label="Facebook Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049511" start="30388" end="30396" title="WhatsApp" label="WhatsApp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049511" start="30744" end="30752" title="WhatsApp" label="WhatsApp"/>
<link wikidata="Q380" start="30756" end="30770" title="Meta Platforms" label="Meta Platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q116947" start="30926" end="30944" title="Facebook Messenger" label="Facebook Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q380" start="30948" end="30962" title="Meta Platforms" label="Meta Platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q15616276" start="31089" end="31097" title="Telegram (software)" label="Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q332707" start="31341" end="31346" title="Viber" label="Viber"/>
<link wikidata="Q973054" start="31350" end="31357" title="Rakuten" label="Rakuten"/>
<link wikidata="Q602471" start="31517" end="31521" title="Line (software)" label="Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q489247" start="31525" end="31542" title="Naver Corporation" label="Naver Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q127293" start="31706" end="31715" title="KakaoTalk" label="KakaoTalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16481045" start="31732" end="31736" title="Zalo" label="Zalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q283233" start="31749" end="31755" title="WeChat" label="WeChat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041310" start="31770" end="31773" title="Imo.im" label="imo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907849" start="31854" end="31861" title="Discord (software)" label="Discord"/>
<link wikidata="Q628523" start="32059" end="32068" title="Messaging" label="Messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618972" start="32084" end="32138" title="Comparison of cross-platform instant messaging clients" label="Comparison of cross-platform instant messaging clients"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863582" start="32141" end="32182" title="Comparison of instant messaging protocols" label="Comparison of instant messaging protocols"/>
<link wikidata="Q104875044" start="32185" end="32235" title="Comparison of user features of messaging platforms" label="Comparison of user features of messaging platforms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="55955" wikidata="Q189439" url="?curid=55955" title="Version control">
<text>Version control (also known as revision control, source control, and source code management) is the software engineering practice of controlling, organizing, and tracking different versions in history of computer files; primarily source code text files, but generally any type of file.

Version control is a component of software configuration management.

A &quot;version control system&quot; is a software tool that automates version control. Alternatively, version control is embedded as a feature of some systems such as word processors, spreadsheets, collaborative web docs, and content management systems, e.g., . 

Version control includes viewing old versions and enables reverting a file to a previous version.

==Overview==

As teams develop software, it is common for multiple versions of the same software to be deployed in different sites and for the developers to work simultaneously on updates. Bugs or features of the software are often only present in certain versions (because of the fixing of some problems and the introduction of others as the program develops). Therefore, for the purposes of locating and fixing bugs, it is vitally important to be able to retrieve and run different versions of the software to determine in which version(s) the problem occurs. It may also be necessary to develop two versions of the software concurrently: for instance, where one version has bugs fixed, but no new features (branch), while the other version is where new features are worked on (trunk).

At the simplest level, developers could simply retain multiple copies of the different versions of the program, and label them appropriately. This simple approach has been used in many large software projects. While this method can work, it is inefficient as many near-identical copies of the program have to be maintained. This requires a lot of self-discipline on the part of developers and often leads to mistakes. Since the code base is the same, it also requires granting read-write-execute permission to a set of developers, and this adds the pressure of someone managing permissions so that the code base is not compromised, which adds more complexity. Consequently, systems to automate some or all of the revision control process have been developed. This abstracts most operational steps (hides them from ordinary users).

Moreover, in software development, legal and business practice, and other environments, it has become increasingly common for a single document or snippet of code to be edited by a team, the members of which may be geographically dispersed and may pursue different and even contrary interests. Sophisticated revision control that tracks and accounts for ownership of changes to documents and code may be extremely helpful or even indispensable in such situations.

Revision control may also track changes to configuration files, such as those typically stored in codice_1 or codice_2 on Unix systems. This gives system administrators another way to easily track changes made and a way to roll back to earlier versions should the need arise.

Many version control systems identify the version of a file as a number or letter, called the &quot;version number&quot;, &quot;version&quot;, &quot;revision number&quot;, &quot;revision&quot;, or &quot;revision level&quot;. For example, the first version of a file might be version &quot;1&quot;. When the file is changed the next version is &quot;2&quot;. Each version is associated with a timestamp and the person making the change. Revisions can be compared, restored, and, with some types of files, merged.

== History ==

IBM&#x27;s OS/360 IEBUPDTE software update tool dates back to 1962, arguably a precursor to version control system tools. Two source management and version control packages that were heavily used by IBM 360/370 installations were The Librarian and Panvalet.

A full system designed for source code control was started in 1972: the Source Code Control System (SCCS), again for OS/360. SCCS&#x27;s user manual, especially the introduction, having been published on December 4, 1975, implied that it was the first deliberate revision control system. The Revision Control System (RCS) followed in 1982 and, later, Concurrent Versions System (CVS) added network and concurrent development features to RCS. After CVS, a dominant successor was Subversion, followed by the rise of distributed revision control tools such as Git.

==Structure==
Revision control manages changes to a set of data over time. These changes can be structured in various ways.

Often the data is thought of as a collection of many individual items, such as files or documents, and changes to individual files are tracked. This accords with intuitions about separate files but causes problems when identity changes, such as during renaming, splitting or merging of files. Accordingly, some systems such as Git, instead consider changes to the data as a whole, which is less intuitive for simple changes but simplifies more complex changes.

When data that is under revision control is modified, after being retrieved by &quot;checking out,&quot; this is not in general immediately reflected in the revision control system (in the &quot;repository&quot;), but must instead be &quot;checked in&quot; or &quot;committed.&quot; A copy outside revision control is known as a &quot;working copy&quot;. As a simple example, when editing a computer file, the data stored in memory by the editing program is the working copy, which is committed by saving. Concretely, one may print out a document, edit it by hand, and only later manually input the changes into a computer and save it. For source code control, the working copy is instead a copy of all files in a particular revision, generally stored locally on the developer&#x27;s computer; in this case saving the file only changes the working copy, and checking into the repository is a separate step.

If multiple people are working on a single data set or document, they are implicitly creating branches of the data (in their working copies), and thus issues of merging arise, as discussed below. For simple collaborative document editing, this can be prevented by using file locking or simply avoiding working on the same document that someone else is working on.

Revision control systems are often centralized, with a single authoritative data store, the &quot;repository,&quot; and check-outs and check-ins done with reference to this central repository. Alternatively, in distributed revision control, no single repository is authoritative, and data can be checked out and checked into any repository. When checking into a different repository, this is interpreted as a merge or patch.

===Graph structure===

In terms of graph theory, revisions are generally thought of as a line of development (the &quot;trunk&quot;) with branches off of this, forming a directed tree, visualized as one or more parallel lines of development (the &quot;mainlines&quot; of the branches) branching off a trunk. In reality the structure is more complicated, forming a directed acyclic graph, but for many purposes &quot;tree with merges&quot; is an adequate approximation.

Revisions occur in sequence over time, and thus can be arranged in order, either by revision number or timestamp. Revisions are based on past revisions, though it is possible to largely or completely replace an earlier revision, such as &quot;delete all existing text, insert new text&quot;. In the simplest case, with no branching or undoing, each revision is based on its immediate predecessor alone, and they form a simple line, with a single latest version, the &quot;HEAD&quot; revision or &quot;tip&quot;. In graph theory terms, drawing each revision as a point and each &quot;derived revision&quot; relationship as an arrow (conventionally pointing from older to newer, in the same direction as time), this is a linear graph. If there is branching, so multiple future revisions are based on a past revision, or undoing, so a revision can depend on a revision older than its immediate predecessor, then the resulting graph is instead a directed tree (each node can have more than one child), and has multiple tips, corresponding to the revisions without children (&quot;latest revision on each branch&quot;). In principle the resulting tree need not have a preferred tip (&quot;main&quot; latest revision) – just various different revisions – but in practice one tip is generally identified as HEAD. When a new revision is based on HEAD, it is either identified as the new HEAD, or considered a new branch. The list of revisions from the start to HEAD (in graph theory terms, the unique path in the tree, which forms a linear graph as before) is the &quot;trunk&quot; or &quot;mainline.&quot; Conversely, when a revision can be based on more than one previous revision (when a node can have more than one &quot;parent&quot;), the resulting process is called a &quot;merge,&quot; and is one of the most complex aspects of revision control. This most often occurs when changes occur in multiple branches (most often two, but more are possible), which are then merged into a single branch incorporating both changes. If these changes overlap, it may be difficult or impossible to merge, and require manual intervention or rewriting.

In the presence of merges, the resulting graph is no longer a tree, as nodes can have multiple parents, but is instead a rooted directed acyclic graph (DAG). The graph is acyclic since parents are always backwards in time, and rooted because there is an oldest version. Assuming there is a trunk, merges from branches can be considered as &quot;external&quot; to the tree – the changes in the branch are packaged up as a &quot;patch,&quot; which is applied to HEAD (of the trunk), creating a new revision without any explicit reference to the branch, and preserving the tree structure. Thus, while the actual relations between versions form a DAG, this can be considered a tree plus merges, and the trunk itself is a line.

In distributed revision control, in the presence of multiple repositories these may be based on a single original version (a root of the tree), but there need not be an original root - instead there can be a separate root (oldest revision) for each repository. This can happen, for example, if two people start working on a project separately. Similarly, in the presence of multiple data sets (multiple projects) that exchange data or merge, there is no single root, though for simplicity one may think of one project as primary and the other as secondary, merged into the first with or without its own revision history.

==Specialized strategies==
Engineering revision control developed from formalized processes based on tracking revisions of early blueprints or bluelines. This system of control implicitly allowed returning to an earlier state of the design, for cases in which an engineering dead-end was reached in the development of the design. A revision table was used to keep track of the changes made. Additionally, the modified areas of the drawing were highlighted using revision clouds.

===In Business and Law===
Version control is widespread in business and law. Indeed, &quot;contract redline&quot; and &quot;legal blackline&quot; are some of the earliest forms of revision control, and are still employed in business and law with varying degrees of sophistication. The most sophisticated techniques are beginning to be used for the electronic tracking of changes to CAD files (see product data management), supplanting the &quot;manual&quot; electronic implementation of traditional revision control.

==Source-management models==
Traditional revision control systems use a centralized model where all the revision control functions take place on a shared server. If two developers try to change the same file at the same time, without some method of managing access the developers may end up overwriting each other&#x27;s work. Centralized revision control systems solve this problem in one of two different &quot;source management models&quot;: file locking and version merging.

===Atomic operations===

An operation is &quot;atomic&quot; if the system is left in a consistent state even if the operation is interrupted. The &quot;commit&quot; operation is usually the most critical in this sense. Commits tell the revision control system to make a group of changes final, and available to all users. Not all revision control systems have atomic commits; Concurrent Versions System lacks this feature.

===File locking===
The simplest method of preventing &quot;concurrent access&quot; problems involves locking files so that only one developer at a time has write access to the central &quot;repository&quot; copies of those files. Once one developer &quot;checks out&quot; a file, others can read that file, but no one else may change that file until that developer &quot;checks in&quot; the updated version (or cancels the checkout).

File locking has both merits and drawbacks. It can provide some protection against difficult merge conflicts when a user is making radical changes to many sections of a large file (or group of files). If the files are left exclusively locked for too long, other developers may be tempted to bypass the revision control software and change the files locally, forcing a difficult manual merge when the other changes are finally checked in. In a large organization, files can be left &quot;checked out&quot; and locked and forgotten about as developers move between projects - these tools may or may not make it easy to see who has a file checked out.

===Version merging===

Most version control systems allow multiple developers to edit the same file at the same time. The first developer to &quot;check in&quot; changes to the central repository always succeeds. The system may provide facilities to merge further changes into the central repository, and preserve the changes from the first developer when other developers check in.

Merging two files can be a very delicate operation, and usually possible only if the data structure is simple, as in text files. The result of a merge of two image files might not result in an image file at all. The second developer checking in the code will need to take care with the merge, to make sure that the changes are compatible and that the merge operation does not introduce its own logic errors within the files. These problems limit the availability of automatic or semi-automatic merge operations mainly to simple text-based documents, unless a specific merge plugin is available for the file types.

The concept of a &quot;reserved edit&quot; can provide an optional means to explicitly lock a file for exclusive write access, even when a merging capability exists.

===Baselines, labels and tags===
Most revision control tools will use only one of these similar terms (baseline, label, tag) to refer to the action of identifying a snapshot (&quot;label the project&quot;) or the record of the snapshot (&quot;try it with baseline &quot;X&quot;&quot;). Typically only one of the terms &quot;baseline&quot;, &quot;label&quot;, or &quot;tag&quot; is used in documentation or discussion; they can be considered synonyms.

In most projects, some snapshots are more significant than others, such as those used to indicate published releases, branches, or milestones.

When both the term &quot;baseline&quot; and either of &quot;label&quot; or &quot;tag&quot; are used together in the same context, &quot;label&quot; and &quot;tag&quot; usually refer to the mechanism within the tool of identifying or making the record of the snapshot, and &quot;baseline&quot; indicates the increased significance of any given label or tag.

Most formal discussion of configuration management uses the term &quot;baseline&quot;.

==Distributed revision control==

Distributed revision control systems (DRCS) take a peer-to-peer approach, as opposed to the client–server approach of centralized systems. Rather than a single, central repository on which clients synchronize, each peer&#x27;s working copy of the codebase is a bona-fide repository.
Distributed revision control conducts synchronization by exchanging patches (change-sets) from peer to peer. This results in some important differences from a centralized system:
* No canonical, reference copy of the codebase exists by default; only working copies.
* Common operations (such as commits, viewing history, and reverting changes) are fast, because there is no need to communicate with a central server.
Rather, communication is only necessary when pushing or pulling changes to or from other peers.
* Each working copy effectively functions as a remote backup of the codebase and of its change-history, providing inherent protection against data loss.

==Best practices==
Following best practices is necessary to obtain the full benefits of version control. Best practice may vary by version control tool and the field to which version control is applied. The generally accepted best practices in software development include: making incremental, small, changes; making commits which involve only one task or fix -- a corollary to this is to commit only code which works and does not knowingly break existing functionality; utilizing branching to complete functionality before release; writing clear and descriptive commit messages, make what why and how clear in either the commit description or the code; and using a consistent branching strategy. Other best software development practices such as code review and automated regression testing may assist in the following of version control best practices.

==Costs and benefits==
Costs and benefits will vary dependent upon the version control tool chosen and the field in which it is applied. This section speaks to the field of software development, where version control is widely applied.

===Costs===
In addition to the costs of licensing the version control software, using version control requires time and effort. The concepts underlying version control must be understood and the technical particulars required to operate the version control software chosen must be learned. Version control best practices must be learned and integrated into the organization&#x27;s existing software development practices. Management effort may be required to maintain the discipline needed to follow best practices in order to obtain useful benefit.

===Benefits===

====Allows for reverting changes====
A core benefit is the ability to keep history and revert changes, allowing the developer to easily undo changes. This gives the developer more opportunity to experiment, eliminating the fear of breaking existing code.

====Branching simplifies deployment, maintenance and development====
Branching assists with deployment. Branching and merging, the production, packaging, and labeling of source code patches and the easy application of patches to code bases, simplifies the maintenance and concurrent development of the multiple code bases associated with the various stages of the deployment process; development, testing, staging, production, etc.

====Damage mitigation, accountability and process and design improvement====
There can be damage mitigation, accountability, process and design improvement, and other benefits associated with the record keeping provided by version control, the tracking of who did what, when, why, and how.

When bugs arise, knowing what was done when helps with damage mitigation and recovery by assisting in the identification of what problems exist, how long they have existed, and determining problem scope and solutions. Previous versions can be installed and tested to verify conclusions reached by examination of code and commit messages.

====Simplifies debugging====
Version control can greatly simplify debugging. The application of a test case to multiple versions can quickly identify the change which introduced a bug. The developer need not be familiar with the entire code base and can focus instead on the code that introduced the problem.

====Improves collaboration and communication====
Version control enhances collaboration in multiple ways. Since version control can identify conflicting changes, i.e. incompatible changes made to the same lines of code, there is less need for coordination among developers. 

The packaging of commits, branches, and all the associated commit messages and version labels, improves communication between developers, both in the moment and over time. Better communication, whether instant or deferred, can improve the code review process, the testing process, and other critical aspects of the software development process.

==Integration==
Some of the more advanced revision-control tools offer many other facilities, allowing deeper integration with other tools and software-engineering processes. 

===Integrated development environment===
Plugins are often available for IDEs such as Oracle JDeveloper, IntelliJ IDEA, Eclipse, Visual Studio, Delphi, NetBeans IDE, Xcode, and GNU Emacs (via vc.el). Advanced research prototypes generate appropriate commit messages.

==Common terminology==
Terminology can vary from system to system, but some terms in common usage include:

===Baseline===

An approved revision of a document or source file to which subsequent changes can be made. See baselines, labels and tags.

===Blame===
A search for the author and revision that last modified a particular line.

===Branch===
A set of files under version control may be &quot;branched&quot; or &quot;forked&quot; at a point in time so that, from that time forward, two copies of those files may develop at different speeds or in different ways independently of each other.

===Change===
A &quot;change&quot; (or &quot;diff&quot;, or &quot;delta&quot;) represents a specific modification to a document under version control. The granularity of the modification considered a change varies between version control systems.

===Change list===
On many version control systems with atomic multi-change commits, a &quot;change list&quot; (or &quot;CL&quot;), &quot;change set&quot;, &quot;update&quot;, or &quot;patch&quot; identifies the set of &quot;changes&quot; made in a single commit. This can also represent a sequential view of the source code, allowing the examination of source as of any particular changelist ID.

===Checkout===
To &quot;check out&quot; (or &quot;co&quot;) is to create a local working copy from the repository. A user may specify a specific revision or obtain the latest. The term &#x27;checkout&#x27; can also be used as a noun to describe the working copy. When a file has been checked out from a shared file server, it cannot be edited by other users. Think of it like a hotel, when you check out, you no longer have access to its amenities.

===Clone===
&quot;Cloning&quot; means creating a repository containing the revisions from another repository. This is equivalent to &quot;push&quot;ing or &quot;pull&quot;ing into an empty (newly initialized) repository. As a noun, two repositories can be said to be &quot;clone&quot;s if they are kept synchronized, and contain the same revisions.

===Commit (noun)===
===Commit (verb)===

To &quot;commit&quot; (&quot;check in&quot;, &quot;ci&quot; or, more rarely, &quot;install&quot;, &quot;submit&quot; or &quot;record&quot;) is to write or merge the changes made in the working copy back to the repository. A commit contains metadata, typically the author information and a commit message that describes the change.

===Commit message===
A short note, written by the developer, stored with the commit, which describes the commit. Ideally, it records why the modification was made, a description of the modification&#x27;s effect or purpose, and non-obvious aspects of how the change works.

===Conflict===
A conflict occurs when different parties make changes to the same document, and the system is unable to reconcile the changes. A user must &quot;resolve&quot; the conflict by combining the changes, or by selecting one change in favour of the other.

===Delta compression===

Most revision control software uses delta compression, which retains only the differences between successive versions of files. This allows for more efficient storage of many different versions of files.

===Dynamic stream===
A stream in which some or all file versions are mirrors of the parent stream&#x27;s versions.

===Export===
&quot;Exporting&quot; is the act of obtaining the files from the repository. It is similar to &quot;checking out&quot; except that it creates a clean directory tree without the version-control metadata used in a working copy. This is often used prior to publishing the contents, for example.

===Fetch===
See &quot;pull&quot;.

===Forward integration===
The process of merging changes made in the main &quot;trunk&quot; into a development (feature or team) branch.

===Head===
Also sometimes called &quot;tip&quot;, this refers to the most recent commit, either to the trunk or to a branch. The trunk and each branch have their own head, though HEAD is sometimes loosely used to refer to the trunk.

===Import===
&quot;Importing&quot; is the act of copying a local directory tree (that is not currently a working copy) into the repository for the first time.

===Initialize===
To create a new, empty repository.

===Interleaved deltas===
Some revision control software uses Interleaved deltas, a method that allows storing the history of text based files in a more efficient way than by using Delta compression.
===Label===
See &quot;tag&quot;.

===Locking===

When a developer &quot;locks&quot; a file, no one else can update that file until it is unlocked. Locking can be supported by the version control system, or via informal communications between developers (aka &quot;social locking&quot;).

===Mainline===
Similar to &quot;trunk&quot;, but there can be a mainline for each branch.

===Merge===
A &quot;merge&quot; or &quot;integration&quot; is an operation in which two sets of changes are applied to a file or set of files. Some sample scenarios are as follows:
* A user, working on a set of files, &quot;updates&quot; or &quot;syncs&quot; their working copy with changes made, and checked into the repository, by other users.
* A user tries to &quot;check in&quot; files that have been updated by others since the files were &quot;checked out&quot;, and the &quot;revision control software&quot; automatically merges the files (typically, after prompting the user if it should proceed with the automatic merge, and in some cases only doing so if the merge can be clearly and reasonably resolved).
* A &quot;branch&quot; is created, the code in the files is independently edited, and the updated branch is later incorporated into a single, unified &quot;trunk&quot;.
* A set of files is &quot;branched&quot;, a problem that existed before the branching is fixed in one branch, and the fix is then merged into the other branch. (This type of selective merge is sometimes known as a &quot;cherry pick&quot; to distinguish it from the complete merge in the previous case.)
===Promote===
The act of copying file content from a less controlled location into a more controlled location. For example, from a user&#x27;s workspace into a repository, or from a stream to its parent.
===Pull, push===
Copy revisions from one repository into another. &quot;Pull&quot; is initiated by the receiving repository, while &quot;push&quot; is initiated by the source. &quot;Fetch&quot; is sometimes used as a synonym for &quot;pull&quot;, or to mean a &quot;pull&quot; followed by an &quot;update&quot;.

===Pull request===
===Repository===
===Resolve===
The act of user intervention to address a conflict between different changes to the same document.

===Reverse integration===
The process of merging different team branches into the main trunk of the versioning system.

===Revision and version===
A version is any change in form. In SVK, a Revision is the state at a point in time of the entire tree in the repository.

===Share===
The act of making one file or folder available in multiple branches at the same time. When a shared file is changed in one branch, it is changed in other branches.

===Stream===
A container for branched files that has a known relationship to other such containers. Streams form a hierarchy; each stream can inherit various properties (like versions, namespace, workflow rules, subscribers, etc.) from its parent stream.

===Tag===
 A &quot;tag&quot; or &quot;label&quot; refers to an important snapshot in time, consistent across many files. These files at that point may all be tagged with a user-friendly, meaningful name or revision number. See baselines, labels and tags.

===Trunk===

The trunk is the unique line of development that is not a branch (sometimes also called Baseline, Mainline or Master)

===Update===
An &quot;update&quot; (or &quot;sync&quot;, but &quot;sync&quot; can also mean a combined &quot;push&quot; and &quot;pull&quot;) merges changes made in the repository (by other people, for example) into the local &quot;working copy&quot;. &quot;Update&quot; is also the term used by some CM tools (CM+, PLS, SMS) for the change package concept (see &quot;changelist&quot;). Synonymous with &quot;checkout&quot; in revision control systems that require each repository to have exactly one working copy (common in distributed systems)

===Unlocking===
Releasing a lock.

===Working copy===
The &quot;working copy&quot; is the local copy of files from a repository, at a specific time or revision. All work done to the files in a repository is initially done on a working copy, hence the name. Conceptually, it is a &quot;sandbox&quot;.

==See also==
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* . The basics of version control.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189439" start="0" end="15" title="Version control" label="Version control"/>
<link wikidata="Q189439" start="31" end="47" title="Version control" label="revision control"/>
<link wikidata="Q189439" start="49" end="63" title="Version control" label="source control"/>
<link wikidata="Q189439" start="69" end="91" title="Version control" label="source code management"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="100" end="120" title="software engineering" label="software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q82753" start="204" end="217" title="computer file" label="computer file"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="230" end="241" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q86920" start="242" end="252" title="text files" label="text files"/>
<link wikidata="Q613566" start="321" end="354" title="software configuration management" label="software configuration management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077784" start="399" end="412" title="software tool" label="software tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="525" end="539" title="word processor" label="word processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q183197" start="542" end="553" title="spreadsheet" label="spreadsheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q474157" start="570" end="578" title="groupware" label="web docs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131093" start="584" end="609" title="content management system" label="content management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318317" start="680" end="689" title="Reversion (software development)" label="reverting"/>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="910" end="914" title="Software bug" label="Bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q925385" start="1431" end="1437" title="Branching (revision control)" label="branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q925385" start="1501" end="1506" title="Trunk (software)" label="trunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q224055" start="2274" end="2283" title="Abstraction (computer science)" label="abstracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571814" start="2850" end="2869" title="configuration files" label="configuration files"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="2929" end="2933" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q186885" start="3476" end="3485" title="timestamp" label="timestamp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3630" end="3638" title="Support programs for OS/360 and successors#IEBUPDTE" label="IEBUPDTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q121879183" start="3842" end="3855" title="The Librarian (version control system)" label="The Librarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17073931" start="3860" end="3868" title="Panvalet" label="Panvalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141501" start="3943" end="3969" title="Source Code Control System" label="Source Code Control System"/>
<link wikidata="Q705851" start="4163" end="4186" title="Revision Control System" label="Revision Control System"/>
<link wikidata="Q467252" start="4222" end="4248" title="Concurrent Versions System" label="Concurrent Versions System"/>
<link wikidata="Q46794" start="4349" end="4359" title="Apache Subversion" label="Subversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186723" start="4385" end="4413" title="distributed revision control" label="distributed revision control"/>
<link wikidata="Q186055" start="4428" end="4431" title="Git" label="Git"/>
<link wikidata="Q186055" start="4886" end="4889" title="Git" label="Git"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275149" start="6199" end="6211" title="file locking" label="file locking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186723" start="6505" end="6533" title="distributed revision control" label="distributed revision control"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="6755" end="6767" title="graph theory" label="graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195339" start="7084" end="7106" title="directed acyclic graph" label="directed acyclic graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="7705" end="7717" title="graph theory" label="graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q917421" start="7909" end="7921" title="linear graph" label="linear graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227115" start="8132" end="8145" title="directed tree" label="directed tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921621" start="8962" end="8967" title="merge (revision control)" label="merge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195339" start="9455" end="9477" title="directed acyclic graph" label="directed acyclic graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479570" start="10816" end="10825" title="whiteprint" label="bluelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="11535" end="11543" title="CAD file" label="CAD file"/>
<link wikidata="Q377960" start="11550" end="11573" title="product data management" label="product data management"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="11825" end="11831" title="Server (computing)" label="server"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914952" start="12634" end="12651" title="concurrent access" label="concurrent access"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275149" start="12676" end="12689" title="file locking" label="locking files"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133368" start="12765" end="12775" title="Repository (version control)" label="repository"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921621" start="13910" end="13915" title="Merge (revision control)" label="merge"/>
<link wikidata="Q86920" start="14161" end="14170" title="text file" label="text file"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572121" start="14202" end="14212" title="image file" label="image file"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="14438" end="14443" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184148" start="14618" end="14624" title="Plug-in (computing)" label="plugin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153495" start="15806" end="15830" title="configuration management" label="configuration management"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445876" start="15845" end="15865" title="Baseline (configuration management)" label="&amp;quot;baseline&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q146813" start="15994" end="16007" title="client–server model" label="client–server"/>
<link wikidata="Q155736" start="16163" end="16172" title="good faith" label="bona-fide"/>
<link wikidata="Q208218" start="16253" end="16260" title="Patch (computing)" label="patches"/>
<link wikidata="Q638608" start="17096" end="17116" title="software development" label="software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q20058545" start="17169" end="17176" title="Commit (version control)" label="commits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342704" start="17599" end="17610" title="code review" label="code review"/>
<link wikidata="Q917415" start="17625" end="17643" title="regression testing" label="regression testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q208218" start="18950" end="18957" title="Patch (computing)" label="patches"/>
<link wikidata="Q184148" start="20981" end="20988" title="Plug-in (computing)" label="Plugins"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="21013" end="21017" title="integrated development environment" label="IDEs"/>
<link wikidata="Q41525" start="21026" end="21043" title="Oracle JDeveloper" label="Oracle JDeveloper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206660" start="21045" end="21058" title="IntelliJ IDEA" label="IntelliJ IDEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q82268" start="21060" end="21067" title="Eclipse (computing)" label="Eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q134067" start="21069" end="21082" title="Visual Studio" label="Visual Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q487378" start="21084" end="21090" title="Delphi (programming language)" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q264456" start="21092" end="21104" title="NetBeans" label="NetBeans IDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q250328" start="21106" end="21111" title="Xcode" label="Xcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252773" start="21117" end="21126" title="GNU Emacs" label="GNU Emacs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21427" end="21453" title="#Baselines, labels and tags" label="baselines, labels and tags"/>
<link wikidata="Q300901" start="21849" end="21853" title="diff" label="diff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2799" start="21870" end="21875" title="Delta encoding" label="delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306359" start="22107" end="22113" title="atomic transaction" label="atomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208218" start="22236" end="22241" title="Patch (computing)" label="patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q20058545" start="23299" end="23305" title="commit (revision control)" label="commit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2799" start="24222" end="24239" title="delta compression" label="delta compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q22682092" start="25494" end="25512" title="Interleaved deltas" label="Interleaved deltas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2799" start="25613" end="25630" title="Delta compression" label="Delta compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275149" start="25704" end="25709" title="file locking" label="locks"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859422" start="28016" end="28023" title="Software versioning" label="version"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214295" start="28589" end="28592" title="revision tag" label="tag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28797" end="28823" title="#Baselines, labels and tags" label="baselines, labels and tags"/>
<link wikidata="Q925385" start="28843" end="28848" title="trunk (software)" label="trunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667186" start="29790" end="29797" title="Sandbox (software development)" label="sandbox"/>
</links>
</doc>
